Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 25 April 2002 .
Colleagues , on 6 May Pim Fortuyn , a Dutch politician and candidate in this week 's general election in the Netherlands was shot dead in Hilversum .
The same day , on my own behalf and on behalf of this House , I condemned this murder unreservedly and expressed our profound solidarity with the Dutch people and with the victim 's family , friends and colleagues .
Freedom of expression is one of our most fundamental and cherished rights - a core value of our democracies .
As democrats we defend the right of every person to participate in political life freely and to exercise his or her democratic right .
That includes the right to express one 's ideas , whether or not we like these ideas .
That is precisely the basis of our democratic system .
In condemnation of this , and all acts of political violence whenever , wherever and by whomsoever they are perpetrated , I would like to ask you to observe one minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
President .
On behalf of the European Parliament I should also like to welcome the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest .
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is a laureate of the Sakharov Prize of this House in 1990 and a Nobel Prize laureate of 1991 .
She has always been a figurehead for the fight for democracy , freedom and human rights in her own country in particular .
This release and her right to again lead her party political life is a significant step forward to the establishment of democracy in Burma .
I hope it will soon be followed by the release of Burma 's remaining political prisoners .
I heard the call of Aung San Suu Kyi last week for a European Union common policy on Burma .
I expressed the hope on behalf of our House that this release will be followed by the development of such a policy in active cooperation with the European Parliament .
We look forward to welcoming her in the not too distant future in this Chamber to take her place and to speak on her own behalf where , in the past , it was her husband and others who spoke so eloquently for her .
Mr President , I had hoped that we would have the opportunity for an urgency on the subject of the plane-spotters ( 12 British and two Dutch nationals ) who were convicted on 26 April at a court in Kalamata in Greece .
They were given very severe sentences .
I am speaking especially on behalf of my constituents , Paul and Lesley Coppin .
They were found guilty of offences which were not an offence in their own countries .
The sentences were totally disproportionate .
This throws doubt on any ambition to develop an area of freedom , security and justice in the European Union based on mutual trust between judicial systems .
It certainly reveals potential flaws in the European arrest warrant .
Mr President , I should like to ask you to express our concern to the Greek authorities and urge them to expedite the appeal process for the plane-spotters with a view to quashing their convictions .
Mr President , I subscribe wholeheartedly to your opinion that we need to be careful as to how we intervene when a case is sub judice , as in the plane-spotters affair .
And I am sure that it is sub judice , that appeals will be lodged and that , whatever people feel about the suffering of members of their constituency , the principle of the separation of powers is too serious a principle for us to call lightly for it to be challenged .
As far as the European arrest warrant is concerned , I really would be terrified if it were a question of Mr Van Orden 's arresting me .
I regret that due to the pressure of the agenda , there is only time to discuss three urgent matters .
I endorse the view that Mr Katiforis and yourself have put forward , namely that when we talk about the plane-spotters , we should not interfere in national criminal law policy , but this does indicate , however , that there is good reason for better harmonising the penalty for crimes at European level , particularly in the light of the measures that have been taken in the wake of 11 September .
The Liberals wanted to submit an urgent motion on this matter , but this was unfortunately overtaken by other priorities .
In the case of other urgent business , an urgent motion or resolution is submitted more or less every month , and in this connection , I regret that we do not put a European issue on the agenda .
I will take up this matter while at the same time bearing in mind the need to recognise the separation of powers between the political and judicial authorities .
Mr President , you will be aware of the great sense of shock at the fatal rail accident which took place last Friday at Potters Bar station in Hertfordshire , claiming the lives of seven people and injuring some 70 people .
While the accident investigations are still taking place , this is not the time to draw conclusions , but I hope that , on behalf of Parliament , you will send condolences and sympathy to the families of the bereaved by the way of the British authorities , and also encourage the Commission to continue its liaison work with the rail administrators in safety matters .
This is an extremely busy commuter line ; literally thousands of people travel on it each day .
I , with many others , travelled the exact route the evening before .
A few miles up the line is the site of the fatal accident which took place in Hatfield only 18 months ago .
Therefore I believe your initiative in this regard would be greatly appreciated .
I shall do that on behalf of the House .
Mr President , on a point of order , you will be aware that almost one third of the Irish people sent in excess of 1 million cards to Tony Blair , the British Prime Minister , calling for the closure of the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant .
Time and time again this nuclear plant has been found wanting , and most independent experts have clearly spelled out that it is highly suspect and unsafe .
Mr Blair was generous enough to acknowledge these concerns in the House of Commons .
In view of the concerns expressed by the Irish people and the evidence already available to us and the frequent concerns expressed by me and many others to this House , I should like to ask you , Mr President , whether you would undertake in a personal capacity , or as President of this Parliament , a visit to the Sellafield site in Cumbria .
Should you agree , perhaps you might be accompanied by an independent expert who would undertake a detailed examination of the installation and subsequently report back to Parliament .
You are fully aware of the concerns of the Irish people and particularly the people of the east coast in my own constituency of Dublin .
Mr President , I rise in defence of Sellafield British Nuclear Fuels and the workers in that establishment who maintain the highest possible standards in their work .
We are rather tired of our friends across the Irish Sea not remembering which way the prevailing winds blow and having no respect for the vast body of scientific and other evidence which supports the good work that Sellafield does .
I wish our Irish friends would concentrate on their own affairs and not seek to interfere in the internal affairs of another Member State .
Mr President , I just want to remind Mr Chichester , apropos of the earlier exchange on Sellafield , that my constituents along the east coast of Ireland , and in particular County Louth , are very concerned about emissions from Sellafield , especially marine emissions in Carlingford Lough which are rising steadily .
BNFL were present at a hearing in the European Parliament in April and had to confirm under cross-examination from me that emissions were currently rising from Sellafield .
This has a serious impact on another Member State .
Indeed , we heard at the hearing of the impact on the Isle of Wight of emissions from Cap de la Hague .
My own constituents and European citizens generally are right to be concerned at the impact of such nuclear technology on their own Member States .
We heard in detail from , amongst others , the UK nuclear inspectorate chief Lawrence Williams , who attended the hearing .
Mr President , during her period of office , Mrs Fontaine introduced a rule , at the express wish of this Parliament 's plenary , according to which speeches designated as points of order are to be made after the vote on the agenda .
Must I conclude from the practice you have introduced that you are again changing this rule and that , before every future plenary , I shall have to worry about what matters raised in my constituency I am to talk about here at 5 p.m. ?
I believe this issue is of great interest to countless other MEPs assembled here who do not come from a certain part of the world .
Perhaps you could let me know .
( Applause )
Mr Kuhne , your point is well made that we should deal with the agenda first , which is precisely what I did .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Rules of Procedure do not allow further proposals for the topical and urgent debate to be tabled at short notice .
Our delegation for cooperation with Georgia was in Georgia last week .
Since local government elections are taking place there on 2 June , we have enquired as to whether these elections are being conducted correctly .
We have learned that two parties have already been denied permission to take part in the elections , and we have also learned just now that a further party , namely that of the former president of the Parliament who left the Shevardnadze Party to found a new one , is also not being allowed to participate in the elections .
We should simply like to state the fact openly here and then , naturally , discuss the matter with the Commission and the Council .
We consider this a matter of great urgency , even though our May part-session does not allow any more urgency debates , for the local elections will already be over in June .
We are of the view that a reminder needs to be given about this .
We should like , however , to be given still more precise information by the Council and the Commission , for we are extremely concerned that elections are being held but are not being conducted democratically .
We should like to support Georgia 's cause , but the bottom line is that democracy must prevail there .
I should like to have this recorded in the Minutes .
The Minutes will so record .
Mr President , I rise to request that you write to the Indian authorities again about the case of Ian Stillman , the British deaf charity worker who was imprisoned in India , convicted of drug smuggling .
As you are aware , he was not provided with sign language interpretation at his trial .
I am grateful that you wrote in the past , but last week his leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was turned down .
The lead judge remarked that disabled people and deaf people are prone to carry drugs , which I thought was absolutely disgraceful .
I would be grateful if you could write again , and also use your good offices in relation to the plane spotters .
The issue here is one of the government and the judiciary , but of the government and the security services .
Mr President , thank you for ensuring that Parliament respects its precedents . In line with these precedents , I feel that it would be appropriate to pay tribute to the victims of terrorism , especially since they came from one of the Member States of the European Union .
It would appear appropriate for this House to pay tribute to the victims of the attack in Karachi , who were from Cherbourg , although that is not my constituency .
It would appear appropriate for us to pay tribute to those victims and to the wounded , and to send our condolences and a message of support to their families .
You are right , Mrs Berès . We will do so .
Mr President , I would like to say - in relation to your intention to deal with the agenda in a moment - that it really does seem inadequate to dedicate only one of the items on the agenda for the debate on topical and urgent subjects to the situation in Madagascar .
What is happening in Madagascar is something much more serious which warrants much more than fleeting attention .
As you are aware , Mr President , President Ratsiraka 's position was confirmed following the political elections , but all attempts to reestablish democratic relations with his opponent , Marc Ravalomanana , are being thwarted .
What is more , civil strife has led in recent days to the ports and transport coming to a total standstill and food supplies being completely cut off .
Many children and elderly people are already dying of starvation .
I know that the resolution we are to debate on Thursday afternoon - that will inevitably be an intimate conversation between a few friends , as is always the case - will focus mainly on politics and the economy .
Mr President , this is a question of respect for human rights .
The alarm has been raised by a community of sisters - Italian and French nuns - who have been the object of a disturbing increase in unwanted government attention , not least , in recent days .
In other words , there is a danger that a climate of oppression and suppression of human rights will develop : this is a question of more than just economic issues .
I would therefore urge you to give this issue a more appropriate slot on the agenda .
Mr President , I understand that a bill to amend the Criminal Code has been tabled in the Slovakian Parliament , introducing imprisonment for anyone expressing sympathy with Communist ideas .
We condemn outright this attempt to criminalise Communist political action and , what is worse , in the run up to elections in which the Communist Party of Slovakia is expected to win seats in Parliament .
Obviously the immediate objective is to terrorise voters .
We also condemn outright the parallels drawn between Communism and Fascism in this amendment , the way in which criminals and victims and tyranny and resistance are all painted with the same brush , especially at a time when far-right forces with Fascist tendencies are gaining ground in Europe .
Given that Slovakia is a candidate country , I should like to call on you to intervene and put a stop to these developments .
Mr President , on 24 April , during the Brussels part-session , our fellow Member , Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen was prevented from holding a press conference inside the European Parliament ; two of our fellow Members were hit in the face by a pie .
Well then , I am not , of course , defending Mr Le Pen , who I expect is quite capable of defending himself ; I am not , of course , saying that I support or do not support his political ideals - if there is anyone in this Parliament who can be counted on to vote differently from the rest of the House it is precisely the radical Members - but that this is a question of upholding Parliament 's dignity .
According to the European Union 's Voltairian principles of enlightenment , we should fight to the bitter end precisely for ideals which we do not share .
It is therefore unacceptable for those Members of Parliament who might be considered by some of us to be fascist , communist or radical not to enjoy rights which are available to other Members .
This is a serious incident and we must respond to it with specific measures and , I would advocate , an internal inquiry as well to find out how this can possibly have happened .
This is for the good of us all , certainly not just the good of Mr Le Pen .
Mr Cappato , for your information and that of the House , on the evening on which the incident to which you refer took place , I asked at the Bureau that an inquiry be made into the matter .
The results of that inquiry will be considered today at the next available Bureau meeting .
The next item is the report A5-0125 / 2002 , by Hanja Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on supplementing the Rules of Procedure by a list of Parliament documents directly accessible through the register ( 2002 / 2055 REG ) .
By 3 June next , the Council , the Commission and Parliament are required to have fully implemented the European Government Information Act , in other words the Regulation that grants access to documents .
For the European Parliament , this means that the list of Parliament documents which will be directly accessible via the register , will need to be appended to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
This additional Annex requires approval by a regular majority of the Members .
The debate on this will take place today and the vote will be held tomorrow .
The list that is before us is for the most part the result of an accurate and legal application of the Regulation .
A team presided over by Parliament 's Deputy Secretary General has drawn up the initial list .
In the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , a small number of documents have been added whose public access is not compulsory , but desirable .
I would mention the working documents , recommendations and statements of parliamentary delegations - which did not feature on the original list - the attendance lists of the plenary and committee meetings - which are , in fact , included in the Minutes and are , as such , already accessible to the public indirectly - and the list of staff of the MEPs .
As rapporteur , I support these additions , which are also partly my own .
As far as public access to the staff list is concerned , I take the view that this will , moreover , need to be in line with the Bureau 's decision of 11 June 2001 , in other words Members and staff will need to take it upon themselves to add their names to the public list .
I hope that the entire list can be approved in that way .
Restrictions that do not comply with the Regulation , however , cannot be accepted , because otherwise the European Court of Justice will be instructing us to add to the list again and Parliament will have lost face .
With this list , the European Parliament has met all the obligations concerning the Regulation 's implementation .
Does that make everything shipshape ?
Unfortunately not yet .
Neither the European Commission nor the Council have , in our opinion , met all the conditions for implementing the Regulation .
Especially where documents of third parties are concerned , for example documents of Member States or of external organisations , things could be arranged more effectively .
As far as foreign and defence policies are concerned , although the Regulation has precedence over the Solana decision that was taken at the time , no final solution has yet been found for confidential and secret documents .
This too will need to be provided for .
In general , public access to third-party documents still poses a major problem , because in this respect , particularly the Commission and the Council are more rigid than required .
In fact , Member States that still have no proper legislation in the field of public access are urgently required to lay down legislation in this area themselves as soon as possible .
Objections which are still being raised by some Member States will then become redundant .
It is unacceptable for public access vis-à-vis citizens in one EU country to be far greater than in another , and it is wholly unacceptable for a lack of public access in some EU countries to undermine the implementation of this Regulation .
I therefore call on the Commission to produce a directive which obliges all EU Member States to apply more transparency and allow public access .
And I will certainly make this point at the Convention on the future of Europe , of which I am a member .
Finally , it strikes me as important that we should not wait too long before this Regulation is evaluated .
We have made huge progress with this Regulation , but quite a few aspects still need defending .
The initial evaluation will take place at the end of this year , and I hope to be involved in this again .
Those ultimately reaping the benefits of this Regulation , however , are our own citizens .
They will , especially via the Internet as well , be able to call up much more information than before . This will benefit Parliament 's reputation and that of the European institutions , and it is also particularly valuable for the democracy in Europe in general .
Mr President , a key role of this Parliament is to put the spotlight of parliamentary scrutiny on the dim recesses of the Commission and the even dimmer nooks and crannies of the Council of Ministers .
Our credentials for doing so will be immeasurably enhanced if our own house is in order , and I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Maij-Weggen , on her very open approach to this issue .
We must ourselves be as open as possible .
I would like to draw attention to two particular issues from my perspective as vice-chairman of the Committee on Petitions .
I support the report when it says that petitions should only be made publicly available with the consent of the petitioners .
For most petitioners that is no problem , since they want as much publicity as possible , but there are occasions when they need confidentiality .
For instance , if I may cite the Lloyds of London petitions , one of the so-called Names was told that if he complained to Parliament or the Commission , then any financial compensation being paid to him by Lloyds could be withdrawn - a very serious threat indeed .
I cite that as an example in the public domain , but there are others .
That we have to push for more transparency with other institutions remains clear .
Again to quote the example of the Lloyds petitions , the Commission last December announced that it was considering infringement proceedings against the British Government .
The British Government responded to the Commission 's letter of intent on 30 April , the very last day available , but still the Commission and the British Government refused to allow Parliament or the petitioners to know their response .
I condemn that secrecy on the part of the British Government and the Commission , and I want them to be absolutely transparent , which is why we must shame them into transparency by being open ourselves .
Mr President , in the discussion on the topic of democratic deficiency in Europe , transparency is one of the crucial concepts .
The European population has an image of a non-transparent and undemocratic Europe , where decisions are taken behind closed doors .
With the establishment of the European Convention , a very important step was recently taken towards an open and democratic Europe , partly thanks to the open dialogue which that forum enters into with organisations from civil society .
It is hoped that the Heads of Government will take the Convention 's recommendations seriously at the forthcoming IGC , and that a break can be made with a long tradition of backroom politics when treaties are established .
After all , we want to move towards a transparent form of European decision-making .
Access to documents forms an essential part of this transparency .
Indeed , the exchange of information is the driving force behind the public debate in the media , public control and contributions by public organisations .
This is why we , as the European Parliament , have been fighting for some time for public access to documents - not only documents from the European Parliament , but also from the Council and the Commission .
My fellow MEP , Mr Cashman , in tandem with Mrs Maij-Weggen , has done a great deal of sterling work on this during a previous phase , and we are now in the follow-up phase .
It is important to continue this fight until those documents of the European institutions which are currently still considered non-public are available to those who are affected by them or those who are simply interested in them .
Mrs Maij-Weggen was right to refer to a number of aspects surrounding the Solana decision which have not yet been translated effectively into a wholesale replacement .
She rightly pointed out that we want to extend the list to include a number of aspects , such as the attendance list , and that we do not want any restrictions , and we support her in this .
In addition , the idea to lay down a directive - probably by adopting the minimum approach , for subsidiarity must be recognised as such and each country is to define this for themselves , so that each citizen in their own country has a minimum level of certainty with regard to access to documents - could be a very useful contribution .
At the same time , we know that the Council is still finding it very hard to take its legislative decisions in public , and this would fit in very well with this continued struggle .
I am speaking at a time when we in Europe should all be acutely aware of the importance and power of our democracy , but also of its vulnerability .
We must vigorously respond to the anti-European currents which are pervading many countries , and we must do so with one voice .
This is only possible , however , if - for a change - we opt for actually reducing the distance between ourselves and our electorate .
The citizen must be informed more quickly and more comprehensively of legislation that applies to them , particularly the entry into force of legislation , so that their interests can be taken into consideration in good time .
For example , I would suggest placing adverts in major newspapers in every country , in which the citizen is informed in clear terms of the significance a decision has for them , and which provides them with information on where they can express their protests .
What will actually help the European project and our work as parliamentarians along is not only information and documents that are available passively and remain within the circle of experts , but a European citizen who is informed directly and pro-actively .
I would thank Maij-Weggen for her contribution , and I look forward to a fruitful cooperation , also in the follow-up phase on this score of providing information to citizens across Europe .
Mr President , what we are discussing now may seem like a dreary , formal list , but it is in actual fact incredibly important and is a crucial prerequisite in the constant battle for increased transparency in the European institutions .
Transparency is the area in which Mrs Maij-Weggen manifestly excels , and I wish to congratulate her on her work .
It may be observed that Parliament takes the lead when it comes to efforts to open up our institutions .
Our documents and activities are openly available to the people of Europe .
We are an open institution with open meetings .
I believe that we are one of the world 's most transparent parliaments , both through our conscious commitment to formal decision-making and through unconventional methods such as the ' Open Up Europe ' initiative taken by a number of liberal MEPs or the decision to put MEPs ' financial interests on the Web in accordance with the name and shame principle .
Through methods such as these , transparency can be achieved .
What is happening in the European Parliament can now be followed on computers from northern Finland to the Greek islands .
There is , of course , a lot more to be done , however .
It is also a question of ensuring that there are clear rules so that access to documents is not dependent upon discretion or the sympathetic interpretation of an application .
The register is therefore an important tool for ensuring that people know what applies and how they can appeal .
The document should perhaps make clear what further increased openness it is leading to .
How in fact are documents from third parties or Member States or those forming part of an official correspondence to be dealt with ?
There is scope for interpretation in these areas .
I hope that Parliament 's employees in general will interpret all applications generously and that we shall soon have reports on how many applications are rejected .
Access to documents and across-the-board transparency are prerequisites for confidence in the EU 's activities .
I really do hope that the Commission and the Council will have their registers in order by 3 June and that , shortly after that , we can begin the evaluation which is prescribed by Article 255 and which is to be ready in a year and a half 's time .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I wish to thank Mrs Maij-Weggen for having drawn up a complete list of those documents the European Parliament must make directly accessible to the public .
I want to say that Mrs Malmström is absolutely right when she says that transparency can and must extend from Finland to Greece ; this really is no longer just a Nordic concept .
I would , however , like to say that our new regulation on transparency perhaps incorporates just one feature which is a very Nordic tradition , which is that there are registers of documents .
For a long time , people in Finland , Sweden and Denmark have been able to go , for example , to the municipal registrar 's office , the public register , and see what sort of documents were held there - and , obviously , they still can .
Now we have the Internet and we can introduce this process in the European Parliament .
We can only hope that all the institutions agree that we should endeavour to create one single document register in which documents from all the institutions are indeed directly accessible for as long as possible , and in this way we really will be making decision-making more transparent .
We must , however , realise that this will still be a great struggle for us .
This week we are having another very important debate on this subject , as we are discussing with Mr Solana the issue of Council reform and transparency , where we will have to defend , for example , the broad definition of legislation .
We cannot settle for a situation where only documents connected with the codecision procedure would be accessible to the public , but must try to ensure that all documents that relate to different decisions binding on Member States are accessible .
I particularly want to thank the rapporteur for having included a list of Members ' assistants , as they carry out public duties in their capacity as assistants to the Members of Parliament .
It is high time we pointed out that these names are not secret ; they are not secret individuals , and their names may indeed be made known to the public .
Parliament thus also takes the view that , while , on the one hand , the protection of privacy is obviously important , on the other hand , the common interest and the right of access to information also require names to be made public , subject to certain conditions .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Maij-Weggen .
However , as regards the future , there may be something missing from the list of documents to be made public , for I feel that the question of audiovisual recordings is fundamental and that we should make increasing use of them in Parliament .
In my opinion , we should make it compulsory for audiovisual recordings to be made of committee work as well - the costs are not excessive - and then treat the recordings as documents to be made public and made available on the Internet .
This is a key point .
Our meetings have to be public under the Rules of Procedure .
However , this is only the theory : we know that , in practice , a European citizen walking into Parliament off the street would not be allowed to attend our meetings without an invitation .
Publishing audiovisual recordings of our work on the Internet is a key form of publicity for our institutions .
Moreover , with the Stenmarck report which we are going to debate tomorrow , we are already addressing the issue of budget cover from Parliament 's point of view .
I will tell you now that , tomorrow , together with 55 Members of all the political groups , we are going to table a resolution calling , not least , upon the members of the European Convention to introduce a Treaty reform enshrining the right of access to all the public meetings of our institutions in the Treaties : the right of access , including access via the Internet , to all the meetings and democratic instruments of the European Union .
I feel that this is the way to go , for it will enable Parliament to fully exploit new technologies to publicise its work .
Mr President , the word ' transparency ' already has a noteworthy career behind it .
If , today , you go into modern search engines , you find 223 000 examples of its German equivalent in less than ten minutes .
No one would confuse the words ' transparent ' and ' perspirant ' .
' Transparent ' is what your shirt may be , while ' perspiration ' is what is sometimes seen under the arms .
If you search for ' transparency ' and ' European Parliament ' you find just 908 examples and , if you ask people out and about what they associate with ' transparency ' , they say it is what we still do not want to make transparent .
Moral : transparency which does not also bring the right people out in a sweat is worthless .
If this report now talks in terms of a milestone 's having been reached on the road to more transparency in the European Union , that is something I would contest .
It is more than just nothing , but it is not much more than a pebble .
What we really need is transparency that is actually experienced .
A European transparency initiative - of the kind I have talked about on a number of occasions in Parliament - is in the process of being developed .
It goes beyond the self-congratulation syndrome of the European institutions and is aimed at making , if at all possible , all documents - even those in which people are really interested - publicly accessible .
On the basis of Regulation 201 / 204 , we urgently need this examination that has already been talked about .
If we are concerned to be credible rather than hypocritical , I think our aim must be to do everything we can to copy the freedom of information act in what will hopefully be a future United States of Europe .
We can also learn more from Sweden in this area .
We all of us know that there is no democracy without transparency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , like the European Parliament , generally attaches great importance to the transparency of its activities and therefore to the rules on access to documents laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
The commitments made by the Commission in this area support this statement and , of these , I would like to remind you of the commitment relating to the communication to this House of the so-called commitology documents , a commitment which goes further than our obligations laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
This confirms our will to move forward and make greater progress , both in terms of transparency and in terms of interinstitutional cooperation .
I am sure you will agree with me that this cooperation is particularly important in the field of access to documents , given the complexity of our working method and the interaction of our activities ; and it is precisely within the framework of this interinstitutional cooperation , organised by means of the already established interinstitutional committee , that the essential mechanisms must be agreed for consultation with the institution originally responsible for the documents whose disclosure is proposed .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , turning to the specific issue which is the subject of this debate , the Commission welcomes and supports Parliament 's initiative in relation to direct accessibility of documents .
Nevertheless , insofar as the report presented by Mrs Maij-Weggen proposes the disclosure of a list of documents from other institutions without including any mechanism for prior consultation of the other institution , the Commission prefers that it make a general reference to documents communicated by the other institutions in relation to the rules in force and the procedures agreed to provide a framework for communication , instead of establishing a list of communicable documents .
In our opinion , this sufficiently guarantees both the objectives of Parliament and the Commission in the field of transparency and compliance with Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 in relation to which - as I pointed out before - we are already taking steps which go beyond what is required .
In any event , I would like to thank and congratulate Mrs Maij-Weggen on the work she has done as well as all the other speakers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading A5-0134 / 2002 by Jacqueline Foster , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation security ( 15029 / 4 / 2001 - C5-0033 / 2002 - 2001 / 0234 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the tragic events of 11 September in the United States gave new impetus to the reinforcement of arrangements for aviation security .
The European Council meeting the day after the terrorist attacks on the USA , instructed the Transport Council to evaluate the measures to be taken to improve aviation security and complete its consideration of those already proposed .
The draft regulation itself was fairly straightforward and was amended at first reading .
However , the attached technical annex , based on the European Civil Aviation Conference , ECAC , Document 30 , was not amended until second reading due to the fact that the high-level group had been updating the annex which was only finalised last November .
Whilst Parliament responded speedily to that challenge , and I thank colleagues from all parties for their support , we believe that this should not lead to a lower level of parliamentary scrutiny and reserve the right to amend in second reading the revised annex to this regulation adopted by the Council in its common position .
Throughout this process , I have met with representatives from the Council and the Commission and consulted widely with the industry .
The draft regulation principally concerns access control and passenger luggage and freight screening on the ground at airports and is outlined fully in my explanatory statement .
The scope does not extend to onboard security which may need to be addressed at some future date .
The technical standards themselves are those adopted by ECAC in 1992 in its Document 30 part 2 , relating to security issues revised in January 2001 which , as already mentioned , has recently been updated .
ECAC membership extends to 38 European States including all EU Member States .
It is worth pointing out to Parliament , and perhaps the Council , if there is anybody there , that this agreement reached by the 38 countries , will set a precedent in so far as for the first time the agreement will have binding force upon its contracting parties .
Document 30 previously had been used for general guidance only .
The outcome of the Council of Transport last December was more than disappointing , as all the amendments supported by Parliament were rejected in the common position .
Nevertheless as rapporteur , I took a decision to re-table all amendments which had been adopted and shall touch on five areas which are fundamental to Parliament 's position .
Firstly , Member States must assume responsibility for additional security costs in the light of the terrorist attacks and recognise their moral duty to protect their citizens .
These attacks were against the Nation States .
I have submitted an amendment to this effect , and I am now pleased to say that there is cross-party support for this measure .
Secondly , inspections of airports should be unannounced if airports are to be inspected in real operating conditions , as is currently the case in some Member States .
Thirdly , whilst recognising that some Member States and indeed a minority of MEPs reject the measure of 100 % screening of staff , I insist that this is a pivotal point in this legislation .
It should be said that some Member States already implement this measure .
Terrorism has taken on a new dimension .
It is misguided to believe that there should be lower standards of security for staff working in restricted areas in airports than for passengers .
History has shown us that , over the last 30 years in the vast majority of cases of terrorist acts , such as hijacking and incidents such as Lockerbie and 11 September , lax security measures and personnel who have had unfettered access in airports have played a significant part .
I am pleased to say that the majority of MEPs in committee overwhelmingly supported this amendment .
Fourthly , it is vital that , as is the current practice in IATA and ECAC , the aviation industry itself is involved in the implementation stage of this regulation , not least because it would ensure that measures are practicable and operationally viable .
Fifthly , on a general point , we are calling for more effective international cooperation in the area of exchange of information for security purposes .
Finally , we are all aware of the catastrophic effects of 11 September on the aviation industry and tourist sector .
Around a quarter of a million directly related jobs were lost worldwide and some fifty thousand in the EU alone .
Not only big businesses were affected , but thousands of small businesses as well .
This report is not the sole solution , but it is an enormous step in the right direction , providing that Member States recognise their obligation to protect their citizens by accepting their responsibility to contribute financially to these additional security measures and taking urgent action to restore public confidence , which would assist the aviation industry , the tourism sector and the European Union as a whole .
I urge the Council to listen to Parliament .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all , on behalf of my group , to express my most sincere thanks to the rapporteur who has not only done a vast amount to familiarise herself with this complicated material - indeed , she is a veritable expert on it now - but has also tried as far as possible to make some excellent proposals .
We are very disappointed with the Council , though .
When , in December , we tried to find a common approach at first reading , it proved incapable of talking with us at all .
In the last two weeks as well , when , following the committee discussions , the rapporteur again tried to reach agreement with the Council , the latter was again unable to oblige .
I have to say that it is shocking that , in a situation following 11 September when passengers are in danger , the Council is unable to quickly reach an agreement with us .
We have a counter-example .
Just a few weeks ago , the Council and Parliament together took no more than three months to find a practical solution to the issue of restrictions on airport operations due to noise .
The fact , however , that , on as important a matter as that of passenger safety , the Council is unable to reach an agreement with us is disgraceful , and we need to say so in no uncertain terms .
I also hope that , if we vote as one tomorrow , the Council will have second thoughts and will want to join with us in finding a solution through the conciliation procedure .
I would also appeal to the Commission too to tell the Council that we have done everything to reach an agreement with it .
The Council was unable to oblige , and I now expect the Commission to support the vast majority of our amendments at least .
The Council must see Parliament and the Commission acting together .
Allow me to make two observations .
Firstly , it is very important that the Member States acknowledge that they have to bear some of the costs of the increased security measures .
It is simply not acceptable that , at public expense , the police in my country patrol and oversee every football match , from which the professional clubs do not earn such a bad living , while the Member States do not wish to make their contribution to the cost of increased security measures at airports , which are in the interests of everyone and not only of the airports .
That is simply not on .
We expect the Council to accommodate us on this crucial point .
The second , somewhat critical question - and one addressed by Mrs Foster - is that of whether employees really need to be vetted 100 % .
My group shares the rapporteur 's opinion , but I for my part take a different view of this issue . Allow me again to point out that , unlike passengers , employees are in principle vetted before they are taken on .
If they were then to be checked up on five or six times a day , then that would be a bit too much of a good thing .
We have to realise that , important as security is , there must also be practical arrangements at airports and for the passengers and airlines that use them .
I therefore hope that we take a different decision tomorrow .
Those who committed these criminal acts on 11 September were not airport or airline employees .
My group also regrets the Council 's obstinacy in finalising legislation concerning the establishment of common rules for security in aviation .
Everyone is agreed that it is of great importance that this matter should be brought to a prompt close .
The events of 11 September represented a very pressing reason for this .
The same strict rules must now apply across the Union .
It is therefore beyond belief that the Council should be reluctant to accommodate the wishes of the co-legislator , the European Parliament , and that as a result , we should be forced to table so many amendments at second reading .
My group supports the rapporteur , Mrs Foster , and we too believe that the central issue concerns a transparent and coordinated system that funds the necessary security measures .
Distortion of competition must be avoided .
There are at the moment still too many discrepancies between the Member States where security measures are concerned , particularly the funding thereof .
The Commission should promptly develop proposals in this respect .
In these proposals , it should aim for the highest possible level of security .
Additional expenses which the new rules entail , if they put the operation of certain airports at risk , should be reimbursed , whereby , however , the principle applies that in the medium term , the costs must be borne by the users and the sector .
The measures to be drafted should be based on the ECAC recommendations .
In our view , following existing practice will promote streamlining .
We also support the principle of random inspections .
These have a preventive effect .
And this is in line with the view that , with regard to security , as few compromises as possible should be made .
Exceptions should be kept to a minimum .
This is why we support the rapporteur 's proposal to delete item 4 in Annex 3.2 , where it is made possible not to screen all staff .
Needless to say , we do not consent to the creation of this exception .
So far , the Council has appeared unsympathetic to our requests to strike better deals on security as well as security measures with third countries too .
This is rather strange , for leaks in the new system can be sprung in precisely those areas .
In Europe too , countries can be found where it is possible to escape security measures in flights to the EU .
It happened to me twice that I stepped onto a plane in an Eastern European country without any security or bomb control .
Finally , a point that we have mentioned many times and also have to repeat on this occasion , is that we fail to grasp why the Council is opposed to granting the competition authority the possibility to carry out evaluations .
It is , in our view , important that an amendment is once again tabled on this subject .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR Group , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Foster , for the excellent way in which she has drafted the proposal with regard to this important matter .
We still have a number of unresolved issues before us on which we should try to achieve a balanced result which suits everyone .
As has already been said here before , the Council , for its part , has not done its homework sufficiently well and has not considered or discussed Parliament 's proposals at all thoroughly .
It is therefore reasonable for our committee to propose that some key amendments be revised even though we are now on the home straight .
Our group has tabled Amendment No 34 to Article 4 , which concerns legal provisions for small airports . Flexibility is needed here .
The amendment makes the wording more specific in such a way that at the same time it increases flexibility with regard to the types of aircraft being used .
I would also ask Members to consider whether that form of wording achieves a compromise that suits us all with regard to solving the problem of small volumes of air traffic without incurring enormous costs .
Secondly , I want to emphasise the importance of Amendment No 8 , which concerns announced inspections .
It is important .
If there is a constant threat of an EU inspection , standards tend to be kept up .
However , if an inspection had to be announced , everything necessary to improve security for air travel would not be done beforehand .
In addition we have to ensure that matters drawn attention to after the inspection are actually put right .
Our group has worked on the assumption that it must be taken into account in dealing with these matters what it is reasonable to do at EU level and what it is better to leave to the Member States ' own discretion , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
For that reason we are not very keen on amendments that mean increased costs without , however , significantly improving security .
Action taken must be in proportion to what is reasonable for each country .
The same goes for monitoring , where it is only sensible to take account of the particular circumstances that apply .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Foster for her magnificent work and the professionalism she has shown throughout these months .
As you all know , less than a month after the tragic events of 11 September the Commission proposed , through this initiative , to toughen the security requirements applicable to civil aviation in a harmonised manner and , when this proposal was sent to Parliament and the Council , it was considered urgent to reach an agreement in relation to it .
Parliament agreed with this urgency and therefore acted by focusing on the main provisions of the Regulation and left aside the technical annex which was based on the work of a specialised body , the ECAC ( European Civil Aviation Conference ) and particularly on its document No 30 on air security .
Now that the text has been analysed in more detail , the Commission understands that the Committee on Transport is proposing 33 amendments to the common position .
Last week we attempted to reach a compromise on the issue between Parliament , the Council and the Commission and , as Mr Jarzembowski and Mrs Foster pointed out a moment ago , unfortunately that has not been achieved .
The Commission insists on the urgency of this document .
If an interinstitutional dispute arises , I fear that we could find ourselves in a deadlock .
I would therefore ask once again for a spirit of compromise , both on the part of the Council and on the part of Parliament , so that , before the summer , we can finally resolve this issue .
I would like to stress something that I have said on other occasions , and that is that the Commission will always carry out its work as a mediator , seeking agreements .
I would classify the amendments in four categories .
The first category , which is aimed at tightening the rules on air security , is the one containing the greatest number of amendments and we can accept practically all of them .
Furthermore , Amendment No 8 , which requests surprise airport inspections , is acceptable in principle .
It proposes that airports should not be warned of inspections , but the Commission would like the inspection to be carried out with the knowledge and cooperation of the national regulatory authorities , as happens in the case of competition inspections or agriculture .
That is to say , the national regulatory authorities would be informed but not the specific airports .
We believe that that would provide the appropriate balance .
Amendment No 16 , which has the Commission 's support , deserves a special mention .
It deals with the requirement that all staff should be subject to controls on accessing security areas .
The Commission agrees that air staff should be subject to the same controls as passengers and not to lower levels .
We should remember that many terrorist incidents have resulted from a lack of security within airport installations .
The aim of the rapporteur 's Amendment No 20 is to increase security .
In this case the Commission believes that it would very much complicate things without really yielding concrete results and , for this reason , we must reject it .
The Commission generally rejects the amendments in the second package , which try to reduce security standards .
I am talking about Amendments Nos 6 , 13 , 17 , 27 , 30 and 31 and in particular No 6 and No 13 .
The first is aimed at increasing the number of airports exempt from harmonised Community rules , by raising the threshold for the size of aircraft .
Since the Commission has not been provided with any indication of the number of additional airports which would be exempt from the Regulation if this amendment were adopted , we reject it , since it introduces a legally unknown situation .
We also reject Amendment No 13 , which proposes delaying the entry into force of certain elements of the Regulation by twelve months , since all of the security rules in the Regulation are based on rules approved by the ECAC , which all the States of the Union belong to .
We believe that its application should not be delayed even more , but that , on the contrary , it is urgent that the Regulation be applied as soon as possible , as Mr Jarzembowski said a moment ago .
The third group of amendments is aimed at extending the scope of the Regulation , which explicitly lays down the obligation for Member States to fund additional security measures and be responsible for them .
The Commission is sympathetic to these arguments - I would like to make this very clear - and in particular Amendment No 7 on the equitable funding of additional security costs .
But these amendments are not appropriate in this Regulation , and do not fall within the scope of Article 80 of the Treaty , which is its legal basis .
Furthermore , in the event that it were possible to include rules on additional funding in this Regulation , those rules would not invalidate the superior Community rules on state aid which are still applicable .
Therefore , the Commission formally rejects Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 , although it is willing to examine the issues raised from a broader point of view , including the need for greater organisation in the field of the funding of investments in air security .
If necessary , after carrying out a detailed study , the Commission is willing to present a legislative proposal , but in a separate form and not within this Regulation .
Finally , the Commission completely accepts all those amendments aimed at improving the Regulation from a grammatical point of view , while maintaining its content .
Therefore , Amendments Nos 16 , 19 , 21 to 26 , 28 , 29 , 32 , 33 and 34 and Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 18 could be accepted after certain textual changes .
The Commission and the European Parliament generally share a very similar position in this field .
Both of us believe that good basic harmonised standards are necessary for security in civil aviation and that particular emphasis should be placed on this Regulation .
Once approved , the proposal will represent a very important step towards guaranteeing a high level of air security throughout the European Union .
Parliament , and in particular Mrs Foster , through her magnificent work throughout the production of this report , is making a very significant contribution towards achieving this result .
What we also need now is a cooperative attitude on the part of the Council and to finally achieve amongst all of us a compromise which allows us to move forward and which prevents the blocking of an issue which we must resolve as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is urgent that we apply harmonised rules as soon as possible in order to guarantee greater security in all airports and throughout the European civil air transport system .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0122 / 2002 ) , by Mrs Berger , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Council common position of 19 December 2001 for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the distance marketing of consumer financial services and amending Council Directives 90 / 619 / EEC , 97 / 7 / EC and 98 / 27 / EC [ 12425 / 1 / 2001 RIV .
1 - C5-0697 / 2001 - 1998 / 0245 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today is , for me , a much longed-for day .
As long ago as the middle of 1999 , I was appointed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market as rapporteur for the second reading of the directive concerning the distance marketing of consumer financial services .
We in Parliament were conscious of the urgency of this directive .
We wanted to be prepared at any time for the common position .
We then had to wait almost three years , however , hoping that the many attempts by several presidencies would at some point prove successful and that the Council would be able to come up with a common position .
If I now propose that Parliament make only minimal changes to the Council common position , then I do so not because the long wait for the common position has worn me down but because I am deeply convinced that the Council common position is a good compromise and that the Council has moved a long way from its original starting point and done a lot to accommodate Parliament and its objections to the content of the draft directive , raised at first reading .
I must also take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for the first reading , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I think that her report has significantly improved upon the draft directive .
Many of her changes also had to be adopted by the Council and the Commission .
In the explanatory statement forming part of my report , I provided a very comprehensive list of the points on which the directive has now been changed following the first reading in Parliament .
I should like here just to list a few important points , as follows .
The relationship to the directive on electronic commerce was clarified . The relationship to the Brussels II Regulation and the Rome Convention was clarified .
The text might perhaps have been further improved , but the relationship is now clear from a legal point of view .
The directive applies to all consumers .
The restriction to consumers ' resident in the territory of the Community ' , criticised by Parliament at first reading , has been dropped .
The list of information to be provided prior to the conclusion of the contract - a central point in the directive - includes all the points called for by Parliament and , in some cases , goes further than the latter .
As a lawyer , I have attached particular importance to the fact that the compulsory cooling-off period originally provided for has been dropped .
The right of withdrawal is now a general right and does not now exist only under specified conditions .
The directive provides for a period of fourteen days . Previously , in the Commission 's draft , it had been seven , whereupon Parliament requested thirty .
These fourteen calendar days seem acceptable , however .
The consequences of withdrawal have also been determined in line with the European Parliament 's requests at first reading .
The biggest discrepancies , here in Parliament too , naturally revolve around the issue of principle concerning whether we should harmonise on a maximum or minimum basis .
This is , of course , not the first time that we are arguing in Parliament about these two principles .
Albeit by a narrow majority , the European Parliament opted at first reading for the concept of maximum harmonisation .
In the Council , there was , on the other hand , originally a very large majority in favour of the universal application of minimum harmonisation .
If , in theory , maximum harmonisation now forms the basis of the common position and the Member States can only apply additional regulations in specific , precisely defined cases , that seems to me to be the only realistic compromise .
In a legal environment in which , for example , we still do not have full harmonisation either in contract law or in the substantive European law governing financial services , no other decision can be made in this directive .
If it is then to be determined upon whom , either the consumers or the suppliers , the risk of an alien legal system is to be imposed , I think it is still the consumer who has more difficulty bearing this risk , more difficulty , certainly , even than smaller suppliers .
The directive now provides for a situation in which the risk borne by smaller suppliers and the costs incurred by them are reduced through the Commission 's providing them with information concerning additional stipulations in the Member States .
When it comes to all those of my fellow MEPs who , through their amendments , have signalled that they are not prepared to compromise and are insisting that maximum harmonisation and the country of origin principle be put fully into effect , I should like , finally , to appeal to them also to consider what would happen if we were to end up in a conciliation procedure in which we would probably not succeed in finding this politically very sensitive and very elusive balance .
In the end , we might possibly have no directive , and we should then be in the situation in which we are at present , in which the country of destination principle directly applies .
We should then be very far , in terms both of content and of timescales , from the goals which , both independently and in conjunction with the Commission , we have set ourselves in the Financial Services Action Plan .
In conclusion , I would therefore again appeal to you possibly to withdraw further amendments by way of a compromise or , as far as possible , to refrain from agreeing to amendments .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague Klaus-Heiner Lehne , who is the shadow rapporteur for our group .
It was important for him to attend the meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that is taking place now .
It is unfortunate that those clashes cannot be taken into account in scheduling these debates , because this is a major piece of legislation from our committee .
I wish to thank Mrs Berger for a very comprehensive and thorough piece of work and for being very persistent in presenting her arguments to us .
It must be said that our group - and I hope many colleagues will agree with us - has tabled a number of crucial amendments to this directive .
We believe they reflect the overall balance of opinion in this House about the importance of maintaining an entirely consistent approach to our work in this absolutely crucial area , and a consistent approach to the work of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market in the areas of electronic commerce and in creating the internal market as a whole .
I suggest that we in this House have been entirely consistent .
It is the Commission and the Council that have moved away from the direction that my colleague Mrs Oomen-Ruijten established at first reading .
In the e-commerce directive we established the principle of country of origin as being crucial to e-commerce transactions .
In our work on distance marketing of financial services , where we robustly supported the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we followed that line as well .
The whole project of creating a single market - an internal market for financial services - is one of the most important projects we are working on at the moment in terms of meeting the Lisbon objectives and creating the sort of dynamic economy that we must have across the European Union .
The distance marketing of financial services directive does not just apply to e-commerce but is crucial in terms of moving to a single cross-border market .
But what do we find ?
We find in the proposal from the Council that the 15 Member States will be able to vary requirements on two crucial elements : prior information given to consumers and aspects of the right to withdrawal from contracts .
What sort of single market will we create ?
What sort of signal will we be sending to the Council and to the market outside if we accept a proposal from the Council that allows 15 different sets of conditions to go forward ?
I suggest to you - and I hope this House will take forward our recommendations - that when we vote tomorrow we should not accept this compromise .
It is not satisfactory .
Conciliation is the only way to resolve it , but we must be consistent with the principles of this House .
I ask you , on behalf of the group , to support those amendments .
Mr President , Mrs Berger has produced an in-depth piece of work and has , I think , got to grips with this subject .
The purpose of the directive is to set up a single legal framework for distance marketing of consumer financial services by supplementing existing sectoral regulations and plugging the gaps in the general directive on distance marketing of consumer goods .
This directive will improve the working of the single market and offer consumers greater protection .
The question of maximum or minimum harmonisation is still a bugbear and naturally voices have been raised in disagreement .
My impression is that the problem could be resolved by adopting or at least allowing for specific regulations to be adopted on certain matters .
Maximum harmonisation , taken together with the Commission 's obligation to tell providers about various national regulations is helpful in a way , especially to small and medium-sized financial service providers , because it cuts providers ' information costs and increases transparency .
This principle has also been retained on the important issue of the right of withdrawal , with the exception of life insurance and old-age pensions .
The 14-day period represents a compromise between the seven days initially proposed by the Commission and the 30 days for which Parliament lobbied .
There are also uniform rules on the method for calculating such periods .
This uniform approach to the right of withdrawal reinforces transparency and legal security in the internal market .
One crucial point which needs to be highlighted is that the common position clarifies the fact that this directive needs to take account of Directive 2000 / 31 on electronic commerce , at least as far as the transactions regulated by it are concerned .
I think that recognition of the country of origin is vital and should not be overlooked .
In all events , despite its remaining shortcomings , the common position will fortunately go a long way towards satisfying the positions of the European Parliament .
I agree with the rapporteur that the directive should apply immediately , which is why we need to avoid time-consuming amendments to individual regulations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Berger , whom I should like to thank for the large amount of work she has done , has once again clearly regenerated the traditional fight in this Parliament for more or less harmonisation .
It might be useful to remind ourselves of the fact that in the original Commission proposal , maximum harmonisation was very much the main objective in terms of distance marketing of financial services .
The Council , on the other hand , took a completely different view .
Needless to say , a great deal can be said for the Commission 's original position .
It was undoubtedly the best solution , both for providers of financial services and for the consumer .
The division in Parliament , however , makes it impossible to secure this best solution .
Moreover , in its common position , the Council would like to introduce exceptions to the principle of maximum harmonisation .
This is unfortunate , for national provisions can indeed constitute barriers to the establishment of the internal market .
Only complete harmonisation guarantees equal competitive conditions between the institutions and instils consumer confidence in services that are offered by other Member States .
The exceptions to the principle of complete harmonisation can seriously hinder e-commerce because service providers are thus obliged to take account of provisions enshrined in the fifteen different legal systems .
I should also like to emphasise that the principle concerning the right of the country of origin will on the whole apply when there is no complete harmonisation .
This will be extremely detrimental to some institutions because the legislations are very different in the area of restrictions .
By way of conclusion , I can therefore state that maximum harmonisation is still the preferred solution , but it once again appears that politics is the art of the possible .
And a bird in the hand might be worth two in the bush .
To put it more clearly : it is better to have a second-rate solution than no solution at all .
Mr President , our rapporteur , Mrs Berger , has very convincingly shown that the Council common position contains a considerable number of Parliament 's demands from the first reading .
I would now just mention here that any directive , for example , in response to Parliament 's demands , would apply to all consumers and not only those that live in the Member States .
Furthermore , the demands for information that service providers must make available correspond very closely to Parliament 's demands , and this and other things mean I am quite prepared , on behalf of my group , to appeal to Parliament not to commence legislative conciliation regarding this matter but adopt this common position , which in many respects is very satisfactory .
It might be said that we have now made a good start with regard to guaranteeing consumer protection in the internal market in financial services , and we can definitely go further in this at a later date .
It is quite proper that the principle of minimum harmonisation is now being applied .
That provides a guarantee that , as no Community act has yet been introduced to cover all the issues and considerations involved , Member States may deviate from it and go a little further .
I do not believe that the internal market will come to any particular harm as a result .
The cross-border sale of financial services is now definitely under way , and in the early stages this will represent a very good level of consumer protection .
Mr President , it is very difficult to sum up this topic .
It is a course of events that baffles me .
Why ?
Because it is not Parliament that has adopted different positions on different occasions , but because the European Commission and the Council have suddenly moved from maximum harmonisation to minimum harmonisation .
And I would invite Mrs Hautala and Mr Beysen to change this topic too .
Politics may be the art of the possible , but if this way of going about things does not benefit the financial services sector nor the consumers , then I think that we should make a different choice .
Allow me to give you another rundown of events , for you will then be able to judge for yourself .
And I would ask you to bear with me .
In May 1992 , the draft directive on the marketing of financial services was submitted .
This original draft included financial services ; so it comprised all distance marketing plus financial services .
This met with a great deal of resistance .
Eventually , the common position was drafted , from which the financial services were deleted .
This happened in 1995 .
The European Commission was in agreement with this .
Parliament attempted at second reading to reverse this situation , but unfortunately lacked a few votes to do so .
Then , a Green Paper was published in 1997 .
Parliament once again opted for incorporating financial services in this directive .
We voted in favour of this .
The Commission subsequently presented a draft directive in which it rightly proposed maximum harmonisation .
Why maximum harmonisation ?
Because the consumer , wherever he may make his purchases in Europe , should be able to do so subject to the same rules , and must be given the same guarantees .
Moreover , this also benefits the financial sector .
What transpired ?
In the common position , minimum harmonisation was all of a sudden opted for .
This minimum harmonisation will create a great deal of frustration within the market , as fellow MEPs have already pointed out .
I therefore call on you , all of us , to revisit very carefully the first reading of this proposal in Parliament - for which I happened to be rapporteur - and to vote on this proposal after all and also to present it to the Council after all .
I have understood that the Council too may have changed its opinion in the mean time .
What is now before us , despite the heartfelt concern displayed by Mrs Berger , will , in my view , not lead to anything .
And I have the feeling that a huge number of fellow MEPs , not only in this group , but also in other groups , will join me in voting out anything that is cloaked in minimum harmonisation , allowing us to start proper negotiations with the Council .
Mr President , Mrs Berger , I think that your work is outstanding and I can only urge you to pursue it . I hope that Parliament will have the wisdom to stay close to and , to all intents and purposes , in line with the Council 's position .
I feel that it is a sensible position and that we need it urgently .
I do not share Mr Harbour 's point of view that conciliation would be the best path to take .
Every day , we see further progress in the development of distance financial services , and we see the positive and negative effects of this in terms of cost to the economy but also the risks to which consumers are exposed as a result .
From this point of view , the common position adopted by the Council is sensible ; I feel that it takes Parliament 's position into ample account and maintains a satisfactory balance in dealing with the principle of the country of origin , which enhances consumer protection .
The crucial point is clearly Article 3 ( 4 ) .
I feel that , if Parliament were to upset the balance achieved by the Council , we would be doing more harm than good , if only because we would be delaying the potential entry into force of this urgently needed directive .
The solution found concerns the potential conflict between pre-contractual information and the information contained in the contract , specifying that the pre-contractual information must comply with the provisions of the contract itself .
This is a sensible requirement and we support it .
This article does not cover all pre-contractual information : it relates purely to the information regarding contractual obligations and its sole purpose is to ensure conformity between the two sets of information .
Once again , this is a sensible step which we fully support .
Lastly , I believe that the Commission itself has fully acknowledged that the agreement achieved by the Council is compatible with the previous texts on e-commerce .
We support the Commission 's point of view , of course , and we trust that Parliament 's wisdom will prevail .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the problem we are discussing is not Mrs Berger ; the problem is the Council , and the discrepancy that we experience so often , between that which is aimed for and what actually results .
The Commission and the Council have set themselves and Parliament the goal of creating a coherent legal framework for electronic commerce , which is intended , over the coming years , to substantially push forward the integration of Europe 's financial markets and enhance the capacity of Europe 's financial services sector to compete across the world .
It is my - and our - opinion that this Common Position by the Council on the proposal for a directive on the distance marketing of financial services does insufficient justice to the endeavour to create a single European internal market .
The great gulf between what we ask for and what is implemented is to the detriment of all parties concerned , including , I believe , the consumers .
The objective that this proposal for a directive has in view - the guaranteeing of a high level of consumer protection in order to safeguard the free movement of financial services - means that the Member States should not be given the option of implementing other - perhaps more extensive - provisions in the areas harmonised by this directive .
I will give one reason why I call for this .
Recognising the possibility of withdrawal from contracts with effect from the moment they are entered into is not compatible with the provision of immediate cover , which is much in demand on the part of customers in the field of non-life insurance .
The regulation envisaged could have adverse effects on the services on offer to consumers .
An internal market requires harmonised regulations , and the objective must not be undermined by means of regulations which differ from one country to another .
We therefore ask you to adopt our amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Berger for having done a great deal of meritorious work , and also my fellow MEPs for their contributions .
Much that has been said has been very much to the point , and , in order to avoid repeating it , I wish to limit myself to just one aspect of the directive .
The attempt is being made to make consumer protection a reality principally by the means of two instruments , rights of cancellation being one and extensive requirements to provide information , advice and guidance the other .
It is immediately apparent that consumers are protected by rights such as these .
On the other hand , this does have its drawbacks - as must of course often be the case .
Do consumers read the information ?
Do they take it on board ?
Do they understand it ?
Do they really cancel , or is it not possible that they are led by it to too free a use of their signatures and a consequent inability to extricate themselves ?
On the other hand , it is in the interests of the business world and of the legal profession for contracts to be durable , and - to take the example Mr Karas has just given - their becoming immediately effective may be in the interests of the consumers themselves .
The reason I say this is that , from these points of view , consumers are afforded better protection where provision is made for the statements they make to be authenticated by a notary .
The procedure itself includes a warning in that the consumer has time to think things over , but , secondly , it involves advice from a third party , one outside the proceedings and obliged to be neutral , and , indeed liability if - as may of course happen - the right advice was not given .
At the same time , though , it combines these points with the advantage of the durability of a deed or contract , and the provision of legal certainty .
In these respects , as a whole , I see this as affording the consumer better protection where - as I have said - provision is made for this .
That is of course not always possible , and certainly not in the day-to-day retail market .
That is why , in my opinion , you should follow the principle that , where national legislation makes provision for consumer authentication , this must suffice , being the better way to protect consumers .
Mr President , let me begin by confirming that the Commission supports the Council 's common position and agreed with the original recommendation of your rapporteur , Mrs Berger , that Parliament should adopt the common position without amendment .
However , we support the compromise amendments proposed by Mrs Berger and Mr Lehne - Amendments Nos 43 and 44 - and urge Parliament to adopt the common position with these amendments only .
Let me pause here to record my thanks to Mrs Berger for the hard work that she has done on this particular piece of legislation , and also to Mr Lehne , for their cooperation and hard work with both myself and my services .
We believe that the common position constitutes a balanced solution which improves our amended proposal and , to a considerable extent , meets the wishes of Parliament as expressed in its first reading .
In particular , the common position includes : fully harmonised and detailed general information requirements ; the principle of written confirmation ; a right of withdrawal with some exceptions ; protection for the user on the chosen means of payment and redress in the event of disputes .
The directive complements and underpins the e-commerce directive by introducing an additional safety net of protection measures for consumers .
This directive also fits into a larger framework of legislative measures designed to open up the internal market for retail financial services .
Allow me to comment on the 50 amendments tabled .
Let me begin by addressing Amendments Nos 9 , 10 , 11 and 37 that expressed Members ' concerns about the position of intermediaries in this directive .
In the common position , the supplier is defined only as the " contractual provider " , and this is deliberate .
Adding the concepts of " intermediary " and " agent " would require a precise outline of the operation of various categories of financial intermediaries and an exhaustive description of the relationship between suppliers and intermediaries or agents .
As indicated by recital 19 , this is not possible in the framework of a general and horizontal directive that applies to all financial services .
I can confirm that the intervention of a contractual provider face-to-face implies that the transaction falls outside the scope of the directive .
The directive applies to organised distance marketing schemes not to face-to-face schemes with the occasional distance transaction .
I shall now address the amendments that are unacceptable because they attack the core of the common position .
I shall begin by commenting on the alleged impact of Article 3 ( 4 ) on the e-commerce directive and , in particular , the principle of country of origin .
I fully agree with the speech made by Mrs Berès on this particular point earlier .
The Commission firmly believes that the common position establishes rules that complement the e-commerce directive and fill gaps in it .
Among these , Article 3 ( 4 ) is central .
Amendment No 13 proposes deleting Article 3 ( 4 ) .
The amendment is , in my view , based on a misinterpretation of the article .
Article 3 ( 4 ) provides indispensable clarification of an important aspect of the e-commerce directive .
The article states that the information communicated to the consumer , prior to conclusion of the contract , needs to be consistent with the provisions which will be contained in the contract itself .
This makes sense legally and in practice .
Contractual obligations are not subject to the country of origin approach , and Article 3 ( 4 ) simply refers to the law and I quote , " presumed to be applicable " , normally meaning the law of the country of destination .
No reputable supplier would willingly misinform consumers about the future content of their contract on the pretext that such information was subject to country of origin rather than country of destination rules .
In addition , the article only covers the prior information which will eventually be reflected in the contract .
It does not cover all the information provided before the contract is signed but not subsequently included in the contract itself .
Finally , the information contained in Article 3 must be communicated and addressed personally to the consumer .
Situations where the supplier provides general information to an indefinite number of recipients are thus excluded .
Another concern is the wish to adopt a maximum level of harmonisation .
Amendment No 3 proposes the deletion of the content of recital 9 ; Amendment No 5 , a substantial change to recital 13 .
Amendments Nos 26 , 27 and 28 provide for the deletion of Article 4 ( 2 ) to ( 4 ) , and Amendment No 25 a fundamental change to Article 13 .
Again , I must disagree with these proposed amendments .
The implementation period for the e-commerce directive expired in January this year .
Once the distance selling directive has been adopted , there will still be a two-year implementation period .
So for on-line transactions , the principle of country of origin will apply to generalised pre-contractual information for a time during which the provisions of this directive are being implemented .
It would be extremely unhelpful for consumer confidence if this period were to be perceived as leading to , or effectively did lead to , the lowering of consumer protection standards in any one Member State .
To avoid this , recital 9 recalls that further convergence or harmonisation at a higher level of consumer protection is foreseen in a number of areas , as laid down in the Financial Services Action Plan .
Pending this harmonisation , there should be no lowering of standards .
The deletion proposed by Amendment No 5 would make the recital factually wrong .
The directive in certain places , such as in Article 10 , leaves Member States some leeway with the harmonised framework .
Article 4 ( 2 ) , introduces the possibility for Member States to impose additional information requirements .
The Commission concluded from the inventory of information requirements it made in 2000 , that this provision is inescapable .
Information requirements in the area of financial services are of a diverse and complex nature , they are regulated partly by EC law , partly for the time being by national law .
Much has been done at sectoral level to harmonise pre-contractual information requirements .
However , it is clear that we are not yet in a position to base information obligations only on EC law .
Deletion of Article 4 ( 2 ) , as proposed in Amendment No 26 - although already rejected by the Committee on Legal Affair and the Internal Market - would prevent Member States from regulating information requirements , notably where no Community legislation existed at all and would in effect roll back important national consumer protection rules .
For this reason , pending further harmonisation , Member States may maintain or introduce more stringent rules .
However , the imposition of any additional rules must conform with the transparency procedure laid down in Article 4 ( 3 ) , which has to be maintained , contrary to the suggestions made in Amendments Nos 27 and 28 .
Amendment No 25 includes the deletion of the phrase at the end of Article 13 " where those operators are in a position to do so " .
This phrase is found in the equivalent article in the general directive .
It is not a minimal clause , it is a reflection of the situation on the ground in all Member States .
If it were to be deleted , postal service operators for instance could be obliged to breach mail secrecy .
Finally , it is an exaggerated concern for the level of harmonisation to seek to transform the directive into a regulation as required by Amendment No 49 and to fix a date for end of transposition , even before the directive is adopted , as is suggested in Article 50 .
Amendments Nos 6 and 8 carve out contracts concluded before a notary .
The consequence would be that intervention of a notary in a distance contract on financial services would deprive the consumer of central rights laid down in the directive , and this is clearly unacceptable .
These rights include information that only the supplier can give , for instance on the quality and risk of a product , protection in case of fraudulent use of cards and protection against unsolicited services and communications .
The effect of a mandatory exclusion of a right of withdrawal for mortgage credit , as contained in Amendments Nos 20 , 22 , 30 and 32 , and the suppression of a right of reflection - Amendment No 31 - would be a substantial reduction of consumer protection in Member States .
Furthermore , although the definition of mortgage credit found in Amendment No 20 is the same as the definition in the code of conduct on home loan information negotiated between industry and consumers in 2001 , national legislation goes beyond the latter definition .
Reduced consumer protection would also follow the suppression , through Amendment No 42 , of the optional exemption to the obligation to pay for insurance services and the limits introduced by Amendment No 33 .
Some amendments include provisions that are unacceptable simply because of their content .
Amendment No 12 seeks to introduce a specific definition of credit .
I understand this is to solve a problem with the transposition in one Member State of the general directive on distance contracts - Directive 97 / 7 / EC .
Any problems relating to the general directive should be resolved in that context and not in this legislation .
Amendment No 15 introduces a sunset provision : a deadline after which a consumer may no longer invoke the right of withdrawal .
This would amount to punishing the consumer for disrespect of obligations by the supplier .
Amendment No 17 would exclude from the right of withdrawal contracts whose performance has begun with the consumer 's consent , before the end of the withdrawal period .
In the general directive on distance contracts ( 97 / 7 / EC ) , the consumer loses his right of withdrawal . If he accepts that the performance of the contract begins .
In contrast this directive foresees that if a consumer withdraws he must pay for services actually rendered before the withdrawal .
Amendment No 17 would render Amendment No 7 meaningless .
However , this would contradict the European Parliament 's position during first reading , when it voted in favour of the principles contained in this article .
Amendment No 23 on payment for services rendered confuses the respective obligations of consumers and suppliers .
Consumers must pay for services rendered if they withdraw .
A good example is an insurance contract .
Suppliers must return any sums received before the consumer withdraws , for instance where the contract is for investments .
I am not convinced of the need for Amendments Nos 24 and 48 on tacit renewal .
The provision in Article 1 ( 2 ) , on initial services agreements , followed by successive operations or a series of separate operations of the same nature , amply covers the concern that underlines that amendment .
Amendment No 35 makes the rules on burden of proof mandatory .
This disregards the fact that the civil law of Member States is not harmonised .
Article 46 removes the need to obtain the consumer 's explicit consent to receive a shortened list of information requirements in telephone communications and replaces this by a reference to the rules on confirmation of information .
This would lead to a substantial weakening of the consumer protection established by this directive .
I have covered the most important amendments .
The remaining amendments - Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 7 , 14 , 29 , 34 , 36 , 38 to 40 , 45 and 47 - are either less precise than the common position or do nothing to improve it .
There is an urgent need to fill the gap and establish the legal certainty that this directive would offer .
The directive has been negotiated since 1998 .
If it fails , neither business nor consumers will be better off .
I urge you to follow the lead of your rapporteur and other speakers who urge this , and adopt this directive without any further delay , only with the compromise amendments suggested .
Thank you for your attention .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has requested the floor .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , please let us not re-open the debate !
I expect you will , however , wish to put a question to the Commissioner .
Mr President , you have just said that this is a debate , but this was not a debate .
For fourteen minutes , I have been listening to a virtual speaking dummy that stated why certain amendments are to be welcomed or not .
The Commissioner has not in any way explained why he calls for maximum harmonisation four times over , but has instead taken fourteen minutes to tell us that a number of amendments that seek to establish exactly that , need not be adopted .
He has not responded to what has been said here in the plenary session .
Good .
We will vote on the matter tomorrow and each Member will , as a number of Members have said , act wisely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0143 / 2002 ) by Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 80 / 987 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer [ 14854 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0070 / 2002 - 2001 / 0006 ( COD ) ]
The next item is a directive that is known as the insolvency directive , but it naturally concerns a directive on the protection of employees , the social protection of employees in this case , when the employer becomes insolvent and when there are insufficient financial resources , or none at all , to pay outstanding wages .
The insolvency directive offers employees valuable protection when their employer is in financial difficulty .
The existing directive is Directive 987 of 1980 .
Clearly , the insolvency directive prevents employees from having to do battle with creditors for outstanding payments .
Instead , they can avail themselves of the provisions afforded in this insolvency directive .
It is a revision of a directive , which , in this case , means that two very important changes have been made , the substance of which we are satisfied with in any case .
The changes mean that part-time workers , employees on fixed-term contracts and temporary workers will fall within the scope of this new directive .
This is based on directives that have been in existence for these employees for some time and that have been brought about in a social dialogue .
They cater for a new category of employees and it is important that we pay attention to this , certainly against the background of what is developing in the field of more flexible labour and the need for this , given the processes such as those in the framework of Lisbon , etc .
Secondly , with regard to situations in which businesses carry out activities in various countries , it is made clear where and in what way the directive is applied and in what state .
The significance of this is obviously considerable , because , slowly but surely , we can see the impact this has on employees , not only in Spain , such as last year in the company Telefonica , but also in German firms , such as Holzman and Kirch .
In 2001 , the number of unemployed in Europe rocketed on account of insolvency cases alone .
In total , 1.4 million people faced these problems due to bankruptcy sustained by their employers .
Needless to say , this is linked to many other factors .
A number of the European Parliament 's amendments were already adopted at first reading - we are now discussing the second reading . This was particularly true of those concerning limiting the possibility of excluding categories of employees and of no longer applying thresholds in the form of a minimum duration of the contract of employment , whereby remuneration in accordance with the directive would not apply until expiry of the contract .
In addition , it was already acknowledged that the chapter on the organisation and financing , Article 5 in the old directive , would be accepted .
Subsequently , in consultation , the Council added that agreement was also reached on the de facto situation of insolvency and it was also agreed that an employee can lay claim to unpaid wages from a fund , insofar as this is provided for in national legislation .
Eventually , further to this second reading by the Council , and its common position in particular , agreements were also reached about whether or not ceilings should be set per se .
In the light of ever-changing labour market developments , it is important for us to have enquired about all kinds of new categories of employees which have been referred to in discussions for some time and in respect of which we would , in fact , like a definition of the terms employer , employee , self-employed , self-employed without staff , etc .
Accordingly , we had asked for this directive to be applied to a number of self-employed that had not been mentioned before , such as self-employed without staff , employees with a training contract , home workers , etc .
We wanted to avoid conciliation if in this respect , we received the assurance from both the Commission and the Council that this entire process , which relates to the legalisation of this situation , would be accelerated .
Eventually , it was agreed that the Commission will carry out a study into what are referred to as ' new forms of work and labour relations ' in the Member States and the candidate countries alike .
This is a huge step forward in my view .
In addition , we agreed that , if this study is published , which will be the case any time between now and six months ' time , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the European Commission will be jointly organising a hearing to discuss the study and subsequently to examine whether , and to what extent , directives , framework directives and suchlike need to be drawn up in order to settle these issues .
I would like to repeat that I have clearly indicated that we refer to the need for new and extensive European labour legislation , certainly against the background of a more flexible labour market .
I would like to make one brief comment on Amendment No 6 that we have withdrawn , for the very simple reason that , in the light of the Council 's common position , it is not central .
I would once again like to thank the Council , the Commission and my fellow MEPs for the cooperation that has helped us avoid ending up in the follow-up procedure - the conciliation , and managed to reach sound agreements nevertheless .
I look forward to statements by the Commissioner .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Bouwman , ladies and gentlemen , in the majority of normal cases , the main - and often the only - source of resources necessary to sustain the salaried worker and their family is the income generated through their work , that is , their salary .
Therefore , with the salary protection system , as well as the mechanisms to facilitate , in a privileged fashion , the payment of salaries from the real assets of the debtor employee , the legislator creates a specific guarantee of the payment of salaries under the responsibility of the public system , often structured around a public administration body , in cases of employer insolvency .
This was the main objective of Directive 80 / 987 / EEC : to guarantee within the Community a minimum level of protection in the event of employer insolvency .
It is true that the application of this directive met with very many difficulties , both in relation to the definition of the concept of insolvency for the purposes of the directive , the need to set limits in relation to the time period and amount of responsibility and the increasingly frequent consequences of transnationality - as the rapporteur has said - and globalisation , as well as the need to adapt this directive to other previous directives and the need to simplify the rules relating to the payment of salaries owed , and all of these are difficulties which the modification is intended to overcome .

The modifications of the text of the common position strengthen the objective of worker protection , laid down in the directive , and I believe that they represent considerable progress .
We still need to define , with the necessary clarity , certain concepts which need to be more precise - possibly due to the fact that social reality is almost always a step ahead of legal reality - such as the concept of the worker , so that it includes all real forms of employment , the problems resulting from productive decentralisation or externalisation , the concept of the role of salary or work dependence in relation to economic dependence , and also that of the proper use of the guarantee institution .
However , on the whole , we should be pleased that we have reached this point .
I believe that the concern of the Commission , Parliament and the Council during the Spanish Presidency demonstrate that it is possible and feasible to create ' more Europe ' and furthermore shows the candidate countries the direction they must take in order to achieve a more social Europe .
I therefore believe that I should end by congratulating the rapporteur , despite the fact that , strictly speaking , not all the desirable objectives have been met in theory .
Nevertheless , surely the possible is the enemy of the ideal and , now that we are so close to the 52nd anniversary of the date on which we can say that Europe began to be built , perhaps we should say that Europe is being built slowly , step by step , but we should also stress , Commissioner , that the social dimension is finally taking the place it deserves in this Europe we want to see .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly on the excellent way in which he has handled this piece of work .
It was adopted unanimously in committee and , thanks to his adept handling of the matter , it seems set to be finalised through an informal conciliation under the Spanish presidency .
That , as he has said , depends upon a clear commitment from the Commission that a declaration will be included in that informal conciliation to cover the situation of economically dependent or subordinate workers - not a very elegant description , but we all know which workers are meant .
We all know the problem : full-time permanent workers , the core staff in many enterprises around the European Union , are becoming less and less numerous , with concentric circles of less formal employment relationships surrounding that core .
The current directive will extend insolvency protection to part-time and fixed-term contract workers , but what about temporary agency workers ?
What about self-employed workers who are in a position similar to employees but who do not have an employment contract ?
What about workers working zero-hour contracts which are becoming more popular in certain parts of the European Union ?
This is all part of a broad approach which , for us , is about balancing flexibility for work places , enterprises , and a degree of security for the workers working within and moving between those enterprises .
We , in the PSE Group , firmly believe that only in that way will all working people embrace the process of change .
Otherwise a barrier will be put in the way of that process of change .
The recent agreement on a directive on working time for long-distance drivers , which will include self-employed workers , shows us a possible way forward .
The Commission , as the rapporteur has said , must commit itself to completing the study it has under way , a joint hearing with Parliament and then legislative or other action to follow that hearing .
For us as well this is about an overall proactive and socially responsible approach to the management of industrial change .
We in the PSE Group have called since the beginning of this mandate for a modernisation of the law governing transfers and insolvency and , indeed , consultation in the form of the European Works Council Directive .
We hope that the remaining elements of those changes will be introduced as soon as possible by the Commission .
I had a recent example in my own constituency where a company called Viasystems registered offshore before declaring insolvency , thereby avoiding the application of certain aspects of insolvency law .
The subsequent Phoenix company which arose from the wreckage through a management buy-out shed over 500 jobs .
Those people were made redundant , some of them with more than 30 years ' pension and other entitlements which they lost completely .
Clearly we still have a lot of work to do . This is a step in the right direction .
Mr President , Mr Bouwman has been extremely sensitive in his approach to this question and has successfully brokered a compromise for which he deserves our congratulations .
Parliament adopted the Bouwman report by a large majority at first reading .
The European Parliament responded positively to this initiative by the Commission because it rounds off the three basis reforming directives , the other two of which cover protection for employees from mass redundancies and during corporate restructuring and all of which aim to reduce the insecurity of workers as a result of structural changes .
This common objective cannot just be confined to these initiatives .
If we want to bring about reform in the European Union and achieve the Lisbon objective of a more dynamic economy , we need to take an equally acute interest in work-generated insecurity and we need to deal with these fears in our reforms , not fly in the face of them .
It is the only way to prevent the renationalisation of social policies and prevent far-right movements from gaining a stronghold .
Parliament proposed a series of amendments , many of which were accepted by the Council , such as a definition of the notion of ' employee ' , application to the liberal professions and other categories and protection for wages across the board , irrespective of whether they are basic wages , bonuses or various pay rises .
The question was raised of including compensation if the employee is made redundant .
The Council 's explanation that it does not refuse to include these relative guarantees but considers that they come under insured benefits in that they derive from the contract of employment is of course tantamount to acceptance .
However , in my personal opinion , there should be an express reference to the term ' compensation ' , just as there is in the international contract of employment and just as the experts of the International Labour Organisation have recommended .
Another positive point is the extended understanding of the term ' insolvency ' which has been retained .
The big question which remains unanswered , and which concerns not just the present directive , is if and to what extent the protection offered to workers will cover all those engaged in new forms of work and if we intend to communitise the relevant definitions .
The compromise solution of an in-depth study of the question is one we agree with , as long as a specific deadline is attached to it .
Mr President , I welcome the proposal before us tonight . I welcome the compromise reached between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
We are still left , however , with the ongoing difficulty of so-called self-employed workers who do not have the protection of social legislation which people covered by this amended directive will have .
We all know that many companies use so-called self-employment as a means of avoiding their social responsibilities .
That is not acceptable .
It is a false flexibility .
Those companies and those Member States which support this position with regard to self-employment are impeding the modernisation of our labour relations , the modernisation of our labour market and the development of a single labour market across the European Union .
It is my view that it is a false saving and a false protection of flexibility .
I welcome the agreement to have an in-depth study into the legal , economic and social situation of people who are self-employed in this way .
I suggest that it would be worthwhile also to examine the impact that this kind of self-employment is having on the development and modernisation of the single labour market that we aspire to .
It seems to me that what is happening is that more and more workers are resisting change precisely because they fear this form of flexibility , because they are then left without the protection of social legislation which generations of workers have fought for .
Mr President , today 's agreement is a major step forward in addressing the new transnational , increasingly complicated problems facing both companies and workers .
I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bouwman on the commitment , the conviction and the great determination he has shown in dealing with this very difficult directive through the co-decision procedure .
I have realised that it would be impossible to have a positive product without the cooperation and the strong support of the members of the Committee of Employment and Social Affairs and I would like to thank all the members of the committee .
I believe that this excellent cooperation , not only in the Committee , but also between the three institutions , will soon lead to the final adoption of the insolvency directive , probably without the need for the conciliation procedure .
I am pleased to announce that the Commission is willing to accept all the amendments to the common position of 18 February in their entirety .
It takes the view that all the amendments which have been tabled supplement and improve the text of the common position .
With regards to the concerns which have been expressed by Members concerning the new forms of employment , I would like to confirm to Members of this House that the Commission is aware of the problem and is dealing with it in a new way and in a much broader context than in the directive with which we are dealing today .
Indeed the forms of the employment and the way in which work is organised are undergoing rapid and far-reaching changes .
New types of employment are emerging .
There are new types of worker , half-way between the traditional models of the employee and the self-employed worker .
Various terms have been used to describe or designate these workers .
The terms used most often are economically dependent workers or para-subordinate workers and persons who perform work similar to that of an employee .
What these workers have in common is that they resemble self-employed workers in the autonomy they have to organise their work and / or the fact that they take an economic risk .
At the same time , they are economically dependent in the sense that they depend more or less on just one client firm and are very often highly integrated into the internal organisation of the company .
The Commission raised the problem of these economically dependent workers with the social partners .
There was a consultation with the social partners , and they revealed their sensitivity to the problem , but it was obvious that they did not have a concrete approach or a concrete proposal .
It was clear that there was a need for further information about the phenomenon in all Member States .
I must reassure you that in the existing text we take into account the concrete forms of employment which have already been legislated for - I mean part-time work , temporary employment contracts and fixed contracts .
But there are other forms of employment , to which I have already referred , that cannot be covered by this directive .
In order to take into account your concerns , and after our consultation with the social partners , I confirm that the Commission has launched a study which should provide an overview of the legal , social and economic position of economically dependent people in the 15 Member States .
Once this study has been finalised , the Commission will organise a joint hearing with the European Parliament for three reasons : to exchange views and practices , to evaluate the results of the study and to raise the awareness of all concerned .
Consideration could be given to inviting representatives of the accession countries to participate in this joint hearing .
After this joint hearing , the question is whether we will go further : is the Commission going to propose concrete Community action ?
After all this information and the reactions , the Commission will consider the forms of Community action needed .
We will propose them to establish a broader framework and then see how it might be done .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0152 / 2002 ) by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Working together for the future of European tourism ( COM ( 2001 ) 665 - C5-0077 / 2002 - 2002 / 2038 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tourism is one of the most important economic and social sectors of the European Union in terms of the wealth it generates , in terms of the jobs it creates and in terms of its essential contribution to preserving Europe 's cultural and historical heritage .
It is also a sector that is crucial to achieving full employment in the European Union , a goal laid down at the Lisbon Summit , and is also fundamental to regional policy , through stimulating growth and employment in less developed areas , especially in Europe 's peripheral and outermost regions .
Europe is still the most popular tourist region in the world and the potential of this sector , especially following the planned enlargement of the European Union , is immense .
Nevertheless , major debates on tourism are rarely held in this Parliament .
I therefore congratulate Commissioner Erkki Liikanen and his staff on having given us this opportunity .
I also wish to thank the draftsmen of the opinions for this report for their contributions , the majority of which were voted for by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , thereby adding value to this report .
Europe has a historical and cultural heritage and a diversity and density of tourist attractions that make it the most visited region in the world . This means that we can expect the volume of European tourism to double in the next twenty to twenty-five years , bringing a net benefit in terms of expenditure and profits of the order of 3 % per year .
Employment will grow at a rate of around 15 % in the next ten years .
This incredibly rich historical and cultural heritage of Europe is a crucial factor in attracting tourists , and has the advantage , in comparison with other industries , that it cannot be relocated .
One of the most important factors in the growth of tourism in the next few years will be the trends in the demographic structure of the population : in twenty years ' time , the population aged over 65 will have increased by 17 million .
Individuals in this age group , who will enjoy better health , a longer life expectancy and greater resources , will feel much more inclined to travel than in the past .
At the same time , demand for tourism will evolve : cultural and heritage tourism will increase significantly .
What is crucial , however , is that tourism has become a social right for workers and , where young people are concerned , the entire European Union has become their territory .
Other factors boosting the tourist sector , such as the liberalisation of transport and the development of transport networks , the progress of the single market , particularly the reality of the single currency , and the considerable developments and outcomes of the Information Society will continue to promote mobility and the internationalisation of tourist flows .
Many measures adopted by the Commission have been crucial to the development of tourism .
I would mention , in particular , the free movement of persons , the removal of borders , and the creation of the single currency .
A new and very important step will be taken on 1 July of this year , when the ' euro ' zone becomes the domestic market and electronic cards will mean that we could just as easily be in our own countries .
I think that this is a very important step in terms of European citizenship .
Since tourism is so important , we call on Commissioner Erkki Liikanen to include all measures concerning tourism in his presentation of the raft of measures to be proposed for next year or which are already underway . I say this because one of the fundamental problems is that so many sectors have an impact on tourism that , unless we look at them as a whole , much of the impact , the importance and the coherence of these proposals will be lost .
I think that his proposal to create a European tourism forum that will meet annually and which will include representatives of the industry and of the European Parliament is a very appropriate measure and is of the utmost importance . The idea is that we must listen to what the tourist industry has to say and find out what its needs are , to which we can then respond .
Another idea that I consider to be very important is that of a Community-level programme to promote tourism in Europe .
One of the factors that we have been most frequently asked to remedy and which I feel is of the utmost importance , is for the European Union 's fiscal policy to consider labour-intensive sectors such as tourism to be entitled to pay the lowest rate of VAT .
Lastly , I ask Parliament , in the Convention on the future of Europe that is now under way , to approve strengthening the legal base so that Europe can develop a genuinely strong tourism policy , which is what we need .
Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of my colleague , Mr Bradbourn , who was the rapporteur for our committee , though I was very much involved in drawing up the opinion .
I should like to say first of all to Mrs Torres Marques that she has produced an extremely comprehensive report with a lot of good ideas in it .
I would say to Mr Liikanen , whom I am pleased to see here in a different guise from when we normally engage in debate , that I read his proposal with great interest .
I want to emphasise that the line taken by my committee in our opinion is that we are looking for areas where the Commission can add value .
We are not looking for new Treaty competences .
We are not looking for new layers of bureaucracy in an industry which , as Mrs Torres Marques has rightly pointed out , is characterised by the very large number of small- and medium- and owner-operated businesses .
The last thing we want is lots of bureaucratic information collection and even ideas like new observatories .
The Commission has a role in adding value , in promoting ideas about benchmarking and sharing information about standards , but industry players and local authorities must be engaged in that process .
I emphasise that they have to add value to the process .
Mr Liikanen 's portfolio is a very broad one already .
I do not want to see him diverting a lot of resources into something that is primarily a competence of Member States and should remain so .
In that connection , I do not want to see us use the ideas about tourism - and certainly , as Mrs Torres Marques has said , it employs a lot of people - to call for centralising measures , for new tax centralising measures or for new measures that might engage regions directly instead of Member States .
We should clearly be discussing tourism issues but we should be quite clear about where the responsibility lies .
We should say to the Commission : add value , look for solutions but do not add to your Treaty competences .
Mr President , despite the tragic events of 11 September , the tourism industry is alive and well .
In fact , it is even enjoying a phase of permanent expansion at European and global level .
As an economic sector , the tourism industry accounts for 5 % of jobs in the European Union .
The lion 's share of the activities and of employment is generated by some 2 million small and medium-sized businesses , together making up some 8 million people .
Furthermore , this employment is spread across different service sectors , such as transport and the hotel trade .
Small and medium-sized businesses are therefore clearly the driving force behind , and platform for , European tourism .
This is why the proposed actions must be coupled with actions in the framework of the multi-annual programme for small and medium-sized businesses .
To the question whether Community tourism policy should be developed for the tourism industry , the answer remains negative , at least for the time being .
This does not detract from the fact that tourism policy must be coordinated more effectively and better managed .
Tourism policy often gives a fragmented and chaotic impression .
This is why actions in the field of harmonisation of information , the establishment of harmonised labels and networking must be strongly encouraged .
In addition , the Commission 's initiative to establish an annual , European tourism forum at which the sector itself can set its priorities , receives our full support .
In short , closer cooperation between all parties involved in order to make tourism more competitive and sustainable , appears to be a priority .
Mr President , I completely agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques , and with Mr De Clercq that , despite the crisis at international level and its repercussions on Europe , the tourism sector is the most promising of all sectors when it comes to creating new jobs .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs believes that we need to use this advantage every way we can , at both European and national level .
To start with , the Member States should include specific commitments on employment in the tourist industry in their national employment action plans .
These actions should basically concentrate on vocational training , improving working conditions and applying policies to protect workers in seasonal , temporary and insecure jobs .
If these policies are to be effective , however , they need to be based on a proper study of the market and its present and future requirements .
There is already a lack of manpower in certain professions in the tourist industry , which is why our committee is calling on the European Commission to draft a study into the requirements of the market in collaboration with the Member States and within the context of a tourism policy at national and regional level .
It is also calling on the European Commission , in cooperation with Cedefop , to propose control standards for personnel training and to generate the required synergy between learning and professional experience .
If full use is to be made of the potential of tourism , these policies all need to be accompanied by support for manpower mobility at both national and European level .
Tourism is a sector which is admirably suited to this sort of mobility policy .
We also believe that we should make use of the potential for job creation and should strengthen employment among women , starting with various measures to help reconcile family life and work in the tourist industry and encourage entrepreneurship among women .
Our committee also stresses the need to emphasise social tourism and calls on the European Commission to produce a communication on the various forms of social tourism and its importance in developing a European conscience among our European citizens and reviving the regions of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every year , around 200 million Europeans leave their place of normal residence to become tourists for a while , usually in other countries of the Union .
As Mrs Torres Marques rightly states , Europe remains the main tourist destination for third countries , despite facing increasingly stiff competition .
Nevertheless , the Treaties provide no specific legal base for a Community policy on tourism , despite the fact that our Parliament has been calling for such a policy for a considerable amount of time in order to give the Community major scope for intervention whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Since the Treaties do not provide for such a measure , the European Union must contribute to improving and encouraging cooperation in this sector in order to harness the enormous potential of tourism .
I welcome the efforts of the Commission , whose communication proposes an operational framework for European tourism as well as a range of measures and actions to be implemented by the various players involved .
The Commission highlights the complexity of this sector due to its diversity and its wide-ranging nature , which gives it little visibility at political level , a situation that does not properly reflect its true economic and social importance .
The Commission has , however , shown a lack of ambition : its proposal does not raise hopes that a real boost will be forthcoming because it fails to envisage a genuine strategic framework for monitoring an industry with enormous potential but which is experiencing little growth .
I agree with all of the recommendations contained in Mrs Torres Marques 's excellent report , not least making tourism an issue to be considered by the Convention on the future of Europe and I do not think that a joint action runs counter to national actions to promote tourism .
Employment in the tourism industry is often highly seasonal and precarious , which is an obstacle to achieving sustainable development in this field .
I therefore call on the Commission to draw up at the earliest opportunity proposals to include the restaurant sector , and possibly other as yet ineligible tourist services , on the list of sectors of activity entitled to a permanent reduction in the VAT rate , so as to boost employment and modernisation in the industries concerned and better equip European tourism to deal with international competition .
Furthermore , know-how in the field of management and technology must be acquired and spread in order to encourage new methods of production and to promote a form of tourism that responds as well as possible to changes in the market .
Tourism is also a crucial element for the economic development of certain regions of the Union whose development is lagging behind , and for the outermost regions in particular , the tourist industry is the leading source of income and contributes significantly to their efforts to ensure the convergence of their economies towards the Community 's average rate of development .
Tourism whose development is handled with prudence over the long term must provide local economies with a source of sustainable income and employment and must also contribute towards safeguarding and enhancing the landscape , cultural , historical and environmental features of the regions of the Union .
Lastly , I wish to stress the crucial role that the European Union must play in encouraging new forms of tourism in new places , not least by helping continental Europeans to discover the wonders of Europe 's outermost destinations .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques , not only for her work on this report , but also for her dedication to the tourism cause in this Parliament , which goes back some years now .
I believe we are faced with a contradiction - a contradiction that emerges clearly as Mr Harbour speaks on behalf of Mr Bradbourn , speaking on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy in this field of tourism .
I believe we need EU competence in the field of tourism , not only to enable tourism to develop in terms of staff and standards and give us a coherent and coordinated tourism policy , but also - and I thought the Conservative Group would have really taken this to their bosom - because the present scenario is holding back profit generation and the opportunities to make money in that sector .
Tourism contributes 5 % of the EU 's GDP .
It employs thousands of people in the Member States and yet we have no EU competence .
We are faced at this moment with numerous - I do not know how many exactly - tourism policies reflecting national , regional and even local priorities that differ from each other .
It appears that we have a tourism ship that is sailing the seas with nobody on the bridge to direct it or to control it .
That is not the fault of the Commission or this Parliament .
The fault lies squarely with the Member State governments .
Even within national boundaries , tourism suffers from this effect of other interests - parochial interests .
We really need to take the opportunity presented by Mrs Torres Marques to get to grips with this problem and to produce for the European Union a coherent tourism policy that will work and be of benefit to the people of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques , for the thorough preparatory work she has done with regard to this important matter .
She has listened to her colleagues and drawn up an excellent report .
Tourism is the industry of the future , and , as has been said here , Europe is still the world 's largest tourist destination .
As a growth industry it can also create jobs in regions where it would be very hard to do so otherwise .
It is important that Europe 's competitiveness and its appeal in the tourist sector are increased through better coordination of different areas of policy , and more cooperation and networking .
It is especially important to promote sustainable tourism and improve conditions for the growth of environmental and cultural tourism .
I would also like to stress how important it is that all regions and citizens of the European Union keep up with developments in the information technology field and that broadband networks should extend to all companies in the tourist industry .
Our group would nevertheless like to emphasise the importance of the principle of subsidiarity with regard to the tourist industry and therefore supports the notion of limited action within the framework of the EU .
For this reason , we oppose the proposal that the tourist sector should have a clear legal basis and its own budget heading .
In my opinion a reduction in VAT in the tourist industry is justified , but many members of our group take a wary view of matters of taxation , as they are largely the business of the Member States .
Regarding amendments , we support most of those tabled by Mr van Dam and Mr Bradbourn .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Torres Marques on her magnificent work .
Today , tourism is one of the most important sectors in the European Union and the absolute number one objective in certain regions in which tourism provides the majority of their gross domestic product and it is essential to the development and cohesion of these regions that they themselves also have significant common policies in other fields .
The lack of a legislative basis which would make this sector more operative and remove it from the field of unanimous decision-making within the Council will give impetus to this sector , which is in the hands of the large tour operators and completely outside the control of this House .
We therefore need decisions to be taken by qualified majority voting for tourism in the European Union .
The necessary action to protect the consumer must not lead us to forget the protection of the interests of the countries and regions for which tourism is a product , which is also necessary .
The impact of tourism on regional planning , the impact on the environment , the traditional agriculture sector , employment , transport and its essential infrastructures , as well as relations with other non-Community States which are providers and receivers of tourism , in which that tourism generates wealth and employment , make the adoption of an operative decision urgent .
The creation of a system of quality and efficiency indicators for tourism and the integrated management of the coastal areas within the field of policies at local , regional and national level must appear in a directive and not in a mere recommendation .
An in-depth analysis should be made of the impact of fiscal transport measures on tourism and the environmental impact of tourism and , finally , the Convention and the Council should work in this direction .
We therefore also need a common umbrella , a common policy and also common promotion for tourism in the European Union .
Mr President , this report is a one-sided report predicated on the need to develop the tourist product in the European Union , combat the decline in tourism in Europe and strengthen the common European tourism policy .
In keeping with what is now the Union 's standard approach , the report also ties tourism to the Procrustean bed of the laws of the market and competition in order to accommodate the interests of big business in the tourist sector , thereby dealing a mortal blow to small and medium-sized - and especially small - businesses in the industry .
In our view , a tourism policy should be based first and foremost on protecting and safeguarding the rights of workers in the tourist industry who , because of the seasonal nature of the industry , have terrible trouble securing insurance and health and safety rights and are the first to suffer at the whim of their employers .
We feel that tourism should aim to satisfy the needs of the workers and the working classes in general for rest and recreation , which are vital if they are to maintain their strength .
Consequently , it must be made into a universal right of the people , not a means for the big businesses ravaging the sector to suck in excessive profits .
In this sense , tourism should play a positive role in wider communications , in getting to know other nations , customs , mores and cultures , in helping to develop friendly relations between nations and in promoting popular culture and history and a healthy and creative synergy between tourism and the environment .
Mr President , to a considerable number of regions in the Union , tourism is a significant source of income .
It appears that , within the countries of the European Union , there is enough to attract both Europeans and non-Europeans in terms of nature , culture and in other respects too .
The attractiveness of some regions is so manifest that the income from the tourism sector dominates , sometimes to a large extent , the revenue on the balance sheet .
Certainly in those circumstances , prudence is called for .
After all , tourism remains a luxury product that is largely dependent on the prosperity and sense of security of the world 's citizens .
Even stagnation in one particular link of the tourism chain can have very detrimental effects on the sector as a whole .
Recent events in aviation have illustrated this .
This is why I should like to call on the policy makers to prevent , where possible , the unilateral bias on tourism by regions .
Not only is the tourism sector very dependent on factors outside of the sector , it is also characterised by a major influence of the seasons .
This means , in addition to unilateral financial dependence , that only partial use is made of the labour potential .
Also , the ecological vulnerability of many tourist areas forms an important concern .
Areas that are of outstanding natural beauty or that are culturally attractive experience a quantitatively large and growing influx of visitors .
This puts such heritage under extreme pressure .
The policy should take this point very much into consideration .
These findings do not minimise the problem , but highlight the seriousness of it , certainly if we realise that with the EU 's enlargement , a considerable number of regions will be added to the list of tourist attractions .
This is another reason why the measures to be taken in the tourism sector should be well thought through .
We can endorse the overall gist of these remarks that are included in the present resolution .
Our struggle concerns the level at which the specific problems would need to be solved and the role which the European Union is to play in this .
The EU , especially with its economic and structural policy , undeniably has a great impact on the situation in many of the tourist areas .
It is questionable whether adding more tasks to the package of the Commission will strengthen the tourism sector and the Commission itself .
After all , most of the expertise about the tourism sector lies with the regions , the Member States and the sector organisations .
Initiatives to provide incentives should therefore mainly originate in these bodies .
After this reconnaissance exercise , a number of incentive measures appear to us to be conceivable .
As already stated , there is first of all a task for the regions , the Member States and sector organisations .
I struggle to think who could match their knowledge and expertise .
Not only measures aimed at tourism , but also at activities of other kinds must prevent unilateral dependence on tourism in the regions concerned .
A European sector forum could play a useful role in this .
Secondly , the European Commission also has a part to play , not in setting up a specific tourism policy , but in synchronising those areas of policy that impact on the tourism sector .
A sector which mainly comprises medium-sized and small businesses .
Good communication and harmony between the relevant Commissioners and their services is desirable in this respect .
In addition , the Commission will need to support the Member States in their endeavours to establish a stable economic situation in the regions .
In our view , developing the versatility of a region is one of those supporting measures .
Thirdly , the European institutions do not appear to have any other role of significance or added value .
Accordingly , the inclusion of a legal basis for tourism in the treaties does not receive our support .
In summary , areas which for a large part derive their economic raison d 'être from tourism deserve attention and encouragement in order to offer them structurally sound prospects .
All authorities involved have their own part to play .
As far as the European Union is concerned , this means , in our opinion , that in the short term , particularly the synergy within the Commission deserves a boost .
Accordingly , I have tabled a few amendments which I would warmly recommend .
Mr President , the Commission communication and the European Parliament report on tourism clearly demonstrate how far European competences can be extended , with no regard for subsidiarity whatsoever .
My starting point is the fact that the Treaty does not provide for Community competences in the field of tourism , since the matter is only mentioned once , in Article 2 , which cannot be used as a legal base .
This position is in keeping with common sense : the tourists who visit a region are attracted by its specific local characteristics and this is why , in the Member States , responsibility for tourism is held at local or regional , sometimes national level .
Although international cooperation may sometimes appear desirable , there must be flexibility between public and private partners , and cooperation should not have to be bound up in the administrative straightjacket of the Community system .
The European Parliament and the Commission clearly do not see matters in this light .
They want to incorporate tourism into Community policies and create a framework programme with an appropriate budgetary line - see paragraph 12 of the draft resolution - with Community administrative resources - see paragraph 44 - and even , it could be said , a sort of planning .
What are their reasons for this ?
Tourism is important for growth .
It can be a tool for development and can create jobs . It is already indirectly affected , to a greater or lesser degree , by several Community policies .
The report now before us even adds that with the attacks of 11 September having indirect consequences for tourism , a European tourism policy has become necessary in order to respond to the shock that was inflicted .
These arguments are interesting but none of them is central to deciding whether such a policy should be implemented at Community level .
In fact , Article 5 of the EC Treaty lays down only one criterion .
Will the action that is planned be implemented more effectively if it is managed from Brussels ?
The argument on this point that the report puts forward is very weak , even non-existent .
The opinion delivered by our Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , contains a revealing phrase .
Having rightly noted that it is hard to see what a Community tourism policy would cover , it adds , and I quote : ' Nevertheless , there is no doubt that common needs do exist and we must identify them ? .
In other words , something is needed - but no one knows what this might be .
To conclude , this report clearly shows that the Commission and the European Parliament are capable of proving that everything and anything falls within their competence .
If they had their way , this approach would apply ad infinitum .
This is why it is crucial that at the next intergovernmental conference , genuine supervision of subsidiarity , in other words , supervision from outside the Community institutions is put in place .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Torres Marques has done an excellent job ; I think , on balance , there are three messages which come out of this report .
The first is that , at some point , we have to move from words to deeds .
I have attended more debates like this than I care to remember here in the European Parliament and at some point they start to sound like empty liturgies .
So we really do need to move from discussion to deed , to measures , to implementing what we keep talking about .
The second is that obviously we should welcome the European Commission 's communications on tourism , but we also need to say to Commissioner Liikanen that they are not enough .
You start with these communications , Commissioner , but you do not see them through to the end .
Various directorates , not just yours , have passed general measures on tourism , the internal market , the Structural Funds and the environment .
These measures need to be coordinated , even though there is no common policy , if the European Union is to produce the best possible tourism policy .
The third point I want to comment on is the famous legal basis for tourism .
There is a legal basis for industry , but there is no legal basis for tourism which , in a few years ' time , will be the most important sector in industry .
Despite the fact that , by definition , tourism goes beyond borders and is by definition an activity which is beyond a single Member State 's control .
We therefore need a legal basis which will not be a substitute for national policy but , on the contrary , will help us adopt a policy with added value at European level and , in the final analysis , will help Europe stand up to international competition .
That is why we need to make sure when the Treaties are revised at the next intergovernmental conference that we have the legal basis which the European Parliament advocated at the last Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a few weeks ago the Greek Minister of Health decided to shut down all the schools in Greece because of an outbreak of a viral infection .
The schools were only shut for two days and the number of new cases quickly petered out .
And yet , this had an instant and severe impact on Greek tourism , with numerous bookings cancelled , exacerbating the crisis sparked by the events of 11 September .
Needless to say , this reaction was unwarranted because the ministry had acted in a purely preventive manner , demonstrating gravitas and a sense of responsibility in allaying tourists ' fears .
However , the hype created by certain mass media and a few loose cannon resulted in cancellations and disappointment for those who make a living out of tourism in Greece .
What else could the Minister of Health have done , however ?
Should he have thought first of the financial consequences or of the potential risk , albeit tiny , to the health of Greeks and visitors alike ?
If you were the minister , Commissioner , what would you have done ?
The same , I imagine .
You would have put health first .
But nor are the businesses and people who make a living out of tourism at fault and they are right to call for proper action , to call for the protective umbrella of the European Union .
When they work and serve a sector which contributes as much as tourism does to the balanced development of the regions of the Union and , in the final analysis , to European integration itself , a sector which is as susceptible and sensitive as tourism is to every sort of crisis , then these businesses , these workers , these European citizens rightly and reasonably feel that it should not be abandoned to its own fate .
We need to be able to take measures to moderate these unfortunate repercussions , we need to be able to finance suitable action from the Structural Funds , we need to make special provision in the budget for funding to improve tourism , with everything that means and implies .
Clearly we need to incorporate the tourist parameter into all Community decision-making procedures and Mrs Torres Marques ' excellent report paves the way for just that .
Mr President , as a Member of this House elected by one of the outermost regions - Madeira - and since it is impossible in the time allocated to address all of the issues that this report raises , and which the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques , whom I shall take this opportunity to congratulate on her excellent work , has dealt with quite thoroughly , I wish to focus my speech on three points that directly concern the outermost regions .
Firstly , I should like to emphasise the importance of tourism in boosting the economic activity of the outermost regions , and as a means of combating underdevelopment .
This sector is the main activity in these regions in terms of the wealth it creates and makes a major contribution to the task of bringing these areas closer to the more developed regions of the European Union .
It is , therefore , crucial to recognise the value of the role played by tourism and the potential for economic development that it represents .
We must not , however , forget that these regions cannot remain dependent on tourism alone , an activity of whose vulnerability we are all aware .
We must , therefore , support work on economic diversification by making use of the opportunities provided in Article 299 ( 2 ) .
Secondly , I should like to highlight the need to develop efficient and sustainable transport infrastructures , with the aim of making access to the remote and island regions easier .
The increase in tourist flows and the consequent development of the sector depend on measures that improve accessibility , which , combined with a proper policy of promoting and making the best use of environmental , historical and cultural resources , could be an instrument of crucial importance to the development of these regions .
Thirdly , I would highlight the special fragility and environmental wealth of territories such as the outermost regions , which are on the one hand a determining factor and tourist attraction , but which on the other require sustainable tourism .
Unless this happens , the very development of the economy and the tourism of these regions will , in the medium term , be irremediably compromised .
Commissioner , I would be very grateful if you would be able to lift us out of an absurd situation in which we are in danger of remaining despite many years of debate , including our debate today .
Mrs Torres Marques ' excellent report - in which , moreover , she was willing to include contributions from her fellow Members - which she supports with figures , gives such a good account that there is no need for us to go over the ground again , describing how the tourism sector is not just a sector which is vital , extremely important for the European Union today but also one of the crucial sectors for its future , both in purely economic terms and indirectly , because of its potential to contribute to environmental policies , social policies and policies for promoting peace and awareness between the people of different areas .
That said , we are now stuck in the absurd situation where , although we acknowledge the value and strategic importance of the sector , we are unable to come up with any policy with a European dimension to help it face its new challenges .
The challenges are those that have been mentioned by the Members : there was September 11 and , on a more general note , we are faced with the question of the competitiveness of the tourism sector , whose dimensions have changed ; there is a problem of training ; there is a problem of environmental sustainability .
We need tourism to help us but it needs our assistance too to bring about environmental conversion with a view to achieving sustainability .
It is true , Commissioner , that you cannot do much at the moment because of the constraints of the Treaties , but maybe you could speed up policy coordination and even join us in calling - as we are doing - for the forthcoming Convention to develop such instruments , legal instruments which will make it possible to create a sectoral policy that will help us face the challenges of the future .
Mr President , last November the Commission addressed two documents to the European Parliament and the other institutions : one about the economic perspectives of European tourism after the events of 11 September , and the other , a Communication on ' Working together for the future of European Tourism ? .
On 19 February the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , under the chairmanship of Mr Caveri , organised a public hearing on the future of European tourism , which was attended by the Commission and the Council .

I would like to thank Mr Caveri and the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques , for their active contribution , as well as the members of the committee for all their work and for the report tabled today .
Various other committees gave their opinion .
I should like to thank Mr Harbour , Mr De Clercq and Mr Graça Moura for their contributions .
The Commission in general can go along with the draft report .
There are a limited number of issues that need particular attention and on which I would like to make some comments : first , the question of a stronger legal basis in the EC Treaty .
In our view , the Treaty of the European Community , in particular Article 3.1 ( u ) and Article 157 , establishes a sufficient basis for the actions proposed in the Commission 's Communication .
After the ratification of the Nice Treaty , a qualified majority will be sufficient for supporting measures in the context of Article 157 of the Treaty to increase the competitiveness of European industry and , therefore , of tourism enterprises .
Secondly , the need for a better promotion of Europe as a tourism destination .
The Commission agrees with the Parliament report that more should be done to promote Europe as a safe and attractive set of tourist destinations .
The Commission is regularly requested to examine this issue as well , and it agrees with the wording of the report and of the draft Council resolution that will be formally adopted on 21 May , in which it is emphasised that : " with a view to contributing to the improvement of the global image of the European Union in the world , consideration could be given to analysing the present image as well as to discussing the possibilities of improving it , for instance through the new information and communication technologies , through benchmarking of best practices or through the coordination of certain combined promotional activities by tourism authorities and / or industry , while ensuring that competition among Member States is not distorted " .
Thirdly , as far as the opening of the Tourism Consultative Committee to the public is concerned , on the one hand , the Commission has already opened - and will keep open - several of the committee meetings to include the participation of industry and other stakeholders representatives .
However , the Consultative Committee on Tourism is a body established by a Council Decision in 1986 .
Members of this committee are designated by Member States , and the Commission chairs the meetings .
It is true that in this Council Decision there is no basis for this and it will be difficult - unanimity is needed - to amend it , in order to open it to the public .
On the other hand , the annual forum meetings , which will start in December , will be open to the public .
Finally , I would like to mention that the informal ministerial meeting organised by the Spanish presidency in Santander on 4 May was followed the day after by a seminar attended by major public and private stakeholders .
The event showed that the proposed actions in our Communication are in line with the priorities of Member States and of the other stakeholders .
It is very encouraging to note the attention the European Parliament continues to give to tourism and that it agrees largely with us .
This will facilitate our work in attaining the objectives described in the Communication , and in implementing these and other actions which could promote sustainable and competitive tourism in Europe .
In conclusion , although many of you favour a more ambitious approach , I consider that this process has been particularly successful .
The merit of the Communication is that , for the first time for nearly ten years , it has attracted strong support from all Community Institutions for tourism-related activities .
The recent meeting of tourism ministers at Santander has shown that we are truly engaged in working together for the future of European tourism .
The next important step in this cooperative approach in EU tourism issues will be the first European Tourism Forum that the Commission is organising with the industry and other stakeholders on 10 December this year , to which all the European private and public stakeholders , including representatives of the European Parliament , will be invited .
I thank you for this very constructive debate .
I am sure that much work remains to be done to convince the European public and decision-makers of the vital role of tourism for employment and growth perspectives in our continent .
I also agree with those who said that the number of people employed in tourism makes it a core employment sector .
Secondly , even though today the average figures are still around 7-8 % of GDP , we have countries where tourism accounts for up to 12 % of GDP , which shows its importance .
Tourism deserves our attention , and we must coordinate different policies as well as possible to promote the future prospects of European tourism .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0127 / 2002 ) by Mr Ojeda Sanz , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 1999 / 311 / EC adopting the third phase of the trans-European cooperation scheme for higher education ( Tempus III ) ( 2000-2006 ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 47 - C5-0096 / 2002 - 2002 / 0037 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank the staff for their excellent work and assistance in drawing up this report , and also those responsible in the Commission for their willingness to help on this matter and , above all , I would like to show my appreciation for the impressive desire for dialogue shown by my fellow members in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which has enabled us to draw up this report with several important proposals that have been reached by consensus .
The Tempus programme - or , in this specific case , the extension of the scope of the Tempus programme proposed by the Council - should be seen as part of a strategy seeking to bolster dialogue and understanding between the peoples and cultures of the European Union and the Mediterranean .
Some people have been asking why we need to extend an existing programme when we could set up a new one .
This is a good question , which is easy to answer .
If we extend a tried and tested programme , and we manage to avoid the usual problems inherent in getting a new programme off the ground , we can draw on the experience and know-how of Tempus , incorporating the improvements that have been made to it over time and which will no doubt encourage rapid diversification in the range of university studies available as well as cooperation between Euro-Mediterranean partners .
As you are all aware , the Tempus programme takes its inspiration from the chain of events that have taken place since the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989 .
This programme was set up in 1990 to meet the need to reform higher education in the Central and Eastern European countries while also encouraging Europe-wide mobility in university studies .
The programme was financed by the PHARE budgetary framework .
In 1993 it was extended to include the New Independent States such as Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Georgia , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation , amongst others .
The second phase of this trans-European cooperation scheme for higher education affected a total of thirteen partner countries for a four-year period and since 1997 the Central and Eastern European countries preparing for accession have gradually been abandoning the Tempus programme to take part in Socrates , the Community 's general education programme .
However , the Council decision was amended to extend the life of Tempus II for a further two years .
This decision laid down that the Commission should undertake an assessment to consider the programming of Tempus .
The Commission is now proposing to open up Tempus III to the Mediterranean partners in order to meet the needs in that region for cooperation in the sphere of higher education .
The Tempus programme will thus encompass the following partners : Morocco , Algeria , Tunisia , Egypt , Israel , Jordan , the Palestinian Authority , Syria , and Lebanon .
The purpose of cooperation in the sphere of education is to strengthen the organisational machinery that will enable universities to continue their cooperation beyond the life and scope of the assistance granted under cooperation programmes .
In this way we shall place the EC institutions and institutions in partner countries and territories in a better position to develop and consolidate partnerships that could in turn generate a multiplier effect beyond the participating institutions and have a lasting impact on education systems , which is basically what we are dealing with .
In addition , and this is important , by widening the range of participants beyond the traditional academic community to secure the involvement of political leaders and civil society in general , we shall be encouraging a kind of cooperation in higher education that could play a key role in changing attitudes by affording an opportunity for the young generations to compare their respective values and national cultures .
The intention is to combine purely academic matters with moves to strengthen the working of civil society in Mediterranean partner countries and to help promote better understanding of the different cultures and respect for human rights and minorities in these countries .
Various assessments have shown that the Tempus programme is perceived as an invaluable means of fostering mutual understanding . That is the goal on which participants must focus when they plan their activities .
These are the main amendments to the Tempus programme for Mediterranean partners that we fully support in this report .
There are no significant amendments to the rest of the programme .
Therefore , I would emphasise the main objectives of the Tempus programme as follows : to pave the way for the development of higher education , to respond more effectively to the socio-economic and cultural needs of the eligible countries , and to promote cross-cultural understanding , rapprochement , and the development of flourishing , free civil societies .
These aims are to be achieved by means of Joint European Projects ( JEPs ) , which constitute the most important inter-university cooperation arrangements under the Tempus programme .
As well as JEPs , the programme provides grants to teachers and researchers , amongst others , for a variety of complementary activities designed to further the overall objectives of the programme .
In this report our intention was to highlight the need for the Tempus programme to be extended much further than the university community , so that this , which will of course continue to be its central pivot , will contribute to the transformation of civil society .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have already heard what we are to gain from the new Tempus programme and from its extension , which is thoroughly to be welcomed , both as regards the countries taking part and also the target groups .
Great challenges and great opportunities are united here ; I believe that the programme needs to have its funding increased in order to meet them .
There are also particular considerations to be borne in mind when extending Tempus III to the partner countries around the Mediterranean , specifically in matters concerning policies on women and the opportunities open to them .
In the countries south of the Mediterranean , there are still very few women who have received higher or university education , especially in rural areas .
The reform and development of higher education structures associated with Tempus III is primarily , or among other things , to be seen as an opportunity for women .
In Jordan , which along with Malta and Cyprus , sets an example in the Mediterranean region , the proportion of women in higher education is already over 50 % , but that on the teaching staff of universities and colleges , and in decision-making positions in them is still very small , making the picture there similar to that in the European Union as far as the presence of women in leading positions in universities and colleges is concerned .
One very ambitious objective is to highlight common cultural values through cooperation in higher education .
Respect for other cultural values is of course very much worth striving for .
It is further enriched by the fact that political decision-makers - and let me say , with reference to the error in the German translation , that ' political decision-makers ' is the expression to use rather than ' political representatives ' - are being included here as a second grouping with academic and civil society .
I really would like to underline that , as it is very often said that it is political decision-makers that should have co-decision in these matters , and that is why the translation error needs to be corrected .
It would also be encouraging if a ' think tank ' could be created , consisting of members of NGOs , educators , administrators , and academics together with citizens from the participating countries .
The involvement of the widest possible range of fora is intended to create a local dimension in addition to the supranational and national ones , in order to make it possible to consider citizens ' needs at an earlier stage .
I believe that the most important thing is that we can get many problems out of the way through our ability to regain , over and over again , the sympathy of our fellow-citizens .
Mr President , first of all , allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Ojeda Sanz , on the excellent work that he has performed , together with all his colleagues .
This report is evidence of Parliament 's firm support for the Commission 's proposal to extend the Tempus programme to the MEDA partners and is in line with the policy of supporting closer cooperation with this region that was adopted in the conclusions of the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conference held in Barcelona and the recent conference in Valencia .
The extension of the Tempus programme to the MEDA partners also forms part of our ongoing cooperation in the field of higher education , between the Community and other regions of the world .
This cooperation , which I undertook to strengthen , is all the more necessary since we are facing an increase in various forms of radicalism and intolerance , which points to a lack of dialogue and understanding between cultures .
And as Mrs Prets stated so well , equal treatment for men and women is obviously part of such a dialogue .
Article 5 of the decision on Tempus III also provides for equal opportunities .
We have further strengthened this approach in the new text .
The current proposal therefore aims to extend the programme to the following Mediterranean partners : Morocco , Algeria , Tunisia , Egypt , Jordan , the Palestinian Authority , Syria and Lebanon .
As the rapporteur quite rightly said , the Commission has only amended the decision on Tempus where this was essential for technical reasons . The only amendments of substance that have been added are : a specific objective alluding to developing democratic civil societies , the possibility of including researchers in order to build bridges with research and the duration of the Tempus III programme has been extended to 31 December 2006 , in order to bring it into line with that of programmes such as Socrates and Leonardo .
The Commission shares the desire of Parliament and the Council to adopt the decision in the shortest possible timeframe .
This is why the Commission , although it supports the spirit of Parliament 's amendments , is unable to accept them : such a modification , Mr President , would delay the proposal 's adoption .
I would , however , like to reassure the rapporteur that I will take into account Parliament 's wishes and amendments when the programme is implemented .
I think that this is what is most important .
The programme will be implemented within the framework of existing actions according to the specific needs of each partner .
We will therefore launch a dialogue with the appropriate authorities as soon as the decision is adopted .
I know that the authorities of the MEDA partners are eagerly awaiting the Commission 's next steps .
Do not make them wait any longer than is necessary and let us put into practice this policy that everyone wants .
I would like to thank you for your support and I would ask Parliament , when it sends a parliamentary delegation to one of these new Tempus countries , to stress our new university cooperation policy .
I am sure that the positive effects of this will be felt in both the short- and long-term .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0126 / 2002 ) by Mrs Gröner , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission White Paper on a new impetus for European Youth ( COM ( 2001 ) 681 - C5-0110 / 2002 - 2002 / 2050 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first to thank all those who have contributed to this White Paper giving European youth policy a new impetus , and in the production of which a unique consultation process has involved thousands of young Europeans .
Parliament , too , has made its own important contribution in a public hearing which attracted a great deal of attention .
Whilst emphasising that the main responsibility for young people lies with the Member States , we support the proposed new forms of cooperation ( a ) by means of open coordination , which , though , in our view needs to be given tangible form by an interinstitutional agreement , and ( b ) in the form of mainstreaming , that is to say , the taking into account of young people 's interests in other policy areas .
Anyone , though , who listened attentively to the young people , heard them speak not only about such issues as education , lifelong learning , mobility , employment , social integration , anti-racism and the combating of xenophobia , but also about other important issues such as equality of opportunity for young women and young men , immigration , addiction to alcohol and other drugs as being important areas calling for action in Europe .
Our committee expects of the Convention that it will come up with proposals as to how young people can be actively involved in the construction of a democratic Europe , as Europe still seems to them to be a long way away .
I , as rapporteur , believe it to be necessary to expand the chapter on young people in the Treaty on European Union and to further raise the profile of children and youth policy in the Commission as well , especially in view of the outcome of the World Summit for Children in New York .
European youth organisations , especially the European Youth Forum , made a substantial contribution to the gestation of the White Paper , in which we now call on all actors , ranging from researchers to municipalities by way of the national representatives , to develop new forms of participation which should also be for young people outside youth organisations .
Conceivable options range from youth parliaments and conventions to competitions in schools and sport clubs .
The political parties also have a great responsibility and should involve young people to a greater degree , encouraging them to take up political office .
That will become very important in view of the elections to be held in 2004 .
We support the greater promotion of voluntary work for young people , but this is a kind of informal education and should be given recognition as such ; legal and social protection for young people also needs to be improved .
The motion for a resolution contains an array of further proposals , for example for making better use , for young people 's purposes , of the Community programmes or indeed the Structural Funds .
In order to do that , they will have to have better data with which to work .
The Pisa survey in the educational field has shown how a youth report to be drawn up every three years , with comparable statistics and indicators from the Member States and the candidate countries , can serve as a significant basis for a broadly-based debate and for further political decisions , but there is a need for other coordinated measures as well , for example - as the catastrophe in Erfurt shows - to prevent violence .
An Internet portal is not a sufficient discussion forum for the purposes of informing young people , as there are marked geographical and gender-specific , as well as social , differences in the way the Internet is used .
My proposal is for innovative material to be developed in the language young people use and for the European Union 's youth work to be presented to the wider public in a week of activities every year .
But , ladies and gentlemen , nothing is any good unless it results in action .
The White Paper on youth policy can only be a first step , a first and important step set in motion by the Commission in order to establish contact with many young people and with actors .
Such a thing cannot be had for free .
There must now be measures that cannot be financed out of the Youth Programme , 99 % of which is exhausted , and so these good proposals cannot be realised .
The Council of Ministers now has to take a quick decision on this at the end of this month .
We need a green light for the White Paper .
Then we must act together to swiftly implement further proposals , including some on the Budget , for I was at many of these European and also national conferences and spoke with the young people , and I can tell you that nothing could be more devastating to our work with young people and to their view of us than for their high hopes not to be fulfilled and for no measures now to result .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by means of the White Paper ' A new impetus for European Youth ' , the Commission has presented us with a comprehensive outline of the European Union 's youth policy for the future .
Although a step in the right direction , it is a concept capable of further development .
During consultations with the Commission , European youth associations clearly expressed the view that this White Paper should give a higher profile to gender-specific issues .
I incorporated this concern in my opinion for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities and put it forward emphatically .
Equal opportunities and the gender issue do not only affect us adults - quite the opposite , in fact .
It is precisely in schools and in youth work that choices are made about the self-evidently equal rights of girls and boys , of women and men .
European youth policy , too , must attach great value to this .
I welcome the report 's proposals for greater participation by young people at every political level , for better provision of information of specific relevance to them , for the promotion of voluntary service by young people and for the highlighting of their interests in the Convention and in discussions on the constitution .
However constructive the proposals may be , though , we must not lose sight of the principle of subsidiarity .
Youth policy is primarily a task for the nations , regions and municipalities , but it is Europe that can create the framework for it .
I take a very critical view of the open coordination that is proposed in connection with this , which , in the form proposed , comes across as incapable of definition and diminishing the role of Parliament .
The family , too , is a focal point in life as it is really lived by Europe 's young people , something of which the White Paper and the report take insufficient account .
The family , too , is a youth policy , and must be protected and reinforced .
I see the White Paper , taken as a whole , as having a good approach and as giving Europe 's future youth policy some impetus , but we must take dialogue with the younger generation further and invest a great deal of commitment in pushing for what results from it to be implemented .
Only then will this initial impetus become the forward-moving process that Europe 's young people have every right to expect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , very briefly , to discuss the process by which the White Paper came into being and to enumerate a number of facts that illustrate why a White Paper on youth policy is absolutely necessary .
We all know that 75 million of Europe 's citizens - in which I include those of the enlarged Europe - are young people between the ages of 15 and 25 , but the falling birth-rate and simultaneously rising life expectancy mean that our society is getting older .
The proportion of the EU 's overall population between the ages of 65 and 90 will rise from 16 % to 21 % between 2000 and 2020 , whilst that of 14 to 24-year-olds will be as low as 11 % .
This disparity in numbers between young and older people will bring about considerable change to relationships at various levels .
We need to find answers within our own society in order to meet these challenges .
We too are called to take measures to accompany and support young people above all , in order to avoid social tensions and also adverse effects on our education systems and the labour market .
After all , the present system of European cooperation on youth issues has been stretched to its fullest extent and can no longer cope with the problems that have to be tackled .
We all know that investment in the young means investing in something that will make up the wealth of our society both today and in the future .
As my lady predecessor on the floor said , youth policy falls mainly within the competence of the Member States .
The new White Paper on youth policy is meant to point the way towards a new kind of European cooperation in the youth sphere .
It is indeed the case that the White Paper is as yet far from ideal , but it does need to be implemented as a matter of urgency in order to increase young people 's involvement in the integration of Europe and in shaping our future .
The White Paper is a logical step for a forward-looking youth policy .
I would like at this point to thank Commissioner Reding for her initiative in the past , but above all for her commitment and for the way she got to grips with the task of listening to young people and involving them directly .
I see that as the right step on the right road , as youth policy , policy for young people , cannot be made without young people ; it must be made with them .
Even if the White Paper is not yet perfect , it is , as I have said , a step in the right direction .
On behalf of my group , I ask you to support it when we vote tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the concerns , desires and worries of young people must be taken seriously , and so I welcome Mrs Gröner 's report on the Commission 's White Paper for Europe 's young people .
It is proposed that greater account should be taken of young people 's needs when framing measures in different policy areas in the European Union .
We must give young people the opportunity to demonstrate active commitment by getting involved in public life .
In Germany , the Pisa survey came up with some sobering results .
It is for that reason that I advocate a reform of schools policy which would have to incorporate the aspirations of students and young people .
I do think that young people 's participation in public life is especially important .
Today , young people are involving themselves less and less in traditionally structured organisations such as political parties and trade unions .
This is seen especially in the extent to which young people take part in elections at national and European level .
It is young people in particular whom we must encourage to stand as candidates at local , national and European level , and we must actively support them in doing so .
I urge that young people 's votes and opinions on political matters should not be shrugged off as an irrelevance .
I find it particularly regrettable that the Commission White Paper devotes too little space to the gender angle , an aspect that I believe cannot be excluded from consideration .
Young women must be promoted in every respect , as women still do not have the same opportunities as men in the labour market .
Top jobs are mainly held by men .
The unemployment rate is higher in Europe for women and women earn on average less than their male colleagues .
I commit myself to women getting the same opportunities as men in the labour market .
I am glad that the fight against racism is given an important place in the White Paper .
This is especially important in view of the way in which people are discriminated against on the basis of their different skin colour or of their belonging to an ethnic or religious minority .
We have to encourage young people to reach out to other cultures , which I am convinced leads to each enriching the other .
Dialogue promotes mutual understanding among peoples in the cause of peace .
I am committed to people in Europe not only living alongside each other , but , above all , being able to live with each other .
Our willingness to reach out to those who are different or foreign gains us a view of the world that is cosmopolitan and tolerant .
Youth policy must be accorded a particular value at national and European level , and this means that schemes for young people need to be appropriately financially resourced .
I consider it particularly important that Community programmes should give adequate support to projects that benefit young people .
Our European home must not be built without taking into account the concerns of young people , and so I urge that their conceptions of Europe 's future should have an influence on the Convention .
If we ignore young people 's interests , our European home will rest on unsteady foundations , for the young of today are tomorrow 's future !
Mr President , I should like to start by offering the Commissioner my warmest congratulations on her initiative on a European Union study into the specific challenges facing its youth of today , on consultations with young people and on a new cooperation strategy which views young people as the basic resource and source of strength for progress and development in the European Union .
The White Paper really does give all us politicians , at both European and national level , the opportunity to take stock of our responsibility in the light of this objective .
If we are honest with ourselves , then we have to admit that we have neither the frame of mind nor the practices needed for our young people to prepare to become proactive citizens in their national and local societies and tomorrow 's responsible European citizens .
It is true that continuing unemployment and the social problems which come with it , often poor standards of education and teaching and insecurity about the future disappoint and alienate youth from the rest of society .
At the same time , however , as studies have shown , they want new social relations and new forms of intervention .
The rapporteur has taken the right approach here , for which she has our warmest thanks .
At the same time , few countries have the structures or institutional framework needed to allow young people to play a specific and fundamental role in society .
The Member States of the European Union have differing experiences in this area as a result of differing administrative and regional structures and political traditions and promoting best practices will be one hundred per cent beneficial here .
But at European level , Commissioner , we should be giving the youth of Europe a better chance to get acquainted , cooperate , support each other and prepare their common future .
Despite the range of European student exchange programmes , for example , there are huge discrepancies between education systems .
When it comes to recognising diplomas , there are universities which prefer to throw up obstacles to students from other Member States of the European Union than to accept them and bring them into contact with their own student circles .
Be daring in your initiatives , Commissioner , the European Parliament is right behind you .
Mr President , young people are the most sensitive group in society and it is therefore only to be expected that crises in the capitalist system will hit them first .
Exactly what does a capitalist society have to offer its youth ?
A society in which everything can be bought and sold .
More to the point , what does the policy of the European Union have to offer ?
An education system which is incapable of passing on basic knowledge , which replaces education with training and which excludes a significant proportion of young people on the basis of class criteria .
Non-existent job prospects or , at best , one paltry part-time job after another with long periods of unemployment in between , no social insurance , easy prey for profit-greedy big business .
Individualisation and competition instead of collective action and fighting for demands .
The sub-culture of television , the sport of hooligans , the fool 's paradise of drugs .
And when our young people dare to protest , in my country they are more often than not dragged off to court .
The Commission 's White Paper does indeed identify some of the problems , but it fails to analyse the causes or offer any solutions .
It is mainly interested in assimilating young people , in pushing them in directions which cause no ructions in the system but which leave young people with no way out .
It promotes the empty European ideal , participation in institutions of the system which young people 's experience and intuition have taught them to shun .
It even promotes so-called voluntary service as the highest form of social solidarity and entrepreneurship as the antidote to unemployment .
It underestimates the serious problem of drugs , on which it takes an almost neutral stance .
Clearly it is an attempt to acquit the system and persuade us that there is a way out within it .
As far as the Communist Party of Greece is concerned , there is no way out for the young without disputing the foundations of the class system .
It is only by fighting for a society that respects people that young people will be able to acquire the wherewithal to make their way in the world .
Mr President , the White Paper which was proposed by the Commission last November is the response to the challenge that I set in November 1999 , to the Council of Ministers for Youth and to all those who are responsible for young people in our Member States .
The challenge is , ultimately , to listen to young people and to avoid developing policies for young people without their input .
This appears to be an innovative approach , and yet it is only logical !
It is perhaps surprising that it took so long for common sense to set in and for us to started to listen to young people and treat them as active partners in shaping all future policies .
I would like to thank the European Parliament , and especially the rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , for the unwavering support provided since the very launch of the new policy .
This work has been patient , persistent and , I believe , as do the young people in our Member States as well , it has shown that the European Parliament is on the side of young people , and rightly so .
The White Paper has given a new impetus to youth policy .
However , as Parliament has made very clear , a new impetus is all well and good but we still need concrete measures .
The ball is now in the Council 's court .
The forthcoming Council of Ministers meeting on 30 May will enable us to determine the will of the Member States to push forward this matter whilst observing the subsidiarity principle , which is respected by the Commission in this policy .
The proposed new framework of cooperation is based , on the one hand , on applying the open method of coordination in the field of youth policy and , on the other hand , on taking greater account of young people in the various European policies , over and above those of the youth programme .
And I am pleased that Parliament supports this two-fold approach , that it is making proposals - which I have listened to and made a note of - and I would also like to assure Parliament of my personal commitment to involving it as much as possible in this new approach .
I am aware of the structural shortcomings of the open method of coordination , but it is also the best method currently available to us .
All I can say to you , therefore , is this : let us move forward along this path .
I will involve Parliament and I also insist that Parliament declare itself competent whenever youth policy is discussed , whether in areas for which I am responsible or in areas which are the responsibility of other commissioners .
Mr President , as you know , the White Paper is proposing nine priorities .
These priorities were identified during consultations with young people .
I am slightly wary of further increasing the number of priorities , because my political experience tells me that if we overload our agenda , it will become increasingly difficult to control things .
I am therefore rather more inclined to say this : it is better to have fewer priorities and to achieve them .
However , it is a pleasure for me to accept Parliament 's invitation to provide a regular progress report .
I shall focus on the progress achieved in European cooperation rather than on the situation of young people : I think that this is what is important , namely to see where we are going and what progress we are making each year .
Your proposal to hold an information week on the activities of young people is an excellent idea .
I shall undertake to organise this and , you are right , we must , in particular , do more to improve awareness of the youth programme .
Lastly , I fully support the proposal to take into account the situation of young women in all the aspects which concern young people , not only here in Europe , but also in the relations that we have with third countries .
We discussed doing this as part of the Tempus project , where we really must improve the integration of women .
In the same vein , for the EuroMed Youth programme , I urged the ministers of the North African countries to give young women the opportunity to participate in the young people 's exchange programme .
As I said , Mr President , the next milestone in the process of translating the policies proposed in the White Paper into concrete measures will be 30 May , the meeting of the Ministers for Youth .
I firmly believe that the arrangements for the future cooperation for young people , as well as the major priorities , can be decided at this meeting .
Mr President , I am extremely pleased to note that everyone is helping to give a new impetus to youth policy .
I would like , to move things forward rather than to bring a close to the subject , to thank the European Parliament : you have been an enormous help to us , and I also know that you will continue to help young people , so thank you again , and let us work together in developing our youth policy .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0132 / 2002 ) by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 ( COM ( 2001 ) 584 - C5-0497 / 2001 - 2001 / 0244 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I recall how , in my last report on sport , in 1996 , I called for the designation of a Year of Sport .
Now we have one , but it took until Viviane Reding 's appointment as a Commissioner for us to get it .
That is a fine thing all the same , and I am grateful , but when I consider the title we have given this year , everything in me tenses up - it really is nonsense !
Why do we have to tie ourselves in knots when talking about sport ?
I wanted a Year of Sport , and now we have a Year of Education through Sport .
We all know why we are going around in circles ; it is because sport should not actually be an issue , although it is one , not only as regards football but everywhere !
At every hour of every day , everyone is talking about sport .
It is only in the European Union that it is not meant to have a part to play .
Why do we have to engage in such contortions ?
Sport has always crossed national boundaries .
Here in Europe , it is by means of a common agency that we are combating the reprehensible practice of doping in sport .
So there is sport in Europe .
With the TV directive , we are also concerning ourselves with sports rights .
So there is sport in Europe .
It actually surpasses my understanding why the EU governments are still balking at it , and that is why I hope that , the next time you assemble together , you will have learned something from the Year of Education through Sport and will make of it a real European-level task which will not , of course , be proceeded with outside the bounds of subsidiarity .
We adopted this Commission proposal with a very great deal of goodwill .
Indeed , we had hardly any problems with it , but Parliament does , of course , table amendments .
We went along with the proposal as regards finance .
I told myself , of course , that I had done the decent thing by not asking for more money , and then the Council went and said it was still too much !
I will bear that in mind for the next time , when I will again make demands , and then perhaps we will even get more than what you have proposed .
Thus we have been very successful in some programmes .
I actually wanted it to be an overnight success , but - alas - that was not the case .
Things seem to have settled down in the meantime , though .
We have not done as the Commission said in every respect .
In one area , we stated that we would under no circumstances be willing to spend more money this year on research and investigations .
We stated that all the money allocated for this year must also be spent on tangible schemes either in this year or as an interim payment .
We made an exception to this for evaluation .
There is bound to be one after a year of this sort , but this one is not in the part we want to try and delete .
We hope , of course , that the Commission will support us in this .
We tabled amendments to enhance and promote the contribution made by unpaid work to informal education , to promote the spread of ' best practice ' and to create an on-line database .
We want to support networks to spread the education role of sport , and we have shed light on the major problem of the many competitive sportsmen and sportswomen who are unable to gain educational qualifications , because they reached the peak of their performance during their schooldays and then , to some extent , neglected their performance at school .
This European Year is an important one , happening across Europe in the year of the Summer Olympic Games in Athens , and measures will be implemented at Community and national level to promote long-term cooperation between education providers and sports associations and to better integrate sporting practice and sporting values into teaching .
As the whole business struck me as a bit too dry , I took the liberty of devising a climax for this sporting year , and my fellow members of the committee went along with me .
Let us , I said , have an athletics competition between school teams right across Europe in 2003 , at the end of which the competition 's winners will be invited to Olympia in 2004 , where the Olympic flame is lit .
I thought this was a brilliant idea .
Our world lives on images , great images , and these images also depict actions .
I must say that I would actually have liked our dear Commissioner to be a bit more supportive in putting this to the Council .
The Council is against it .
Now , all I want to say is that it does not cost much more , and there will , indeed , probably be no additional expense whatever , as we still have money in reserve .
Of course , we do not always have to tell the Council that , but we do have money .
We can do it , and we should be able to afford it .
I really cannot understand why they do not want us to !
We will certainly succeed in carrying off the vote for first reading without difficulty .
I wish the Council would get a move on , as we had to , and get its common position out by 31 May .
I can include my colleagues on the committee in promising that we are willing to take it into committee as quickly as possible , and , if necessary , to use a trilogue to ensure that we do not have to resort to a conciliation procedure .
I think though that the Council still has to take a few steps in our direction on that point .
I would be very grateful if the Commission could help them in that direction .
Again , many thanks for presenting this , Mrs Reding .
We are grateful that it has at last arrived !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 2004 will be the European Year of Education through Sport .
Sport has been since time immemorial a favoured , successful and effective means of influencing , in a fundamentally positive way , educational policy and the educational values that underlie our life together in society .
The promotion of sport and the partnership between sporting and educational facilities has a positive effect on teamwork , tolerance , solidarity , the campaign against drugs and violence , and on fair and healthy competition without recourse to doping .
These are values that need to be rediscovered and promoted .
This makes the choice of 2004 as the European Year of Education through Sport , and against the backdrop of the Olympic Games and Paralympics in Athens and the European football tournament in Portugal , very much to be welcomed .
The Commission is proposing a total of EUR 11.5 million to finance it , EUR 3.5 million of which are to be paid towards operational expenditure in 2003 , the year when preparations for it get underway , and EUR 8 million in 2004 .
The proposed financial framework must be compatible with the upper limit laid down in the Financial Perspective and must not be allowed to result in cutbacks in other areas .
For reasons of efficiency and for the avoidance of unnecessary administrative costs , a coordinating body should be provided for in each Member State .
There is , in my view , no need for a formal requirement to consult a group of as yet unspecified experts who would decide on the financing or cofinancing of individual measures .
Administration and evaluation of the programme should remain a public matter , that is , one for the Commission .
The decision on the European Year of Sport is the right one , but it is continuity that brings success .
This splendid scheme thoroughly deserves to be continuously developed , signifying as it does an investment in our young people growing up to be healthy and able to contribute to the integration of a healthy and united Europe .
This investment in our future will pay dividends , for our young people are our future !
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work and also the Commission on having been able to overcome the obstacles it always faces so that this Parliament can address issues relating to sport .
I would like to emphasise two points on the reasons why I think this report is so important .
Firstly , I think that we should not forget that sport is a great educational tool .
People have always talked about the qualities of sport - that it teaches us to value striving to succeed , or that it brings people together , for example .
A million things I do not intend repeating right now .
However , what I do want to say - and if I may be so bold I would like to say I have some experience in this field - is that young people , especially children , do not usually , or would find it difficult , to forget what they have learnt through playing whilst practising sport .
Sport has a great educational role in a wide range of fields , especially in areas such as the environment . This is just one of the many areas that can benefit from education through sport .
The second point I would like to emphasise is that we should not forget that we are living in a Europe in which differences based on race and culture are growing every day , and that we all have to make an effort to integrate into the European Union .
Sport plays a fundamental role in this integration .
This would be difficult to achieve with any tool other than sport , and any attempt to do so would entail enormous costs .
I hope that 2004 , European Year of Education through Sport , will be the driving force we all need to be able to ensure the inclusion in the Treaty of an article that makes specific reference to sport , and for this programme to be the starting point , and only the starting point , of what sport can achieve in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to say , by way of introduction , that I regret that it is so late in the day that we are dealing with topics of interest to young people .
The galleries are empty .
All day long , there are young people sitting in the galleries and now their issues are being discussed there is , unfortunately , nobody there .
Perhaps we can change that in the future , when proximity to our citizens might mean that people understood what goes on in this House .
Despite that , I rejoice at the initiative that has been set in motion , and I would like to thank you too , Commissioner , for the way sport has been brought more into the field of vision of European policy and perhaps getting more attention .
I am convinced that sport merits such attention , playing as it does a very large number of roles in society , for example , enhancing communication skills and social skills , personality development , preventing ill health and more of the same besides .
Sport is a very important factor in social and economic policy .
As an initiative , the Year of Sport or of Education through Sport is a very good first step , and one that needs to be followed by many more .
Despite that , there is one criticism that I would like to address , one on which I agree with Mrs Pack .
The title of ' Year of Education through Sport ' is intended to restrict the events to schools .
I cannot go along with that , believing as I do that clubs and organisations have to be involved in the activities and supported in doing so .
Education through Sport does not only happen in schools , but mainly in clubs and in an immense number of sporting organisations .
The Year of Education through Sport must also , I believe , make an impression on clubs and acknowledge the work they do .
I also expect there to be much discussion in this House of the values that sport embodies , about what , for example , fair play is , about the nature of amateur and professional sport , about what is meant by training and care for young sportsmen and sportswomen and a good deal else .
Discussion must range far and wide .
If we leave an area out , it will only be half a job and we will have wasted an opportunity .
The European Year of Languages was , I think , a very good example .
It involved both the schools and every sort of educational organisation , making it possible to spark many initiatives and get many new schemes moving .
We should take it as our example .
It worked , and the same thing can also - must also - work in sport .
Sport is movement !
You should not be restricting movement , but encouraging it .
That calls for scope for development and also for financial guarantees .
Over the centuries , sport has played an important role in our lives .
Maybe this is overrating it a little .
Who does not remember the sports days at school when we were young , in which everyone had to take part , whether they were sporty or not ?
They gave us a good feeling afterwards , a feeling of solidarity , and that is actually what we want to work on together this year .
I therefore welcome the proposal to pronounce 2004 European Year of Education through Sport as an excellent initiative , and I should like to thank Mrs Pack for the thoroughness with which she has studied the proposal .
I agree with her that the title sounds a little contrived .
My personal opinion is that the title is formally correct of course , for sport does not have its own legal basis .
A number of Member States were opposed to it , and in this way , a compromise can be struck after all .
In my view , it also emphasises precisely the educational side of sport , something which I very much applaud .
Nevertheless , I should like to make a few observations with regard to this plan .
Sport at school is an excellent way of teaching children all kinds of human values , such as fair play , team spirit and tolerance ; sport can even play a role in creating solidarity and understanding for your fellow human beings , and this is more than ever essential .
You will understand where I am coming from , but sport helps in the fight against xenophobia and vandalism , certainly if the children in school teams are able to take part in competitions between schools , and at regional , national and also European level , as Mrs Pack suggests .
A fine concept , whereby the European idea is spread .
The objections my group has in this connection pertain to the idea that such competitions should be organised and funded by the Commission .
The Commission does not have the budget for competitions of this kind , and in my view , it is not up to the Commission to organise these .
I take the view that this would sooner be a role for national Olympic committees .
Another point I should like to make is the fact that this initiative should not be restricted to one year .
Sound initiatives should be followed up .
I am confident , however , that Mrs Reding is already thinking along those lines and will unquestionably work on this .
Mr President , the European Year of Education through Sport will provide an excellent opportunity for promoting the social importance of sport within our society and will be a very powerful tool for promoting integration .
One third of Europe 's citizens pursue a physical activity on a regular basis , making sport one of the most significant social phenomena in Europe in the 20th century .
Sport is an excellent way to engage people in their communities .
It can contribute to education and lifelong learning , as well as promoting qualities of leadership , citizenship and teamwork .
The Year of Education through Sport should concentrate on the social inclusion aspect of sport .
However , for this to become a reality , we need to provide better facilities within deprived communities .
What I am deeply concerned about is the lack of group leaders and volunteers to run sports projects , especially in the more depressed regions .
What will be in the programme to address this ?
Also it is important that projects chosen should provide a firm foundation on which to build .
The momentum provided during 2004 must carry on beyond 2004 - it should not stop there .
It should become an established part of projects within our communities .
The involvement of local and regional authorities also during the year will be crucial to its eventual success , as they are in a unique position to ensure that the widest possible access to local community action is achieved .
Sport is not only a form of entertainment for the spectator .
It also has a strong social dimension and it is this social dimension that should be one of the main themes during the year .
All sports should be included , not just the mainstream sports - and we need to emphasise this throughout the programme .
It is also important to link projects started under the European Year of Disability in 2003 with sporting projects for the disabled in 2004 .
No one should be excluded .
I thank the rapporteur for an excellent initiative and look forward to participating in the development of the projects throughout the year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Pack for her persistent efforts .
To start work on a dossier in 1995 or 1996 and to still be working on it today could really be called fighting for a cause .
That is my first point and I would like to thank you for having shown such commitment .
My second point is that I am a member of two parliamentary committees , namely the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , both of which have the rather sad or dubious privilege of working long hours on a regular basis .
If I may , this evening , I would like to bring together these two concerns and discuss both equal opportunities and sport .
This is the purpose of my amendment , which I would like to come back to , as I think that this is a very important point .
In its decision , the Commission is , in actual fact , highlighting discrimination alone .
Yet , I do not feel that this aspect , which Mrs Pack has also emphasised in a recital , is sufficient .
I think that sport , for girls and for women , is a factor which encourages identification and emancipation and that we must , therefore , give it the importance that it deserves .
I would remind you that the subject of equal opportunities in sport was highlighted during the Beijing + 5 Conference held in New York in June 2000 , and that Article 26 of the Helsinki report of September 2000 also mentions this issue . Furthermore , the IOC organised a conference on ' Women and Sport ' in Paris in the year 2000 and the French Minister for Sports placed the issue of ' women and sport ' on the agenda back in 1997 ; the success of this initiative speaks for itself .
Thanks to this initiative , the media now gives coverage of sporting competitions for women .
I think that we must take all of this on board .
I know , Commissioner , that you intend to organise a symposium on ' women and sport ' in the near future and this is something I welcome .
I think that we must stress this point in the report .
In the Mediterranean countries , for example , in Iran or in Algeria , women achieve emancipation through sport .
Sport is therefore an important factor in emancipation .
In France and in other countries of the Union , young immigrants manage to achieve emancipation , perhaps not through the right of vote and citizenship , but through their bodies and sport .
Sport is therefore an extremely important social link , which is something the previous speaker pointed out .
I would , therefore , like us to stress this point .
As a final point , I would like to mention that there is a problem with one of my amendments because the French word mixité has been translated into English as ' mixed-sex sport ' .
In actual fact , I did not mean mixed-sex sport ; I meant diversity in sport ; women 's sport must be encouraged at school and at competition level .
I have brought this translation problem to light , but I did not notice it until it was too late , and I hope that Mrs Pack will take this into account .
Well , we know that the Olympic Games are approaching .
We know that from one Olympic Games to another , the role that women play in sport is increasingly important .
I would hope that this role is even more important in Athens than it was in Sydney and I know that I am not the only one who is hoping for this .
Education obviously serves as a basis for what may come later , namely performance and competition .
I hope , Mrs Reding , that these considerations regarding women and sport will be of interest to you .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , on this report , which was adopted unanimously in committee .
Indeed , we would like to take this opportunity to stress how important the initiatives and displays linked to the European Year of Education Through Sport will be , taking place as they will be in 2004 , the year when the European Championship , the Athens Olympic Games and the Paralympic Games will all be held as well .
It will also be an important year in terms of the Winter Olympics , which will be held subsequently in 2006 in Turin .
A year or so ago , Commissioner Reding announced this event here in Strasbourg , stressing precisely the wider impact of sport , a dimension which is not just linked to its purely economic role but also - and , I would add , in particular - contains social and cultural added value for European society as a whole .
However , there are still great disparities in the world of sport and we must therefore focus in particular on the small sports clubs and support their efforts in training young people .
You will also remember , Commissioner , the meeting I had with you on football transfers in Europe , on which occasion I suggested creating a European Sports Agency .
I feel that this is still a very relevant project , although it must first be included in the Community Treaties on the basis of the declaration on the specific characteristics of sport made by the Fifteen at Nice in December 2000 .
Indeed , I feel that such a body would aid the dissemination and promotion of healthy sporting activity and a European-level sporting culture while , at the same time , encouraging cooperation between sporting bodies to combat violence , discrimination , racism and even doping .
The European Year of Education Through Sport will therefore be an extremely important event and we are ready to give it our full attention .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Pack for her report , and the Commission for the efforts it is making to remove obstacles to strengthening and promoting sport .
I believe that if we want the European Year of Education through Sport - 2004 - to be a success , we must work hard to ensure that it does not end up as just another action that is set up by the EU but which never actually reaches the citizens .
In this regard , and so that this action does not go unnoticed , I think we need to make use of all the institutions at local , regional and national level that have been working for a long time to promote the educational value of sport .
These institutions should contribute to this action in a coordinated fashion , contributing synergies , which is the most important thing .
The promotion , dissemination and study of all sciences related to physical activity and sport is the best weapon we have to educate people against intolerance and xenophobia and to support social integration .
Mr President , I wish to thank my colleague , Mrs Pack , for her work in preparing this report .
For years now she has done some really excellent work to promote sport and physical education .
It is excellent that the Commission has set out to organise a Year of Sport . It was about time .
It is regrettable that sport has no legal basis in Community legislation .
There must be a separate Article devoted to sport , or at least it should have a clear mention in the article that deals with culture . This would not mean that the sports world would be deprived of its influence but that sports organisations would themselves be able to influence the decisions that apply to them .
Young people who go in for sport must be included in the EU 's various exchange programmes .
The current practice , whereby sports-related projects get hidden away under other articles in the budget , is ridiculous .
It is always better to call things by their right name .
Unquestionably , sport is also of educational importance , as the report mentions .
For this reason I hope that the status of sport in the school curriculum will be seriously reconsidered .
In many Member States schools organise important voluntary activities after the official school day has ended .
Resources for these afternoon activities must also be significantly increased .
Clubs that organise voluntary activities in the afternoon often do valuable work .
Physical activity in the afternoon enables children to satisfy their natural need and desire for exercise .
At the same time they are being offered something meaningful to do and social problems and exclusion are being prevented .
Thanks to the clubs children do not need to spend long hours alone in the afternoon while their parents work longer days than before , there being no let-up in the labour shortage that is beginning to emerge .
Mr President , when I say that it is a pleasure to speak to you today about the European Year of Education through Sport , I mean this sincerely , because I truly believe that we are nearing our goal and that we have finally made a good start to a process that will lead us to great and important things for our societies , but also , and above all , for the young people in these societies .
There are very few fortunate coincidences in politics but I am very pleased that Mrs Doris Pack is rapporteur today , because it was she who came up with the idea back in 1996 . Mrs Pack , was lange währt , wird endlich gut .
[ It was worth it in the end . ]
Let us hope so !
When I became Commissioner , I immediately took up this idea and placed the project on the agenda .
I know that it is not the European year of sport that you had wanted .
You are also aware , however , and you have also acknowledged this , that the Community has no specific responsibilities in this area .
However , this should not prevent us , as the Nice European Council urged us to do , from using the values that sport encourages to strengthen and improve existing Community policies and actions .
In my view , the European Year of Education through Sport is of political , practical and symbolic importance .
It is of political importance , as it demonstrates that the Commission is interested in fully harnessing the educational and social values of sport .
It is of practical importance as EUR 11.5 million will be released to finance Community , national , regional and local projects and this money will be added to the appropriations that our partners have earmarked for this event , which means that , in 2004 , further , ample resources will support the educational dimension of sport .
And do not forget that the European Year of Languages was a great success .
Why was it successful ?
Because it was taken up by the people , the citizens and by private associations .
It enabled us to make progress .
It stimulated a debate , and society itself took charge of it .
So , ladies and gentlemen , often , all that is needed is a boost of this kind to bring about change .
Lastly , it is of symbolic importance , because 2004 is an Olympic year .
Yet , the Olympic Games are scheduled for the beginning of the century along with other events such as the European , intercontinental and world championships .
The European Year will take place throughout the Union , and I think that the eyes of the whole Union will be on this event and it will be a wonderful opportunity to promote the social , educational and cultural values of sport , whilst reminding us of the roots of the Games when sport was not simply a business , but was a festival of culture and education .
I knew , Mr President , that I would find an ally in the European Parliament .
Not simply because the idea was conceived here , in Parliament , but also because the Commission has always had the firm support of Members to place the ideas and values of sport on the education agenda .
It was a pleasure to read Mrs Pack 's report and I did so with interest .
Not only does Mrs Pack support our proposal , but she also improves it in a number of areas .
Some aspects of the report will however merit particular attention and will provoke some reservations within the Commission .
They are not fundamental problems ; rather , they are reservations that have been inspired by legal concerns , or quite simply because we believe that certain ideas that have been expressed exceed the framework of the legislative provision .
First of all , Amendment No 7 , which designates three specific sporting events in addition to the Olympic Games in Athens .
I think this is tantamount to inviting speculation regarding the hierarchy of different types of sports and levels of competition in terms of media coverage and public interest .
Since any list of this kind is highly contestable and most certainly incomplete , I think that it would be preferable not to list any of them and include all of them .
Secondly , Amendment No 22 and Amendments Nos 29 and 38 which refer to it cannot , unfortunately , be accepted by the Commission .
It is not that I do not think the idea of organising inter-school competitions , of encouraging partnerships between academic organisations and sporting organisations , of benefiting from the symbolic and media impact of the flame is not both excellent and feasible - very much the opposite in fact - but the Commission itself has no authority to organise projects of this type .
It has no competence in this area , I reiterate the autonomy of the sporting movement , on the one hand , and the autonomy of the Member States in organising studies , on the other hand .
We cannot therefore impose such partnerships from above .
Having said this , I myself believe that carrying out this type of project is extremely important as is the great symbolic value of the Olympic flame and truce , for example .
Not only do I want to ensure that the text of the decision makes such projects possible but I also want to do everything possible , Mrs Pack , so that our partners , both schools and the Olympic committees , take the initiative as part of this European Year .
In addition , I have good reason to be optimistic : look at the sport / school political action launched in 2001-2002 !
This was a pilot project launched by the European Olympic Committees and the Ministers for Education in the three pilot countries : the Netherlands , France and Italy , with the support of the European Commission .
This test has already shown that yes , such projects are possible , that we can forge ahead and that we can find partners who wish to support this action .
On this basis , ladies and gentlemen , with your help , I think that , during the European Year of Education through Sport , we will find many associations , many bodies , many volunteers who are willing to help us .
This is also one of the key objectives of this European Year , namely to encourage the educational institutions to work in partnership with sporting organisations .
Formal training and non-formal education must be combined .
Sport encourages values , such as teamwork , solidarity , respect for rules , respect for one 's opponent , thinking of others , so many elements which will be on the agenda during this European Year .
The year 2004 is an Olympic year . It is a year that will be marked by other prestigious events and sport and sportsmen and women will be making headlines practically every day .
We must use the impact generated by the media to prove that , as well as sports played at a highly competitive level , which receive generous financial assistance , there is also considerable work being done by civil society , in particular based on the voluntary sector which we must support and encourage .
It is this educational and social dimension in which the Community is interested .
We must also thoroughly prepare this year : so many things must be done in advance , for instance work , contacts and scheduling all need to be arranged .
That is why I hope , Mr President , that Parliament will make every effort to reach a political agreement with the Council as soon as possible , in order to adopt a common position before the end of the Spanish Presidency , which is what the Presidency really wants .
I think that this would be in everyone 's interest .
It would certainly benefit the idea that , back in 1996 , Mrs Pack proposed and desired ; in other words , to place sport and its social and educational dimension in the limelight for the good of Europe , for the good of our societies .
Thank you for your help .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 9.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
? he Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , my comment refers to the point of order I made yesterday , which has been wrongly recorded in the Minutes .
The Minutes say that I protested about the recent change to the Criminal Code in Slovakia .
In fact an amendment has been tabled in an attempt to change the code ; it has not been changed already and I would be obliged if this could be corrected .
Rest assured , Mr Alyssandrakis , the correction you request will be made .
Mr President , I asked for the floor yesterday , but my request was refused due to a lack of time .
What I wanted to say was that even though , according to the information available , the possibility of an imminent attack by Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip cannot be discounted , never mind the carnage that will unleash , even though the ruling Likud party in Israel is open in its opposition to the creation of a Palestinian state and has passed a resolution to that effect and 13 Palestinian fighters have been expelled from their homeland as terrorists at Sharon 's insistence , the Council has still not reached a decision and I have no idea which countries the Council will finally decide should accept these fighters .

My question is this : what will the status of these thirteen fighters be , wherever they end up , and is there any possibility of their being returned at Israel 's request , which would , of course , be criminal .
Also , does the European Union intend to continue to aid and abet the regime in Israel , in blatant disregard of the European Parliament 's resolution that the partnership with Israel should be suspended , and does it intend to continue funding and arming this criminal regime ?
Thank you for your intervention , Mr Korakas but for the moment , as you know , we are discussing the Minutes and the order of business .
There is a whole debate on the Middle East on the agenda .
The questions which you have just put relate to the debate on the Middle East scheduled for tomorrow .
Mr President , as far as I know , given how times are allocated , I shall not have a chance to speak .
If you wish to arrange for us to be given even just a minute to restate these questions , then gladly .
Mr Korakas , I have no wish to get involved in a detailed discussion of how speaking times are allocated .
You know full well that there are rules which apply .
What I would point out is that the questions you have put are material questions which relate to the debate on the Middle East , not the order of business or the Minutes , which is what we are discussing now .
( The Minutes were approved )
The next item is the vote on the request for a topical and urgent debate on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing specific access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks [ COM ( 2002 ) 108 - C5-0135 / 2002 - 2002 / 0053 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , regarding this request from the Council in respect of a Commission proposal for a Council regulation establishing specific access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks , I would like to say that I have consulted with the rapporteur , and I call on the House to reject this request .
Deep-sea stocks are fished stocks caught in waters beyond the main fishing grounds of continental shelves .
They are distributed on the continental slopes or around sea mounts .
These species are slow growing and they are particularly vulnerable to over-exploitation .
Since fisheries for these species have developed in recent years , it is necessary to establish a management system to ensure that their exploitation is sustainable .
The scientific advice that we have received indicates that the most appropriate conservation measures for these species would be based on effort limitation and , in certain cases , on reduction .
This proposal introduces elements of a system for the management of fishing effort directed at these deep-sea species .
It also includes elements for the collection of data and support of scientific assessment and appropriate management .
Under this proposal , fishing effort will be limited to recent levels and improved data will be made available for scientific assessment .
The Commission intends to propose further elements of an effort management system , as required by scientific advice in due course .
The proposal is complemented by a separate Commission proposal to restrict catches by means of quota management .
This is an urgent and important matter , but it is one on which , until now , no Community action has been taken .
It therefore requires very careful consideration by our Fisheries Committee .
The Council 's request for urgency was received on the 3 May , while our first exchange of views on this is only scheduled for 22 May .
Given the lack of action by the Commission to date , I do not think it seems unreasonable to allow a few months for parliamentary scrutiny .
It also seems to me bizarre that the Council should request urgency in this matter when our understanding is that the President-in-Office of the Council has himself been involved in attempts to derail the timetable of publication of the CFPE reform proposals .
Therefore , I call on the House to vote against this request for urgent procedure .

Thank you , Mr Stevenson , for your contribution against the motion .
No one appears to wish to argue in favour of the motion .
I therefore put the motion to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I actually wanted just to say on the record that there are an increasing number of cases here in Brussels of bagsnatchers smashing in the side windows of cars and women drivers getting injured in the process .
I would like to ask that this be noted and consideration given to the possibility of doing something about this .
Thank you , Mr Rübig , for your comments , which have been noted .
You will be pleased to hear that the Bureau is taking a very serious look at the question of security in general .
The next item is the report ( A5-0146 / 2002 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the appointment of Mr Lucas Papademos as Vice-President of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , I propose that Parliament should confirm Mr Lukas Papademos 's appointment as Vice-President of the European Central Bank , in accordance with the committee 's unanimous vote .
Confirmation of the proposed candidate is not merely a matter of course .
It results from a hearing in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and therefore has to do with monetary policy being transparent .
Experts may well know the President of the Central Bank , but Europe 's citizens do not , yet they must be able to trust the Vice-President .
As a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , he will have a part in decisions on the euro zone 's monetary policy which will affect growth and employment and thus people 's lives .
After all , it is money that must serve people , not the other way round .
Decisions on monetary policy are the work of man , which means that they primarily call for personal integrity and character , skills , great experience of the economy and monetary affairs , and also a willingness to be candid .
The hearing emphasised the importance of these qualifications .
The new Vice-President is the first new member of the first Executive Board , which was so successful in preparing and introducing the euro .
What underlines the independence of the members of the Executive Board is that re-election to it is not permitted , and so this is renewed proof of personal independence .
The European Central Bank 's independence - which I must re-emphasise today - is truly a constituent element in European Monetary Union .
At the end of the day , policy on money and currency is not neutral .
No institutions in a democracy can be infallible or function under the cloak of darkness ; rather , democracy and integration policy make the transparency of decisions and of the reasons behind them inseparable from the European Central Bank 's role .
Such transparency is , by the way , not only in the interests of European democracy , but also in the interests of the European Central Bank , which is thereby - and as recent years have clearly demonstrated - made more credible , more legitimate and more trustworthy .
It is in the popular interest and in the interest of the market that we want to build up this authority .
After all , as the renowned economist Joseph Schumpeter once said , a people 's monetary affairs reflect everything that that people desires , endures , and is .
It is Parliament 's view that the European Central Bank is far more transparent than previous national central banks in Europe and that , that being the case , we have undergone a kind of cultural revolution in the countries of the euro zone .
Parliament 's dialogue with the European Central Bank on monetary affairs has made a real contribution to this .
This is not , in the final analysis , just about the publication of monthly , quarterly or annual reports , but also , in fact , about a monetary dialogue to question not only decisions on monetary policy but also the background to them .
We who are in Europe 's Parliament , though , must continue to insist on these publications being followed by the publication of brief Minutes and of the voting record .
The US Federal Reserve has just decided to announce , on the same day that decisions on monetary policy are taken , how the individual members of its Board of Governors voted on them , so that everyone can know who voted for what .
For Parliament , the publication of the voting record without names would be every bit as adequate as publishing the arguments for or against a particular decision , as what is important for us to know is that they have not only , in fact , given consideration to price stability , the primary objective of monetary policy , but also to its secondary objective , namely the European Union 's support for growth and employment .
It is interesting to note that an American study emphasises that , in the USA , the way Federal Reserve Board members vote is determined not only by the problems posed by the risk of inflation , but also by the problem of unemployment .
It would be reassuring to learn that members of the Board of the European Central Bank were influenced by this in view of it being the secondary task of monetary policy , as I have said , to support growth and employment , and in view of it having hitherto been unclear to Parliament how the European Central Bank defines the achievement of this second objective .
This very year , it will be crucial to achieve clarity on this point , because the faltering recovery in Europe should not be halted by decisions on monetary policy .

It became very clear , in Mr Papademos ' vice-presidential nomination hearing , how important the interpretation of these objectives in Article 105 of the Treaty establishing the European Community is to him , and so I would again like to reiterate our support for his appointment , the legitimacy of which should be underlined by this confirmation procedure , even if it lacks significance in law .
Anything else would require reform of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is due to the imminent departure of the French Vice-President , Mr Noyer , that we are today debating the nomination of Mr Lukas Papademos .
On behalf of my group - and , I believe , on behalf of the whole House - I would like most warmly to thank the departing Vice-President for the excellent work he has done , as also exemplified by constant dialogue with Parliament and the favourable reception he gave to our arguments and proposals .
As its chairman has already said , the nomination of Lukas Papademos is supported unanimously by the committee .
There are , of course , reasons for this ; his life , with a career in academic research and teaching , as well as a role as Governor and Vice-President of the Bank of Greece foreordain Lukas Papademos for this position .
If I may refer only to his two positions in Greece , he made , as Vice-President of Greece 's central bank , a substantial contribution to the complete liberalisation of capital markets .
Apart from that , it was he who , as that bank 's Governor , took Greece completely into the euro zone .
Let me also say that the hearing established beyond doubt that the new Vice-President of the ECB sees no contradiction between price stability on the one hand and growth and employment on the other ; on the contrary , price stability is for him a precondition for the creation of growth and employment .
He therefore sees no reason to amend the treaty by which the ECB was set up .
Price stability is the task , cause and objective of the European Central Bank 's policy .
I thank him for his proposals for greater transparency in announcing the European Central Bank 's decisions in order to strengthen public confidence in the euro , and for his clear commitment to the European Central Bank 's independence and to rejecting political interventions .
Together with the Council , we have made the right decision .
We wish him every success .
Thank you , Mr Karas .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0153 / 2002 ) by Mr Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting the Sixth Framework Programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities , contributing to the creation of the European Research Area and to innovation ( 2002-2006 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 14 November 2001 , Parliament adopted , by a very broad majority , my report on the Sixth Framework Programme ( FP6 ) for research , technological development and demonstration activities .
We retained the structure , the principles and the philosophy of Commissioner Busquin 's plan and enhanced these aspects with contributions by citizens from the research community so as to better respond to the aspirations of the European people .
On 10 December 2001 , the Research Council responded , in an extraordinary manner , to many of our requests and proposals .
Since then , we have continued to work together to clarify some points and to further improve the framework programme in close collaboration with Commissioner Busquin and his staff as well as the Council Presidency and Mr Marimón Suñol .
Everyone has made an effort , everyone has listened to and tried to understand each other ; to work around others ' limitations and to seek compromise .
On 23 April 2002 , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy adopted 90 amendments , 30 of which will be included in the specific programmes .
We requested further clarification on the instruments for the implementation of the programme , on the aid to SMEs and on micro enterprises .
We emphasised research , sustainable development and the reduction of external environmental costs .
We reiterated our commitment to basic research .
Lastly , we stressed the importance of research in the fields of health and combating major diseases , whilst bearing in mind everything which affects human and social research .
Before and after these votes , several informal and formal three-way meetings enabled us to reconcile the various points of view .
The administrative and technical teams of the three institutions , the MEPs concerned and their assistants have worked tirelessly .
And on 7 May , during a lengthy and particularly productive three-way meeting , we reached agreements involving 34 compromise amendments that the Committee on Industry approved last night , almost unanimously , thus giving me the go-ahead , as rapporteur , to substitute them for the amendments adopted on 23 April .
On the more delicate subject of ethical considerations , a broad agreement was reached , enabling the Commission to confirm the limits that must not be exceeded in this area , which means the Council can take these into account and that everything can be included in the specific programmes .
Commissioner Busquin is expected to confirm this later .
We are now on the verge of finally adopting the FP6 , as the Council has already given us its written approval of the 34 compromise amendments that you are to vote on tomorrow .
I would like to conclude by once again thanking the Belgian Presidency which enabled us to adopt a very positive common position on 10 December 2001 .
I would again like to thank Commissioner Busquin and his staff , who have been open to our views , shown understanding and respect for Parliament and proposed imaginative solutions .
I would also like to thank Chairman Westendorp and the entire secretariat of the Committee on Industry , the administrators and secretariats of the political groups and my assistant , Gaëlle Le Bouler .

I extend my warm thanks to my colleagues who have worked with me on this matter for a year and a half , the shadow rapporteurs , the coordinators , the draftsmen , which include Mr van Velzen , Mr Piétrasanta , Mr Alyssandrakis , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and also Mrs McNally .


I would thank in particular , the Spanish Presidency and Mr Marimón Suñol who have been open to our views and given a great deal of their time , something which is particularly deserving of our gratitude and praise .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have almost come to an end , with what will no doubt be my last major European report , after 13 years as an MEP .
I left the French Socialist Party six months ago , and will be standing in the legislative elections in France , as a candidate of the ' Forum Gauche Citoyenne ' [ Forum of the Citizens ' Left ] , up against a Socialist Party candidate .
Either I will be elected and will leave the House , or I will be defeated and the Socialist Party will inevitably dismiss me from the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Whatever happens , my life will be completely transformed and that is why I am pleased to close this chapter of my political life , having contributed to the creation of an excellent European research programme which , with a budget of EUR 17.5 billion , is the third largest European policy .
Today , 14 May 2002 , I would like to express my genuine pride , and to praise Europe 's scientific community with which I have worked closely and to thank once again all my colleagues and their counterparts who have helped and supported me over the last year and a half .
Mr President , I should like to start by making an unusual statement .
I should personally like to let the Commissioner know that our thoughts are with him in the difficult times he is currently facing on account of his wife 's illness .
The PPE-DE Group wholeheartedly and fully endorses the compromises that have been made .
A number of my colleagues , for reasons of their own , will be tabling an amendment on the paragraph on ethics , the so-called 32 signatures procedure .
I welcome the fact that our colleagues use this right to demonstrate that , in their view , the paragraph on ethics has not gone far enough .
Quite honestly , I also hope that the Council and the Commission will seize the opportunity to come closer together in the near future , and closer to Parliament , and hold discussions with each other about ethical issues .
The ethical issues have not been solved by the Sixth Framework Programme - we know that there is a significant level of divergence between the Member States - but in my view it is most definitely worthwhile for us to continue to exchange ideas with each other on this score .
I should like to thank Mr Caudron for his excellent , open and communicative style of cooperation .
I should also like to thank our chairman , Mr Westendorp , for his sterling advice and support .
I should also like to extend my intense gratitude to the Commissioner , his cabinet and the members of the Commission for their extremely positive attitude and I should also like to thank the Council in particular .
The Belgian Presidency was first-rate , but the Spanish Presidency is a fine example of how it is possible for the Council and Parliament to work together , and I believe that it is thanks to the Council that we have managed it .
Except , of course , that the budget has made a distinct shift towards us .
Needless to say , as an MEP , you always want more , but ultimately you have to accept the compromise .
Personally , I am delighted that in the area of cancer research we have managed to set an example of how you can allocate both National and European funds and how you can develop far greater strength in cancer research by combining two funds .
I am extremely pleased about that .
I also welcome the fact that the relationship between the framework programme and the specific programme has gained in strength and coherence , and I would also thank the Council for its efforts in this area .
All in all , I am of the opinion that the long journey we have undertaken to ultimately achieve this result has been very worthwhile .
We can , however , also tell the scientific world that Parliament , the Council and the Commission have joined forces in order to produce the best possible result that we could possibly manage at the time , and in my view this is a great success today , not only for the Commissioner , but for us all .
Mr President , I should like to add my congratulations to those already expressed to the rapporteur , to the Spanish presidency and to Commissioner Busquin who has been exemplary in his patience , understanding and respect for Parliament 's opinions .
Clever people all over Europe are waiting to hear what we decide this week , because next year they will be able to use their brains on our behalf .
We will give them the money to do work which will help our economy and our society .
There is a strong correlation between research effort and economic success , and the European Union at least is giving an example and showing that it understands that connection .
We have been able to reach a very wide consensus in Parliament across political and national boundaries on the Sixth Framework Programme .
We are coming up with a programme which highlights key areas for research but at the same time expresses the wishes of the citizens of Europe for scourges like cancer and other illnesses and for environmental dangers to be combated with intelligence .
This is one part of the European research area .
Member States must do the rest .
It is their responsibility .
The European Union is doing its part . Thank you to those who have enabled more money to be spent on the important area of science and society which includes a detailed examination of ethics .
We in the PSE Group will not support amendments on ethics , but we appreciate the declaration which has been brought forward .
At the end of a long process , may I thank once again our excellent rapporteur who has worked in a remarkable way , our shadows and everyone else involved .
Clever people of Europe , the money is on its way !
I am delighted to endorse the views of my fellow MEPs , and I should like to thank everyone who has helped establish this framework programme .
At the moment , there is no real European Research Area .
One of the key conditions for bringing this about is a well-oiled , fast communication infrastructure .
This is why the liberal group has always set such great store by the progress made in the Geant project .
After all , effective , rapid communication is essential in order to enable researchers to work together .
I am therefore pleased that under pressure from Parliament , firstly the budget for Geant was increased , and secondly the management structure was considerably improved by means of sound agreements within the European Commission .
Another important prerequisite for cooperation and the transfer of knowledge is the mobility of researchers .
I should like to draw the attention to this aspect once again .
Many of our top people - and this is echoed throughout the world of research - sometimes spend time in America to learn about new developments .
However , sound pre-conditions to guarantee the return of these researchers are lacking in Europe , so that sometimes they prefer to stay in America .
This is a brain drain , and we need these brains in order to turn Europe into the world 's most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy .
My last point concerns ethics .
A great deal has been said on this topic over the past few months , and I should like to say something about the attitude of a number of fellow MEPs who are attempting to thwart innovations in the field of biomedical research .
The liberal group is also acutely aware of the ethical dilemmas posed by the ever faster evolving technological possibilities .
A balanced , well-thought-out approach is what is required .
But how can we ever become this competitive economy if we nip each and every innovation in the bud in the name of moral standards and even attempt to impose views on other Member States ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can tell you that we in the liberal group are pleased with the current wording , as laid down in the common position on ethics .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to extend our thanks to Mr Caudron , our rapporteur , as well as to our shadow rapporteurs .
Mr Caudron was very willing to listen to our views and it was a pleasure for us to work with him in drawing up the Sixth Framework Programme .
As far as the Council is concerned , I must also thank the Belgian Presidency , represented by Mr de Donnea , who worked hard to include the proposals that Parliament , in particular , desired , and I would also thank the current Spanish Presidency .
The fact remains , however , that the person who most influenced the Sixth Framework Programme was undoubtedly Commissioner Busquin .
I would like to pay tribute to him and thank him , because he was always very open to our proposals . He considered them in a professional and sensitive manner .
I would like to give him my sincere thanks for his contribution to the Sixth Framework Programme to establish the European Research Area - it was his idea - and the new instruments , such as integrated networks , networks of excellence , integrated projects and the stairway to excellence .
We shall , of course , discuss the various themes .
There is the difficult issue of ethics which I do not wish to tackle , as this is an area of concern for us .
There appears to be a majority of Green Members in favour of rejecting the amendment on ethics .
We are concerned by this serious issue and we must be aware that European scientists as well as the public look to us when we take decisions in this area .
I recognise that the question of the use of embryos for research purposes is a very personal question , that there are Members in each group who are in favour and against their use . It is no secret that there are different opinions , even within our group .
However , we must bear in mind that Parliament , at first reading , adopted an amendment whose aim was to restrict research activities in this highly sensitive area .
It seems likely , at the current time , that Parliament will accept the Council 's proposal not to deal with ethics in detail in the Framework Programme and if we accept the Council 's proposal , we are essentially recognising that ethical issues must be dealt with by the experts , by scientists , by the Commission , and not by ourselves , the politicians .
There may be good reasons for accepting the compromise and it is up to each of us to decide if it is better to avoid conciliation or to find a satisfactory solution to ethical issues .
All I can say to you now is that when we meet the members of our groups to discuss the issue of ethics , we must not forget that the public believes that these are political issues for which we , as politicians , are responsible : we cannot delegate this responsibility .
We have further reasons to welcome this Framework Programme : the theme of sustainable development has been included for the first time and has been given a substantial budget , more than EUR 2.2 billion ; research into energy , within the framework of renewable energy , is on a par with research into nuclear energy ; sustainable transport and research into urban and rural ecosystems , with , in particular , an ' ecosite ' concept , are new themes which were accepted .
We are also pleased with the appropriations which were added for international relations , particularly for the science / society theme .
It is now up to us to optimise the Sixth Framework Programme through these very specific programmes which will be developed , as the Commission promised , and on which we shall report back very soon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Caudron , for the tremendous effort he has put into this report .

I should also like to thank Commissioner Busquin , the President-in-Office , Mr Marimón , all the shadow rapporteurs in the political groups , the chairman of the Committee on Industry , Mr Westendorp , and all the secretarial staff involved in this procedure for the excellent cooperation which has marked it from the outset .
Having studied the outcome , I must say that it is a significant improvement on the original text and , as such , our group will support it .
However , there are certain points which I should like to raise regarding the procedure for applying the framework programme and any subsequent programmes .
Although the framework programme successfully identifies a whole range of leading-edge subjects for modern research , its orientation is , in my view , excessively narrow , with little room for all the research sectors which deserve support to benefit from funding .
Because , objectively-speaking , the framework programme points the way for research by the Member States , I worry that this unilateral orientation may become the rule .
? he second point which concerns us is where the money will end up .
What worries me is that a large slice of the funding will go to industry , with a tiny sliver for universities , research institutes or small research groups , irrespective of the standard of work carried out .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is huge research potential in all the Member States of the European Union .
If we manage to tap into and fund it and apply the results obtained , we shall have done a very great service to the generations to come .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , of course our group broadly supports the Sixth Framework Programme and the objective that is being formalised here of more financial resources for European research policy .
We are aware of the enormous importance of this programme for scientific research in the Union and that this is a crucial step in establishing the European research area .
The reason for my speaking , however , if only for a minute , is once again to draw attention to the ethical issues that cannot be ignored .
Our group feels that the wording of Article 3 is unsatisfactory .
Hence our insistence on tabling Amendment No 89 , which presents a solution that is , in our opinion , correct : the principle of legislative unanimity .
This ethical question is extremely sensitive and we must trust the decisions that the various Member States take at the highest level on this issue .
To this extent , we feel that European research funds must only be used for those objectives and in accordance with those methods and means that are not deemed to be illegal in any Member State .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are , by voting on the report on the Sixth Framework Programme , laying the foundation for projects to be supported to the tune of a total EUR 17.5 billion , which is a considerable amount of money .
What was made clear , as early as first reading , by the incredible number of amendments , is just to what an extent views differ in this House on what form the Framework Programme should take .
Diametrically opposed positions are appearing now at second reading when it comes to the definition of basic ethical principles .
Opinions differ to too great a degree for there to be ready compromise , in the Community of Fifteen , on the boundaries of stem cell research .
We will certainly be concerning ourselves more in future with questions of bioethics .
I have my own difficulties with the use of embryos for research .
Most of all , I cannot approve of European research funds being used to promote something which , in many of the fifteen Member States , is illegal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I see both light and shade in the outcome of the legislative process , which is now drawing to its close , on the Caudron report and on the Sixth Framework Programme .
A whole range of proposals made by Parliament have been taken up in the Common Position and in the Commission proposal , and there is a certain amount that we have achieved .
What I would mention as being particularly positive is that child illnesses and their treatment now have a place in European research policy .
There was , unfortunately , resistance to that at first , but that resistance was successfully overcome .
I see it as particularly important that priority one not only includes genetic engineering , with all the opportunities it offers us , but also medical research in general .
For these improvements I wish to thank all parties involved - the Commission , Commissioner Busquin , Mr Caudron , the rapporteur ; the shadow rapporteurs , especially Mr van Velzen , and also the Spanish Presidency .
I see , however , the compromise we have now achieved as having one great and grave defect , in that no clear rules have been enacted on how to deal with ethically sensitive areas of research .
Parliament has difficulties with this , of course , but we adopted an amendment at first reading which could at least show Europe the way ahead .
Even though I do not give it my wholehearted support , it is a compromise that has taken form there .
It is unfortunate that the Council has wriggled out of its responsibilities by not setting down any clear rules in this area .
Legal uncertainty now makes this a difficult situation for all concerned .
The Commission will not have an easy time of it with this text , which incorporates no mandate that might , for example , support research with human embryos , although the possibility of this is not clearly excluded either .
This will lead to disagreements , and that is another reason why we , in Europe , should carry on working towards a compromise .
I am prepared to join in working on a compromise even if it means disregarding my personal conviction in favour of tight restriction .
Co-funding will be impossible for as long as a compromise of that sort is not reached .
Subsidiarity cannot mean that we may well have no common rules , and that everyone does as he pleases , but all share in paying for it .
That is why this issue demands that amendments be tabled and resolutions adopted .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are times when we can feel particularly happy to belong to a particular institution and this is one of those times .
The three institutions have worked well , in a way that the European citizens would want legitimately constituted institutions to work .
They have done so both effectively and speedily , thanks to Commissioner Busquin and the Belgian Presidency , who , with difficulty , were finally able to reach an agreement on the financial package , which , as you will all remember , five years ago was the bone of contention that caused delay in the adoption of the Fifth Framework Programme .
This will not happen again .
Thanks also to the Spanish Presidency , which has been particularly sensitive to Parliament 's needs , and thanks , above all , to all the rapporteurs , Mr Caudron and the shadow rapporteurs , who have worked professionally and in Europe 's interests .
This is , therefore , one of those times when one can feel truly happy and content at being a representative of this institution .
The work is not finished . There undoubtedly remains a whole range of unknown factors - ethics , for example .
We have total respect for all of those who feel differently to us .
However , I would like to suggest that you will see for yourselves how , through the Council proposal for a common position and the Commission statement with regard to specific programmes , your concerns are being taken into consideration .
Above all , we shall ensure that this issue allows for the adoption of a framework programme in which the European Scientific Community has placed its hopes .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Caudron and Commissioner Busquin for their hard work in difficult circumstances .
In particular , I welcome the funding for sustainability and renewable energy in this programme .
With regard to ethical dilemmas in biotechnology , we need to take these , and the efforts to respond to ethical concerns in funding EU research very seriously .
In particular : the patenting of the human genome ; human cloning in its various forms ; the manipulation and modification of the human germ line - which is a particular concern - and the creation and use of human embryos in research .
Our citizens are very concerned and our policies and funding should match their concerns .
I have some animal welfare concerns also , in particular developing validation of alternative methods for animal testing and hastening the replacement of animal-based toxicity testing with regard to chemicals policy .
With regard to funding for health , I have welcomed the modifications here and would thank Mr Caudron for his concern , because human genome research cannot be the only strand of health research funded by the EU .
It looked as if that might happen , so I welcome the funding for health and complementary medicine .
Finally , I know that the Euratom programme is not part of the EC programme and is not subject to codecision , but I would welcome an assurance from the Commissioner that the Commission will reflect European Parliament concerns in its activities , and in particular our amendments to the Euratom programme .
Mr President , Commissioner Busquin , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Italian radicals , I would like to pay a glowing tribute to the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , for bringing the second reading of an extremely difficult subject to a successful conclusion .
As Chairman Westendorp quite rightly said , we can be proud that the report was submitted in the form in which it was adopted by the competent committee .
After a temporary committee of enquiry , which tried - unsuccessfully - to clear the way , was disbanded , Parliament then adopted a position with the Caudron report . This position is , of course , a compromise , but I believe it is very important for our countries , for research , for the future of millions of people who now believe that stem-cell research can offer the possibility of life in reality , not just in fantasy , which has been discussed extensively in recent years and in recent months even within Parliament .
This compromise , which states , in particular , that the framework programme could finance research on ' supernumerary ' early stage - that is , up to 14 days - human embryos , in order to discover stem cells capable of treating diseases that are currently incurable , is a crucial but irreversible step forward .
I appeal to the Commission to do everything possible so that the compromise , which , of course , excludes all manipulation of human cloning for reproductive purposes , and which , at long last , represents a significant step forward for research , can provide a glimmer of hope for millions of European citizens .
We must not disappoint them .
We must adopt the Caudron report in its current form .
Mr President , as author of last year 's report on the future of the biotechnology industries , I can only welcome most warmly the high priority given to the life sciences in the Sixth Framework Research Programme and strongly supported in Mr Caudron 's excellent report .
On the health side , there are great prospects for breakthrough cures for some of mankind 's most dreaded afflictions : cancers , heart disease , diabetes and cystic fibrosis , all the neurological diseases - such as Alzheimer 's , Parkinson 's , dementia , motor-neurone , spinal and brain injuries .
Genetic intervention could eliminate hereditary disasters such as haemophilia and Huntington 's Corea which overshadow some families so tragically .
On the crop side , the potential is no less exciting , even if this suffers from a campaign of denial from certain shameless vested interests .
Hundreds of thousands have died and continue to die from smoking and road accidents , but no one has ever died from genetically modified crops or foods .
So much potential good is available to us in reduced applications of herbicides and pesticides , in reduced energy consumption and CO2 releases , and in better quality and higher yields .
This is before considering the potential in the developing world for feeding the starving , growing crops in drought-ridden and saline soils , rectifying vitamin deficiencies and so preventing disease for millions .
I call on the Commission and the Member State governments to brace their backbones and stand up robustly for what they know is for the good of mankind .
Our scientific community , our researchers - not least in my Scottish constituency which leads in these vital areas - deserve our whole-hearted support , not only in passing Mr Caudron 's report overwhelmingly , but in backing the simplified and legally certain procedure for approving biopharmaceutical products ; for approving genetically modified crops and foods for trials and commercialisation ; and for protecting intellectual property rights with an economical and effective community patent .
Approving the Sixth Framework Research Programme is only the beginning .
We must follow up with the practical steps which will fully realise the potential of biotechnology .
Mr President , this is a great piece of work , and I would like to thank Mr Caudron most warmly , as well as Mr Busquin , who has left his mark on this programme with new ideas .
I wish him great success in implementing this programme .
It will not be easy to manage and implement such a large programme , with not only the fifteen Member States , but also other states taking part in it .
We wish you good luck on the way ahead , in any case .
I note with great satisfaction that two issues which I have put forward again and again have been included , the first of these being research into improved methods of clearing away anti-personnel mines .
I would ask the Commission to keep these efforts under one roof if at all possible .
The second is the issue of disarmament , a contribution towards the abolition of nuclear , bacteriological and chemical weapons , a technical contribution to their destruction .
Open today 's newspapers and you read about how the two former superpowers are disposing of the heritage of the Cold War , that is , they want to disarm on a really massive scale .
If the European Union were to join them in this , that would be a noble endeavour .
We have achieved a compromise on the ethics issue .
The Commission has issued a statement which corresponds in essence to what Parliament resolved at first reading .
I would ask that we bring forward discourse on the finality of science , and also on ethics in Europe .
The actual problem is not with the Council , Parliament , or the Commission , but with different publicly-expressed opinions .
Playing a part in bringing forward the broadest possible public debate on the purpose , content , and finality of science and technology in Europe would be important and should become fundamental as the Sixth Framework Programme progresses .
In saying this , I would like to give you an assurance that Parliament is interested in this .
Being myself a co-founder of STOA , I am aware of the importance of the task of technological assessment , and hope that we will work well with the Commission .
Mr President , I cannot do other than congratulate Mr Caudron and lament the fact that this will be the last of the major reports he has drawn up in the European Parliament .
His work on this report is indeed remarkable and it opens up great horizons in many areas of research .
I continue to hold a resolute position with regard to bioethical issues , on which I have to say - to you , Commissioner , and to my fellow Members - that I have nothing but doubts .
I have been working on these issues for two years and I have nothing but doubts and only one certainty , which is the sacrosanct value of human dignity .
I suppose I believe in the institutions which are shaping the future , and the European Parliament is certainly a point of reference and not just for Europe .
We must realise that something unforeseen is happening which radically changes the rules of the game .
We must therefore assess the results of the increasingly rapid innovation , we must reflect on the way biotechnologies are advancing and what impact they could have on the very nature of the human race .
Biochemistry is only the beginning : in a future which is becoming increasingly imminent , we will have to adopt positions on the possibility of parents being able to alter the DNA of their embryos in order to provide their offspring with increasingly good genes .
We will have to deal with the selection - for the purposes of genetic improvement - of dozens of embryos produced for that purpose .
Cloning techniques will soon make it possible for individuals to produce copies of themselves , creating genetically identical twins which are capable of self-replicating , giving rise to a form of genetic immortality .
It is an inherent part of the nature of each of us to fight against death , pain and suffering , and science is interpreting this instinct perfectly .
The possibility appears to be attractive at first sight , but do we really realise how radically our existence might change ?
Is the possibility of genetic improvement techniques being used by dominant classes to perpetuate their genetic superiority over weaker social classes really so far off ?
I followed the long , anguished decision-making process on the Sixth Framework Programme closely ; I witnessed a kind of resignation on the part of the Member States at their failure to come to an agreement on ethics .
Aware of the difficulties of my colleagues themselves , I persisted with my amendment in order to send out a clear , consistent message .
When I see companies springing up on the Internet offering to provide us with clones of ourselves at a high price , I realise that there is no limit to how bad things can get , but I also find in this a great incentive to persevere in the battle from which many - understandably disillusioned - people have already withdrawn .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to echo the thanks that have been extended to the rapporteur and to the European Commissioner , Mr Philippe Busquin .
Thanks to the efficient work of both , we have been able to reach a decisive stage today which proves that a democratic relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission is possible and which , I hope , will send a clear message to the scientific community as to the responsibilities that the European Parliament is able to shoulder .
We in this House often debate acts that are of fundamental importance to European integration .
The Sixth Framework Programme for research and technological development activities will be one of the cornerstones of this integration .
If science did not occupy its rightful place , what would become of society ? If knowledge and research were not progressive , what would become of our nations ?
In affirming the European desire to create an area of research and innovation , we are rejecting tendencies to look to the past and attitudes that oppose change .
Philosophical considerations aside , the Sixth Framework Programme also underlines Europe 's clear and firm commitment to be at the forefront of technological developments , to be innovative , competitive , dynamic and to build our future .
The proof of this is the numerous , practical aspects that the FP6 contains , such as human / social research , principles of integrating the issues of the environment , sustainable development , improved mobility , equal opportunities , the role of universities , education and openness to the world .
The coordination during both the Belgian and the Spanish Presidencies , between the various bodies of the European Union , has also been remarkable .
We must also emphasise the ongoing dialogue with the scientific community , the prospects of a network being set up and the increasing concern of the European Parliament and the Commission to keep in touch with the genuine needs , the genuine requirements of the people .
The Europe that we want to see becoming a daily reality is a Europe of research serving its people and its researchers .
Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Caudron , for his work in preparing this report .
He has done some excellent work in a very difficult situation , as the programme has been tossed around among the institutions .
The ethics of research are an important and controversial issue and everyone 's opinion must be heard .
Now at long last we must decide on the Sixth Framework Programme , an enormous funding framework providing finance for supranational and transnational European research projects .
It is necessary to invest in European research , but after this Member States will be able to decide what sort of research they will be financing out of their own budgets in terms of ethical values .
The preparation of the Sixth Framework Programme is a prime example of inefficiency and bureaucracy , for which the framework programmes have been criticised for years now .
It can take many man-years to find projects , prepare them and produce the various reports .
All bureaucracy of this sort is depriving actual research of resources .
The programme 's structure must be as light as possible so that we obtain the best forces possible for research and rapidly achieve results to serve industry , thereby increasing European competitiveness in accordance with the conclusions of Lisbon .
The gap between the United States of America and us is growing all the time .
Controversial questions such as the use of cannabis for medical purposes can play no part in this programme .
The Sixth Framework Programme must address and emphasise the importance of research developments in those areas in which real European added value can be achieved .
Despite all the decisions and effects , it is important that we now take decisions on the Sixth Framework Programme and that it is allowed to commence on time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , second reading by the European Parliament is a crucial stage in the adoption of the framework programme under the co-decision procedure .
I would like to stress that , during this procedure , cooperation between the three institutions was particularly productive .
I would like to thank Parliament and the Council for their commitment .
In particular , I would like to give sincere thanks not only to the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , but also to the shadow rapporteurs , Mr van Velzen , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , Mr Piétrasanta and Mr Alyssandrakis , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , Mr Westendorp and all the members of this committee and those who contributed to this process .
I would also like to pay tribute to the Spanish Presidency and to Minister Marimon Suñol for the extremely efficient way in which they handled this important and delicate stage of the adoption process .
I would also like to reiterate the importance of the swift adoption of the framework programme and its launch in January 2003 for Europe 's researchers and its scientific community .
On behalf of the Commission , I can approve all the compromise amendments adopted by the Committee on Industry .
The rapporteur , Mr Caudron , explained to you the main areas where compromise amendments were proposed by the Committee on Industry and the way in which the Council indicated that it could take them into account , following a series of informal three-way meetings .
Today , I shall simply expand slightly on each of these points , and where necessary , give you some details which you do not yet have .
The first point is the technical amendments which were adopted en bloc by the Committee on Industry on 23 April , and which are to be incorporated in the specific programmes .
The Commission undertakes to incorporate them in the specific programmes subject to the following statement being included in the Council 's Minutes : ' The Commission considers that the content of the amendments voted ' en bloc ' by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on 23 April 2002 in relation to the second reading of the Sixth Framework Programme , is broadly acceptable and can , subject to the appropriate editorial changes , be incorporated into the specific programme decisions implementing the Sixth Framework Programme and , as appropriate , in the Rules for Participation of Undertakings , research centres and universities for the implementation of the Framework Programme ' .
The Council intends to make a statement along the same lines .
My second point relates to the issue of instruments for the implementation and participation of SMEs .
The formula agreed by the three institutions emphasises the need to ensure a smooth transition from the current framework programmes to the new one , taking into account Parliament 's concerns .
It is also clearly stated that special measures will be taken to stimulate and facilitate the participation of small- and medium-sized businesses as well as that of research bodies of the candidate countries in the measures undertaken in the priority thematic areas .
The next point relates to health .
In line with Parliament 's wishes , the aspects of research on health were both strengthened and better identified , particularly as far as the European dimension of research and the communication of the results of this research to patients .
This is particularly the case for cancer research , which , as has been explained , is now the subject of a specific measure , which has been granted considerable resources .
Electronic networks for research is an additional point .
Parliament expressed its concern to see activities carried out on this theme within the framework of infrastructure support activities , which would be implemented in conjunction with those carried out in the priority thematic areas concerned .
In order to clear up any ambiguity on this point , it was agreed at the trialogue that the Commission would include the following statement in the Council 's Minutes : ' The Commission states that the resources allocated to the activities on high speed electronic networks , notably GEANT and GRID - an amount of up to EUR 300 million , comprising up to EUR 100 million in Thematic Priority 2 ' Information Society Technologies ? and up to EUR 200 million in ' Research infrastructures ? - will be managed in an integrated way . '
Moving onto the budget , the sense of responsibility with which the three institutions treated this subject can also be seen by the swift agreement which was reached on the overall amount .
However , significant concessions were made regarding budgetary allocation , in the direction that Parliament wanted .
In addition to the increase of resources granted to health research , I feel that the increase for specific aspects of international cooperation , as well as the science / society theme , correctly reflect the attention that Parliament devotes to these issues .
As far as international cooperation is concerned and in line with Parliament 's wishes , additional emphasis was placed on the specific measures to support international cooperation with the developing countries , the Mediterranean countries , Russia and the new independent states .
The various methods of support for international cooperation in the framework programme have also been clarified .
My final point concerns ethical considerations . This is such an incredibly sensitive issue .
As you know , it was very difficult to find a solution on this point which reconciles both the wishes and the limitations of the three institutions .
I reiterate that , in no way , of course , do I wish to introduce harmonisation of rules for ethics at European level .
The Commission simply wishes to push forward European research , whilst respecting the prerogatives of each Member State and their parliament .
There is no surprise there , in an area which is highly characterised by cultural and philosophical diversity and where the approach has always been and will always be the respect for opinion , values and sensitivities , within the boundaries of universally acknowledged principles .
It is nonetheless necessary to clarify the conditions in which research undertaken in the fields of science and technologies of the living being might be carried out within the specific framework of Community programmes .
In order to do this , and I think that this is an important step , the Commission has included the following statement in the Council 's Minutes : ' In accordance with the opinion of the European Parliament concerning the proposal on the Sixth Framework Programme and taking into account the opinion of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies , the Commission believes that research in the following areas must not be financed by the framework programme : research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes , research activity resulting in the modification of the genetic heritage of human beings , which could make such changes hereditary , research activity to create embryos solely for research purposes or to supply stem cells , including somatic cell nuclear transfer . '
Of course , there is also the question of animal experiments , which must be replaced by alternative methods as far as possible , bearing in mind that the suffering of animals must be avoided or kept to an absolute minimum .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , within a very short space of time , thanks to exemplary collaboration - and I once again extend my heartfelt thanks to all those who played a part in this - we have made considerable progress .
Once the vote has been confirmed by the House , which I hope it will be , and once consensus has been achieved , we will still have some work to do .
The decision on the framework programme is only the first component of a mechanism which also comprises the rules for participation , which were also adopted under the co-decision procedure , as well as the specific programmes .
In order for Parliament and the Council to adopt the framework programme and its instruments for implementation in June , in accordance with the objectives that we have in mind , the three institutions must continue the close collaboration that was successfully engaged at the beginning of the procedure .
We worked very closely and in a very productive manner with the rapporteur for the rules on participation , namely Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , as well as with the rapporteurs for the specific programmes , Mr van Velzen , Mr Alyssandrakis , Mr Piétrasanta , Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Zorba .
We must continue with these efforts .
The Commission certainly intends to continue to do everything in its power to encourage inter-institutional dialogue .
For the first time in the history of Community research , we are in a position to adopt the framework programme in a timely fashion , rather than at the very last minute , so that it can be launched and implemented in the best possible conditions .
We must seize this opportunity and we must give ourselves the means to take full advantage of this possibility .
This is what both researchers and European citizens will thank us for .
- ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this week we have reached a crucial point in the discussion process aimed at the approval of the Sixth Framework Programme , a process that was started under the Swedish Presidency , continued under the Belgian Presidency and taken up by the Spanish Presidency .
Parliament has played a very important role in this process , through the Caudron report at the first reading of the Framework Programme .
We took many aspects from this first reading for our common position , because the issues and concerns that were aired in Parliament were the very issues and concerns that came to light in the Council and which also surfaced in other discussion groups .
I would also like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , and the shadow rapporteurs Mr van Velzen , Mr Piétrasanta and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , whose cooperation has really enabled us to get to the heart of the matter .

I am convinced that the programme that emerges from this process - and I am confident that tomorrow we will adopt a definitive programme - will be a significant improvement on the first programme we were presented with and a sign , therefore , of the mature and cooperative approach the various institutions have taken to the common position relating to the first reading , but even more with regard to the stimulating process that has taken place under our Presidency .
I believe that the positions of Parliament and the Council are now much closer , and this has been achieved through the desire to respond to scientists ' and companies ' request that we should implement this important instrument , and respond to the mandate we were given at the Barcelona Council that we pull out all the stops to approve the Sixth Framework Programme under our Presidency , and , also - as I said - because the concerns have been very much shared concerns .
The specific aspects relating to content have been more fully developed , such as research issues in health sciences , the question of a greater contribution by the GEANT network , scientific and social issues , research and support on environmental issues , for example .
For this reason I would say that , in terms of content , we are now offering a framework programme that is much better defined and will serve as the key element in another great initiative that goes much further than the framework programme , which is the development of the European Area of Research and Innovation .
The Barcelona Council , taking up the commitment made in Lisbon , made a very ambitious commitment which was that , in the year 2010 , Europe should reach a level of spending on investment in research and development of 3 % of Gross Domestic Product , with a substantial participation , of two thirds , from enterprises in the private sector and from the private sector as a whole .
However , the figures are not the most important factor , but rather that we must recognise that Europe must change direction and take a qualitative and quantitative leap in order to achieve this objective of being highly competitive in the knowledge-based society .
The Sixth Framework Programme is an essential component of this .
However , with the satisfactory development of the Sixth Framework Programme we shall also develop other initiatives , such as better coordination of national programmes , a task we have promoted during our Presidency .
Therefore , particularly in this process , it appears crucial to us to respond effectively to the expectations of the scientific community and companies and reserve , as has been done , active participation for small- and medium-sized companies .
For this reason , I thank you once again for your work and I am sure that the other aspects , such as participation rules for specific programmes - will be formalised once the framework programme has been defined .
For our part , the Council has totally supported the Presidency 's initiatives - which we are very pleased about - in the series of discussions we have held .
The Council takes particular note of the Commission 's vision and supports the Presidency in including all the amendments that have been tabled en masse , as far as possible , finding the appropriate formulae from within the specific programmes .
The Council totally supports the entire fruitful discussion process we have held .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the Commission 's presentation of the preliminary draft budget for the financial year 2003 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 30 April , the Commission decided on the preliminary draft of the Budget for 2003 .
I am glad to be able to present the rough outline of it to you today .
Let me start by setting out in general terms the 2003 Budget 's basic figures , which we had the opportunity of briefly discussing in the Committee on Budgets yesterday evening .
The Commission 's preliminary draft Budget amounts to EUR 98.2 billion , representing an increase of 2.7 % over the current Budget .
Compared with those predicted for the Member States ' public budgets , this rate of increase is lower than the average .
I want above all to emphasise that the preliminary draft Budget is , with EUR 4.7 billion , below the amount that the Agenda 2000 financial perspective fixed as a maximum .
I also see it as good news that a preliminary draft Budget , despite the many new demands that are made on it , can be set out in such a way that there remains a large margin for unforeseen eventualities , and that this can also be captured within the financial perspective .
The Budget amounts to 1.03 % as a proportion of gross domestic income , which means that the share of European GDP attributable to public expenditure for next year is 1.03 % .
That is very small - less , indeed , than in previous years .
The reason I lay such emphasis on this is that it demonstrates that Budget discipline is taken very seriously even at European level .
I also emphasise it because it is often said in public discussions that , okay , there will be these developments and those developments , and they will exceed what is budgeted for .
On the contrary , that is not the case ; rather , we again have a preliminary draft Budget below what was laid down as an upper limit in the financial perspective .
Above all , we should also make clear what will be financed within the European Budget with this share of GDP attributable to public expenditure that amounts to just over one per cent of the EU 's economic performance , and which policy areas will benefit from this money from the taxpayer .
Let us take agriculture first , which continues to be the most significant area .
If we add all the agricultural policy outgoings together , they amount to a total of EUR 48.7 billion allocated to this area .
This figure includes , for example , aid for the candidate countries , that is , for the farmers in the candidate countries , and also the staff in the Directorate-General which has responsibility for this area .
To put it another way , if we express it as a percentage of the EU 's gross national income , just about 0.5 % of the EU 's gross national income is to be spent on agriculture via the European Budget .
The illustration I have just given with reference to agriculture corresponds to the new approach to breaking down the Budget by policy areas .
In the past it was very often the case that the public had difficulty reading the Budget - if they had any access to it at all - because it listed only the Budget lines , but not the legal bases , which one might term the policy content , what was to be achieved with the money .
With the new Budget breakdown , that has now been done , and it is clear at a glance how much is to be used and for which policy areas .
To quote a few more figures before I move on to something else , EUR 21.8 billion have been allocated to regional policy , EUR 940 million to fisheries policy , EUR 3.2 billion for external relations , EUR 1.1 billion to development policy , EUR 9.8 billion for employment and social affairs , and EUR 1 billion solely for promoting the information society .
Such a breakdown is in fact capable of expressing much more than would be possible through a breakdown of figures only by reference to categories in the financial perspective .
All the same , I propose now to enlarge on these categories .
I have already referred to agriculture , in which area there is , according to the Commission proposal , a margin of EUR 2.3 billion , meaning that the Commission 's preliminary draft remains EUR 2.3 billion under the maximum set for agriculture in the financial perspective .
This positive outcome results from a combination of several factors : firstly the prognosis of relatively favourable market developments in agriculture , then a situation in which stocks are relatively low , and an underlying euro / dollar exchange rate of EUR 1 to USD 0.88 .
At this point , I must observe that this is not the Commission 's prediction for the future development of the euro / dollar exchange rate , but regulations state that , when drawing up the preliminary draft Budget , we have to base our calculations on the average over the preceding months .
However , I will point out that , in the event of the euro / dollar exchange rate changing , or , to put it another way , the euro rising , expenditure in the agricultural sector will also rise .
That does not , though , represent a risk to the Budget , as the large margin will remain and will be able to take it up .
In June , the Commission will be presenting its so-called mid-term-Review of agriculture .
My fellow-Commissioner Fischler will then present an overview estimating how agricultural expenditure will develop in the future , and proposals for reforms .
These will not , however , have any direct effect on the 2003 Budget year .
I would like to observe that our agricultural policy will have different rates of increase .
Firstly , that used for rural development is , as in previous years , and in accordance with the Commission proposal , to be the whole amount provided for in the financial perspective ; this instrument will play a very major role in the future and it is certain to receive special attention in the mid-term review of agricultural reform , as incentives need to be used to promote alternative economic opportunities in rural areas .
Above all , this category includes environmental measures of relevance to agricultural policy and this makes it highly significant in terms of sustainable agricultural development .
Still on market measures and direct aids for agricultural policy , I would like to point out that 2003 will be the first year in which the new organisation of the agricultural markets in goats and sheep will apply .
This gives us a slight increase in this area , because , according to the resolutions adopted so far , for example , a premium of EUR 21 per head per annum is paid for sheep .
This is an increase over the previous year .
I now turn to structural policy , where the commitment appropriations for structural measures are in line with the current financial perspective , although here the Budget ceiling is exceeded to a negligible degree , as the Commission , adhering to the resolutions passed by Parliament and the Council , is looking to present the second tranche , of EUR 27 million , for the special measures to restructure the fishing fleet in Spain and Portugal .
The Commission proposes that this should be funded out of the flexibility reserve , and I believe this is in accord with the arrangement reached as part of last year 's resolutions .
Over the past two years , estimating the payment appropriations required for the structural policy as a whole was made very difficult by the programmes ' start-up phase , so that there was under-utilisation in these areas in 2000 and 2001 .
Some of the resources were able to be transferred to other programmes .
It is due to this delay in implementation that we now have , of course , a sharp increase in the payment appropriations we must reckon with , and the Commission 's preliminary draft Budget envisages a 4.4 % increase in the structural policy 's payment appropriations .
It is to be noted that a major part of this is intended to pay the balance for the old programmes carried out by the Member States between 1994 and 1999 .
Delays occurred in all the Member States , with consequent delays to the final payments , but we hope that all of these can be dealt with in 2003 .
I would now like to turn to category 3 , the internal policy measures , which are indeed wide-ranging .
It is proposed that funds amounting to EUR 6.7 billion be allocated , leaving a reserve of EUR 81 million , which is sure to be called on in the course of the discussions on the Budget .
Let me also point out that a very large number of new measures have been adopted .
Your House has just had a debate on the new Sixth Framework Programme ; I am glad that a decision can now be taken on it and that , as I have just heard , the Framework Programme can be voted on tomorrow .
It is endowed with an overall EUR 17.5 billion up to 2006 .
That this is a very large amount of money should be reiterated , as the accusation is frequently levelled that the European Budget , with its particular focus on agricultural policy , would never promote new developments .
I believe that the Framework Programme demonstrates that the opposite is the case , in that a truly massive amount is being invested in joint promotion of research , and preparations for the programme 's implementation can be set in train as soon as the decision is taken .
The preliminary draft of the Budget already allocates over EUR 4 billion to this research programme for next year .
I would like to quote , as another example of new measures , the transport sector , in which it is envisaged that EUR 53 million will be spent on maintaining safety measures , so that 2003 will be marked by the establishment of the European Aviation Safety Agency and the European Agency for Safe Seas .
This is something else that the public can expect of the European Union - action being taken to prevent accidents of the sort we have experienced in the past , and to ensure , moreover , that the steps that are taken are effective without delay .
That will be another of the tasks for the Agency for Safe Seas .
Resources for the new so-called Marco Polo programme have also to be incorporated .
These are Community financial aid to improve the impact on the environment of freight transport networks .
As one final example of category 3 , I will point out that measures for a rational energy policy , in the form of the promotion of innovative sources of energy , show , with almost 50 % , the greatest increase .
I believe this is another example of how the priority given to the promotion of sustainable development results in corresponding approaches to funding .
I would now like to discuss the area of external policy , that is , category 4 , where commitment appropriations totalling EUR 4.9 billion are envisaged , representing an increase of 2.3 % over the current Budget year .
In its draft , the Commission is standing by its priorities and the foreign policy commitments we have made .
Let me mention the Balkans , to which , for next year , we are allocating EUR 685 million .
Aid for Afghanistan is also in accordance with commitments which the Commission made on behalf of the European Union in December 2001 in Tokyo .
Funds for this have also been budgeted for , although it will of course be necessary to exert proper financial control on all these resources .
I would like , furthermore , to emphasise that an increase of 4.2 % is planned in the financing of the Mediterranean programme , which includes pre-accession aid for Turkey , Malta and Cyprus , but also new resources for the commitment made as part of the Barcelona process to make available additional resources from the European Investment Bank , constituting the provision of a special facility .
The Commission proposes to set aside EUR 25 million for this purpose , for example , to give financial support to a risk capital programme .
One external affairs policy focus for the Commission is the combating of serious infectious diseases in many parts of the world .
In consequence , the appropriations for health measures in 2003 , have , on the Commission 's proposal , had around EUR 55 million added to them , EUR 35 million of which is an additional contribution to the Global Health Fund .
Still in the external policy field , I would like above all to mention that the Commission proposes to allocate EUR 40 million to the Common Foreign and Security Policy , EUR 20 million of which would be set aside for the joint European peace mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
This makes it clear that this new type of activity under the Common Foreign and Security Policy is funded out of the operational part of the Community Budget .
Let me , in conclusion , turn to the administrative costs , where the appropriations come up against something of a peculiar situation .
On the one hand , there is here a very large increase in pensions payments , but , on the other , we made no provision in the financial perspective for the European Community institutions - both Parliament and the Commission , the European Court of Justice and the Council - to have to take preparatory steps in the run-up to enlargement .
It is for this reason that the Commission 's preliminary draft Budget exceeds the upper limit only in respect of these preparatory measures .
The Commission proposes that the resources needed for this should be made available from the flexibility instrument .
For myself , I am sure that this will be one of the main points to be covered in discussion , including with the Council , which has held out the prospect of an increase of 11 % for its staff appropriations .
That is not the increase for which the Commission is planning , but I do believe that it is this very area that we have to debate together , in very definite terms , how to go about the preparatory measures that are necessary if enlargement is to be a success for the institutions as well .
I take it as read that this will be a keynote in the debates , as much of course as the issue of how to fund any new requirements in the area of foreign policy , such as - and I will give just two examples - Palestine and Cyprus .
I hope that the conciliation meeting in July will enable us to find a common outlook .
The Commission was unanimous in deciding on the preliminary draft Budget after a very matter-of-fact discussion , and the unanimity was due , among other things , to the preliminary draft Budget again being so well prepared by the Directorate-General and above all by its Director-General , Mr Mingasson .
As it is , so to speak , the last draft prepared by him in his capacity as Director-General of the Budget Directorate-General , I would like to take this opportunity to thank him warmly for the work he has done .
I am delighted by this burst of applause for Mr Mingasson .
Thank you very much !
Our discussion of the priorities has shown that Parliament 's and the Commission 's are very largely the same after all , something that is also shown in the preliminary draft Budget .
I believe it to be a successful draft that looks to fund new requirements and is , at the same time , guided by budgetary discipline .
I look forward , of course , to the debates , and am highly optimistic that we will be able to achieve a good outcome this year as well .
( Applause )
. ( SV ) Mr President , allow me to begin by submitting apologies from the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , who was prevented from being here .
He has asked me to speak on his behalf too .
We both wish to express our thanks to Commissioner Schreyer and Director-General Gazon for their excellent cooperation .
I believe that we shall benefit greatly from the spirit of cooperation we have enjoyed during the year , for there are a number of problems which need to be solved .
That is only an initial discussion of the preliminary draft budget .
We shall be returning to the subject more than once , for example during the July part-session and on a number of occasions this autumn .
It is nonetheless important to make some introductory observations .
First of all , there are a number of positive features I think there is good reason for looking at .
The first , concerning the draft budget for the year , is the improvement of the process itself .
We are now finally on the way towards a system of activity-based budgeting and thus also towards a more lucid and transparent system that will make it easier to present the EU budget to people in Europe , something which I think is incredibly important if people are to have confidence in the European Union .
We are now taking the first step by using the old technique and the new ADB technique in parallel , something which constitutes major progress .
The second positive feature is that we have succeeded in achieving a better political dialogue .
Through the Commission 's annual political strategy and through the fact that the Council and Parliament decide upon the political guidelines for next year 's budget at approximately the same time , we have brought about a political exchange , or dialogue , at an earlier stage .
That is , in fact , progress .
Certainly , there was a great deal of criticism in Parliament of the lack of factual content in the Commission 's annual political strategy , but I nonetheless believe that the method as such constitutes clear progress .
I also hope that we shall be able to renew Parliament 's own budget debate by holding a wider debate in July in which we do not only focus upon next year 's budget but also upon the implementation of the current year 's budget , as well as linking the processes together , which is something I believe is very important for the future .
I also want us to be able to have a proper and exciting budget debate this autumn , hopefully during the September part-session , in which we can also make a better link between the budget and the political initiatives in terms of legislation .
So much for the procedure itself , which represents a positive development .
Another positive aspect is the fact that there is broad agreement as to the basic political priorities .
If the Commission 's basic priorities are compared with the guidelines adopted by Parliament , it can be seen that we are agreed on a range of points .
We are agreed that we must now put enlargement first .
Enlargement , which is the most extensive we have ever undertaken , will most probably involve ten countries at the beginning of 2004 .
That is our most important task , and we must begin preparing for it as early as in the 2003 Budget .
We are also agreed that we must tackle the issues of security and safety in the broad senses of those words , partly by having a full discussion of how we are to manage security in Europe following the terrorist attacks of last September and partly through adopting a broader perspective on the safety issues - such as food safety and transport safety - on which a range of initiatives need to be taken no later than in next year 's budget .
We are also agreed upon a third area , namely the need for increased focus on sustainable development in economic , social and environmental terms , which is something that will require a range of initiatives on the part of the EU .
We have been relatively ineffectual in this area so far , especially when it comes to implementing Parliament 's initiatives on the issues of small companies , e-learning and a range of other areas within which I believe we must really step up the pace .
Bearing in mind all those who believe that the EU budget is forever growing out of all proportion , it may also be noted , especially for educational purposes , that we now have a budget whose share of the Member States ' economies is decreasing .
Even though a number of basically positive signs can therefore be seen , a number of points should be noted that cause us to feel a certain anxiety .
The first of these , and the one that overshadows everything else , involves the implementation of the budget .
We have a backlog of payments and other backlogs - what are termed reste à liquider or total outstanding commitments - which only increase .
As a reminder , I might mention the debate in the last part-session on supplementary budget number two for 2002 and the fact that the Member States are demanding EUR 10 billion back on the grounds that the EU has not been able to complete its tasks .
In this connection , the Commission proposes a greater increase in payments than in new commitments , something which is naturally a step in the right direction .
We are nonetheless afraid that this measure is quite inadequate for getting to grips with the existing backlogs .
Especially on the issue of the structural funds , from which we have to pay the money sooner or later , we are in danger of accumulating a mountain of unpaid budget items which will create major problems in the years to come , especially if these payments have to be made at the same time as we have major costs in connection with enlargement .
The problem is of crucial importance and it needs to be discussed .
The other problem , which is also worrying and needs to be discussed , is the way in which enlargement is to be dealt with .
Of most concern are the efforts which need to be made within the European institutions in order to prepare for enlargement itself .
The costs of enlargement as such will not of course place a burden upon the 2003 Budget , but we must prepare ourselves right now , especially if ten new countries are to join as early as the beginning of 2004 .
In this connection , the Commission proposes that we use the flexibility instrument to defray the increased administrative expenses .
It is possible that we shall be forced to do this , but I believe we must increase the pressure on the Secretary-Generals to produce new , radical proposals , for example concerning increased cooperation between the institutions so as to reduce the costs and thus avoid having recourse to the flexibility instrument .
I believe that there are many new avenues open when it comes , for example , to the language regulations and the recruitment of new staff to the EU .
We should seriously increase the pressure before we decide to use the flexibility instrument .
With regard to the security and safety issues - I earlier mentioned food and transport safety - we are also concerned about the incredible variety of new authorities or ' bodies ' .
We have Eurojust , Europol and authorities for food , rail and air safety and so on .
These bodies do not in themselves present any problems , but they create problems in terms of budgeting and the ability to obtain an overview of the EU 's costs .
They constitute a risk of our doubling our costs due to work 's being carried out in both the Commission and new authorities .
They give rise to problems concerning methods of requiring accountability and maintaining scrutiny .
We must review these aspects in depth before we continue to extend the variety of new authorities , even though the tasks as such are certainly of exceptional importance .
A further point we need to discuss , and which the Commissioner too mentioned , is , naturally , foreign policy , for which the Commission proposes a budget margin of EUR 60 million .
It may sound a lot , but it is actually insufficient .
We are faced with major situations of uncertainty , for example the continued development in the Middle East .
We do not know what demands will be made upon the EU in terms of efforts in Palestine .
We do not know in detail or with any certainty what demands will be made when it comes to Afghanistan or overall efforts at tackling poverty-related illnesses and so on .
Nor do we know whether it will be acceptable to reduce our contributions within the CARDS programme in the Balkans at as fast a rate as the Commission is now proposing .
In this area too , I believe we need a more extensive discussion and evaluation of the EU 's contributions before we take any decisions .
To all these uncertain factors , we can add the fisheries agreements within category 4 which , for a further year , will constitute an issue that we need to discuss .
In conclusion , I want to say something about the longer term future .
Two of the absolutely most important budget problems we need to discuss certainly do not concern the 2003 Budget , but must nonetheless be addressed .
These are the reform of agricultural and fisheries policy , on the one hand , and the real costs of enlargement , on the other .
We shall later be receiving a special report on the subject from the Committee on Budgets .
Let us begin this discussion in time .
Let us also try to retain the extraordinarily interesting cooperation and the common approach we have in relation to the exciting developments towards enlargement .
I believe there would then in actual fact be high hopes of being able to find common solutions .
The presentation of the preliminary draft budget for the financial year 2003 is closed .
The next item is the report ( A5-0117 / 2002 ) by Mr Stenmarck , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2003 .
. ( SV ) Mr President , when , some months ago , we set the guidelines for the 2003 Budget , there was a great deal of agreement in Parliament concerning three priorities for category 5 .
The first of these concerned preparations for the forthcoming enlargement , the second concerned necessary institutional reforms and the third concerned the need to deal with everything within the framework of the budget .
These are priorities which , for Parliament , must now be translated into figures and calculations in euros and cents .
If , at its summit in Copenhagen in December , the European Council decides in favour of a ' big bang ' whereby ten new countries will become members in time for the next elections to the European Parliament in 2004 , this will present extraordinarily large demands .
There is no greater challenge for the European Parliament than precisely this .
If such an enlargement is to be possible , it will have to be possible for up to 147 observers to be in place from the beginning of 2003 .
With this in view , it is now proposed that EUR 6 million be placed in a reserve .
It is estimated that the enlargement-related costs for 2003 will amount to just over EUR 32 million in total .
By means of a far-sighted policy , Parliament has for a long time been working single-mindedly to make the forthcoming enlargement possible .
It is a task which is now continuing into the 2003 Budget .
There is also a readiness in this Budget to bring certain costs for 2004 forward into the 2003 Budget .
This sum amounts to EUR 51 million .
In total , this means , in other words , a financial investment of EUR 89 million in the course of just a single budget year .
If it is to be possible to cope with all this , enlargement must be given top priority by the European Parliament , and that must also have a visible effect on the budget work .
Parliament 's own reform process is of the utmost significance and is priority number two .
I believe that , in common with myself , a good many MEPs have heard remarks over the years along the lines that this is not a proper parliament .
In many ways , that may once have been an accurate observation in the sense that the European Parliament did not have any real legislative power .
Today , Parliament has power of co-decision in ever increasing areas .
It is probably not difficult to predict that there will be a further increase in the use of this power .
If that is to be possible , Parliament must be strengthened in its key functions .
We are talking here , then , about MEPs ' ability to exercise the power due to every Parliament in every democracy and relating to the budget , legislation and oversight .
Unless we continue to invest seriously in these functions , there will , in the future too , be many people who maintain that we are not a proper parliament .
For precisely that reason , we must strengthen these areas , develop better follow-up of the budget and increase support for MEPs in the legislative work .
If room for everything - the costs of enlargement and Parliament 's necessary reforms - is to be found within the framework of the third priority - that is to say , with ever greater expenses being dealt with within the established budget framework - a strict budget process is required .
In spite of all the commitments entailed in the biggest enlargement in the EU 's history , the 2003 Budget will be managed within the 20 % framework that has for a long time been Parliament 's portion of the common budget .
For next year , we are looking to a 1.6 % increase , which has to be compared with an intended increase of , on average , 3.5 % for all the EU institutions .
When , a few months ago , we began work on the 2003 Budget , there was a large estimated deficit in category 5 .
A few months later , the majority of institutions responded positively to the challenges from Parliament and the Council to focus on the key activities and so reduce its estimates .
When we now look at the Budget figures from other institutions , it appears in actual fact fully possible for us to be able successfully to manage our commitments within applicable frameworks without using any flexibility instrument .
Allow me finally to make a short technical correction .
Paragraph 22 of the resolution quotes a sum of EUR 15.5 million for the buildings reserve .
If it is accurately to reflect today 's decision , the amount should be adjusted somewhat so that Parliament remains under the ceiling of EUR 1 051 million .
Mr President , I am pleased to be the first to congratulate our rapporteur on putting together a package for the budget for 2003 for our Parliament .
Many of the items included in his report are ones which we , as a group , can fully support .
In particular the provisions concerning enlargement , especially the inclusion of observers and other provisions .
There are , however , three points that still remain of concern to us .
The first relates to an early-retirement scheme , which we would like to see applied in this institution as it is applied in others .
We would like the Council to come forward with the right kind of conclusions so it can be included in the 2003 procedure .
This , along with other reforms , will help to prepare our institution for enlargement .
There are two other items of greater concern which relate to the way in which the administration responds to the demands and consultation of parliamentarians .
The first refers to the Interinstitutional Recruitment Office which we as a Parliament , and indeed as a Committee on Budgets , have been calling for for many months .
We now find ourselves faced with a text but without the means either to amend or discuss it .
We understand that Mr Gargani , as chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , has sent a letter this morning to the President stating that committee has concerns about legal administrative questions .
My group also shares those concerns and therefore we support what Mr Stenmarck has put in his report , namely that we would like the relevant committee to have a report on this proposed recruitment office before a final decision is taken .
In addition , we understand the Council wishes to amend this document and , therefore , we do not see why we , as parliamentarians , should not also have that right .
Lastly , buildings : my group has discussed the needs of enlargement so far as offices and so on are concerned , and we have put in a request .
No decision has yet been taken in my group as to what buildings we need .
Yet we understand that negotiations are in full swing for the construction of new buildings in Brussels , for which authorisation has been given neither politically nor in relation to the Committee on Budgets , since we have no documents available to us .
This is why I have tabled an amendment , on behalf of my group , which calls for this question to be clarified .
The Podestà report concerns translation and interpretation and there should be a report on buildings to indicate what commitments are needed , unlike in the past when Parliament has been faced with a fait accompli , and then had to sign up for the bill .
In conclusion , on these two items , we would like to see greater sensitivity on the part of the administration and the Bureau towards parliamentarians , because ultimately it is the Assembly that is sovereign .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Stenmarck for his report .
I agree with him that the estimates in front of us are critical in that they deal with Parliament 's preparations for enlargement .
We all know that this is the greatest enlargement the EU has faced , so it is critical that we get the preparations right in time for 2004 .
This is especially so in the current climate in which the EU seems to be needlessly coming under attack from all sides .
Our credibility more than ever depends on getting this right .
In this context the need for improved provision for information is imperative and I therefore support the 15 % increase outlined in this report for this area .
Bringing the work of the European Parliament closer to the people must be one of our top priorities .
It is increasingly evident that all the work we have been doing on information provision has not quite caught the imagination of the European public .
I heard recently some evidence from the Irish referendum on the Nice Treaty which shows that citizens who went to Parliament or Commission information offices for literature were not sufficiently convinced or motivated to go out and vote .
If this is indeed the case , we need a fundamental review of what we are publishing and how we are communicating with the people .
So what did encourage people to go out and vote ?
The source of information that encouraged people to go out and vote " yes " most effectively was conversations with friends and family .
The clear message for us is that producing mountains of glossy brochures is not getting the message across .
I , for one , am continually meeting people who are completely confused about the roles of the different institutions .
We need , therefore , to recognise that we must have interinstitutional cooperation on information policy , and such cooperation has been quite slow to develop .
I know that some of these issues may be dealt with by the convention and I know the Council is talking about opening up its decision-making process to permit greater transparency .
However , we need to be more focused and targeted in our approach and I am not entirely convinced that the proposal in this report to broadcast Parliament 's plenary part-sessions on the Internet , will really solve the problem .
How many people will be inclined to sit at their computer and watch such broadcasts ?
Before we go down this particular road we should undertake a pilot study and look at the cost-value ratio of this measure .
I am also extremely concerned about how the institutions are going to deal with proposals for funding the administrative costs .
Commissioner Schreyer has informed us today that in the proposed PDB for 2003 on administrative expenditure there will be a negative margin of EUR 66 million .
It is proposed to finalise this through the flexibility instrument .
I have enormous reservations about this , because my understanding of the flexibility instrument is that it is meant to be there for unforeseen events .
How can we justify using this to the taxpayer for the administrative purposes which are known and have been foreseen for quite a long time ?
What happens if there is another crisis in the coming year ?
How will we fund measures to tackle it ?
Commissioner Schreyer also made a reference to pensions .
I recognise that this is an area in which there has been a dramatic increase in terms of the provisions we need , given the demographic profile of staff in the institutions .
Surely we need proposals for the long term which look at how we can provide for the pensions by setting up a fund or alternative means , .
The issue of budgetary rigour is referred to time and time again .
We want greater budgetary rigour , but there are two major issues that the Council needs to address if we are to achieve this , and it is a pity it is not here to listen to this : the first one is the issue of the language regime .
The area most affected by enlargement within the institution will be staff and the building costs related to languages .
Whilst I support the right of all MEPs to speak their own language , we must recognise that we need to rationalise this and we need to recognise the danger of a loss of dynamism in our meetings .
The Council therefore needs to look at the Treaty provisions to see how we can rationalise this area .
Secondly , the issue of the seat of the European Parliament requires urgent attention .
This fact alone has a major impact on costs .
Surely it is time that Parliament has one seat .
Mr President , Mr Stenmarck has drawn up a very rational and balanced estimate of Parliament 's estimated revenue and expenditure for the next financial year and my sincerest thanks go to him for that .
The report also serves as a good basis for later discussion of the budget in the autumn .
The 2003 budget is likely to be the last before EU enlargement .
For that reason the rapporteur has set aside considerable sums of money for the new Member State 's admission to the EU .
The rapporteur is proposing that EUR 32 million is needed for enlargement immediately and a further EUR 51 million for a special reserve .
When we also take into consideration the 6 million euros reserved for observers and the extension of property reserve of 15 million euros it is my group 's opinion that sufficient funds have indeed been set aside for preparations for enlargement .
The language issue is one of the hardest matters to deal with .
Nearly every new Member State will also bring its own language to the European Union .
For democracy to function properly it is vital that every EU citizen can stand as a candidate for election to the European Parliament without being required to be fluent in a foreign language .
This places special demands on the European Parliament with regard to interpreting .
All of us must be able to take part in the debate in our own mother tongue .
On the other hand , it is virtually impossible to arrange for the smaller languages to be interpreted just through one interpreter .
For example , Finnish is interpreted first into English , say , and only then into Greek .
In my opinion , we should establish the practice of interpreting as many languages as possible , including the smaller ones , into the most important languages , that is to say , English , French and German .
In this way Members could listen to the original speech in these languages as interpreted by just the one interpreter .
Another crucial problem is the support of Parliament 's core activities .
It is incomprehensible that the committees should be short of staff to carry out preparatory work at the same time as legislation work has increased .
It is important to give more support to this basic work .
Parliament must be capable of high standards in its treatment of matters , as , otherwise , the Commission and the Council will become too overbearing and above all because the quality of legislation will otherwise suffer .
Mr President , according to its preliminary draft budget , the Commission wants 500 temporary posts to serve the needs of EU enlargement , which would be financed by means of a flexible mechanism .
This is the wrong way to provide finance .
There is no question here of unforeseen expenditure .
Parliament also wishes to prepare for enlargement by employing additional staff .
To cover the cost of this the desire has been expressed to resort to the so-called negative priorities , in other words seeking to trim and wind down current activities .
Savings would then apply most drastically to activities that maintain Parliament 's pluralistic and diverse nature , and that is why this is the wrong way to provide finance .
It is reasonable for both the Commission and Parliament to place on view the administrative expenditure due to enlargement under Section V of the budget . It is reasonable to exceed the upper limit for administrative expenditure recorded in the Interinstitutional Agreement partly because when the agreement was being made there was no provision for the inclusion of ten new Member States and nine new languages .
The costs of enlargement must be paid for and they must be shown transparently in the budget .
Mr President , it is clear that the costs of enlargement are at the present moment difficult to estimate , but it must also be clear to us that they must not , in future , be allowed to exceed their limits .
The economic data for our EU as regards employment and economic growth are not particularly good , and , in addition , the fiscal burden in Europe , which is to be borne by the citizen , has reached an all-time high of 46 % .
Put in clear terms , this means that the Member States will have to manage without tax revenues from 2003 until 2008 , as prevailing tax rates are too high and must be reduced absolutely .
That is also what we in this House have committed ourselves to .
At the same time , the Member States ' budgets will not be able to cope with any additional burdens , the payment of higher contributions being one example .
The EU 's citizens will not accept higher tax burdens .
If we decide on them all the same , the political landscape of the EU is likely to change in the future and probably not to Europe 's advantage .
It is highly likely that , at the next elections , the voters will tell us what they think about it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's estimates for 2003 should be viewed as a success , thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Stenmarck , who has focused on a series of fundamental issues on which it is good for Parliament to give its opinion .
One of these is enlargement and the other , assistance to Members .
It is clear that in the enlargement process we will have to seek a balance between the political timetable and efficiency , without which there will be a surge in administrative costs and expenditure on buildings , an issue of great interest to Members and Parliament as a whole , because the public image of this Parliament very often suffers if too much money is spent on buildings .
This is the essence of the amendment tabled by our group : to seek improved information on the part of the services corresponding to this Parliament to discover the true need for these buildings .
On the other hand , assistance to Members also requires a balance between professional requirements and the immediacy of Members activities , which are very specific and which require punctual and immediate assistance .
Parliament now has more political responsibilities , new competencies and a whole set of technical requirements that need to be fulfilled , yet there have been no improvements to the administrative element of our assistance .
For this reason we need to follow the recommendations of the ROME-PE study .
We believe that the rapporteur has covered this very well in his report , and for this reason , apart from further negotiations with the Bureau , the rapporteur 's opinion should prevail in this report .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his work . I would then like to stress the importance of item 20 , which calls for the broadcasting on the Internet of audiovisual recordings of Parliament 's plenary sittings and for the creation of archives .
Unlike Mr Gill , I believe that the principle of publicising our work is very important .
There will be meetings which will have a large audience and meetings which attract less attention , but I still feel that the Internet represents a very inexpensive opportunity to retrieve the fundamental democratic principle of publicising meetings , which , as we know , are only public in theory , on paper .
Indeed , we know that European citizens cannot attend these events : irrespective of whether they interest thousands or dozens of people , the fact is that the public cannot have access to them without an invitation .
The costs might be much less than those currently sustained for the various publicity materials or for reported information ; this would be live information , not reported information , which would bring the European Parliament 's activities back into line with the principle of publicising our work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
report ( A5-0161 / 2002 ) by Mr Trentin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission recommendation for the 2002 Broad Guidelines of the Economic Policies of the Member States and the Community ( COM ( 2002 ) 191 - C5-0191 / 2002 - 2002 / 2075 ( COS ) )
report ( A5-0145 / 2002 ) by Mr Marinos , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the annual assessment of implementation of stability and convergence programmes ( Article 99 ( 4 ) EC ) ( 2002 / 2016 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we are faced with an economic situation which is still very uncertain , and the European institutions need to do more than just wait for American recovery and its impact on the European Union economies .
Moreover , as in Europe , recovery in the United States still appears to be slow and to differ according to sector , and it is accompanied by restructuring processes which are having considerable repercussions on employment and require substantial capital investments .
It is no coincidence that the United States Government has adopted a highly interventionist policy , and it should make the European institutions pause for thought for they still have to counteract ongoing stagnation in the investment sector , at least if they want to avoid the gap in competitiveness between Europe and the United States widening further .
This being the case , the need to respect the constraints of the Stability Pact , particularly in terms of national budget deficits and the debt reduction mechanism , cannot , as some would advocate , take the place of stronger coordination of economic and social policies and a policy mix which will impact on the economic policies of the countries of the Union , particularly the Eurogroup .
The constraint of the 3 % threshold for national budget deficits must be respected .
However , we have to understand , at this point , that the scarcity of resources available for each State to develop an economic and social environment policy which is capable of giving fresh stimulus to employment and the economy makes it essential that we create fresh synergies through stronger coordination of economic , social and environmental policies , particularly in the eurozone ; moreover , this coordination should also be evident at the level of the policy for supplies of oil raw materials , in order to reduce price fluctuations and counteract the threats from inflation .
That is why our report calls upon the Commission to propose to the Council and certain groups of States open coordination experiments precisely in the investment sectors in which the Lisbon European Council recorded the greatest delays in the European Union in the development by 2010 of a knowledge-based economy and society moving towards full employment and social cohesion .
I refer , in particular , to investment in research and development , to investment - which has to be substantial if it is to have any effect - in lifelong learning ; a policy which is inseparable from the promotion of job flexibility .
I refer , once again , to investments which could encourage , which could facilitate a policy of active ageing based on the voluntary choice of employees and on the retraining of older workers so as to ensure the endurance of a collective pensions system . I refer , lastly , to investments in integrated infrastructures of networks and services which can lead , with the commitment of the States , with the commitment of private individuals and with the support of the European Investment Bank , to the immediate recovery of employment .
I also feel it is important and urgent that consideration be given to the recommendations of the Green Paper on corporate social responsibility , in cases of mergers and restructuring , so as to use benchmarking and other procedures to encourage the practice of informing and consulting workers and in order to find solutions based on employability and continuous education as alternatives to structural unemployment .
Mr President , this is the path proposed by Jacques Delors yesterday and again today in the interview published in Le Monde this morning .
With this path , the economy and the markets will benefit from a considerable announcement effect which will encourage economic recovery in the countries which are currently just marking time too .
Lastly , Mr President , I would like the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' call to the Commission and the Council for Parliament not just to be consulted but to be more involved in establishing the broad economic policy guidelines and promoting greater cooperation between the European institutions to be taken up , so that this process too is carried out with full transparency and with the informed participation of the Members of Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , my report on the annual assessment of implementation of stability and convergence programmes , which was approved unanimously by the European Parliament Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , concludes - in brief - that the annual stability and convergence programmes submitted by the governments of the Member States and their application in 2001 were , for the most part , in keeping with the requirements of the stability and growth pact , despite the recession caused by the decline in growth rates , what were luckily temporary setbacks in the American economy and one-off incidents such as the terrorist attacks on 11 September .
This generally positive state of affairs , a number of very serious exceptions in the case of Germany and Portugal notwithstanding , proves that having a stability pact and applying it as strictly as possible - and the policy of the European Central Bank has helped here - are vital to monetary stability .
That was why we were able to introduce the euro successfully and the prevailing opinion is that it is a prerequisite to healthy and sound economic growth in the European Union , something we have yet to achieve .
Unfortunately , apart from a few exceptions , rates of growth are still low , high unemployment persists , causing serious problems among the poorer classes and the young in particular , and we live with the threat of inflationary pressures .
The European Commission and ECOFIN believe that recovery is on the way and will start to bite during the last quarter of this year .
The new stability programmes for the next three years paint a similar picture .
We shall just have to wait and see if they prove to be right .
Unfortunately , despite the upward trend in the American economy and recent improvements on the stock exchanges , uncertainty persists and huge swathes of the population are taking to the streets to voice their dissatisfaction , occasionally in extreme terms , especially at the last elections .
Obviously , simple management by the intergovernmental conference is not enough .
We need more effective economic policies which strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy , promote convergence , encourage productive investment , especially high-tech investment , and create jobs , if we are to allay fears caused by what is , unfortunately , an uncontrollable influx of immigrants , the criminality ascribed to them and persistent high unemployment , especially among the young .
Despite the fact that a revised stability pact - or more lenient application of it - are being mooted in certain quarters , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs considers it is vital that it be adhered to rigidly and is therefore highly critical of the cowardly manner in which deviations in Germany and Portugal were dealt with .
Unfortunately , despite the Commission 's recommendation that an early warning be sent to these countries , as happened with Ireland in the past , ECOFIN did not do so , clearly for political reasons .
That was a bad move and could undermine confidence in the need for the pact and the Commission 's authority .
And it has turned out to be an extremely bad move because , after the elections in Portugal , for example , the new Portuguese Government revealed that public finances were in a far worse state than the previous government had let on , with the budget deficit exceeding the gross domestic product by far more than the 3 % limit .
Figures were also covered up in Germany , on unemployment at least , while the deficit in both France and Greece appears to be much higher than suggested by the figures released .
All this creative accounting must stop ; the Commission is already pressing for greater transparency and honesty in figures released by governments and stressing the urgent need to speed up the structural reforms needed , especially in pensions , the liberalisation of markets , especially the job and energy markets , and education standards , if the Lisbon targets are to be met .
The European Union needs to be bolder , to learn from the successes of the American model - which announced a worrying 80 % increase in farming subsidies yesterday - and to allow the creative forces of private initiative free - but not of course unaccountable - rein , without abandoning the social market economy , so as to escape the current climate of uncertainty which is a breeding ground for many a threat .
And it has to do so against a backdrop of destabilising terrorist activities and in the face of the sort of revival of far-right and far-left movements , with all the suffering that presages , the like of which has not been seen since between the First and Second World Wars .
.
( SV ) Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Trentin for the very good job he has done under extremely difficult circumstances .
The latest version of the report arrived this morning , and it has not been easy for any of us on the committees to cooperate under these conditions .
We are nonetheless agreed on many issues , and Mr Trentin has done very well in accepting a number of the viewpoints produced by our committee .
I agree with him that the starting point must be the fact that the European economies are in the doldrums right now and need to be strengthened and that investments need to be made in what is necessary and in what there is substantial political agreement about .
Both Mr Trentin and Mr Marinos have talked about education .
I would especially emphasise basic education and basic professional training .
It is also important to invest money in improving the ecological infrastructures , which are beneficial for the future , as well as to invest money in education , which has a large effect upon employment .
It is important not only to do those things that are required immediately but also those that are required in the long term and that will have beneficial social consequences .
It is therefore crucial to give particular attention , and more than has been given so far , to the importance of strengthening those local labour markets that are less vulnerable to economic trends .
We shall have the opportunity to return to this subject in Parliament a little later when we debate a report from the Commission about developing local employment strategies .
I wish finally to say that , unfortunately , we have not had the opportunity to take sufficient account of the East European countries and their economies , something which it would be desirable to do as part of this process .
Certainly , there are other measures which need to be prioritised in the short term , but as soon as we have a somewhat longer-term perspective it will be necessary to discuss the economics in a pan-European perspective .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , please let me make three introductory comments .
The first is that I am very happy that we are dealing with the Trentin and Marinos reports in a joint debate , because that again gives clear expression to the fact that there is not only no contradiction between the stability and convergence programme and the Guidelines of the Economic Policies , but also that they even complement each other .
The second is that anyone comparing the Lisbon objectives with reality will be aware how much there is still to be done , and will see that there have been substantial delays in their being put into practice .
The Lisbon objectives , which are to make the EU into the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economic area , facilitating sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater cohesion , represent the goal to which all of us - Parliament , Council and Commission - give the highest priority and to which we have committed ourselves .
Thirdly , Commissioner , and speaking on behalf of my group , I fully support , as regards their content , the guidelines you have put forward and believe that their main features , despite a number of amendments we have also agreed to , are right and merit our entire support .
Our objective is best , and most safely , reached by way of the model of the environmentally responsible market economy .
I have to reiterate that , because the environmentally-responsible market economy incorporates on the one hand functioning free and liberalised markets and , on the other , sees responsibility towards enterprises , employees and consumers , along with sustainability , as part of its responsibility towards future generations .
I would like to appeal right now to an element among the speakers on the Left . Let us at last stop playing social policy off against economic policy , and employment policy against price stability .
Growth and employment presuppose price stability , and social cohesion in our society presupposes growth and employment .
Those who jeopardise the Stability and Growth Pact are mortgaging the future and acting irresponsibly .
Those who abide by it have enough room for their political initiatives and investments to manoeuvre .
I call for greater consistency in implementing what we have agreed to and adhering to it .
The implementation of Lisbon , of the convergence criteria , of the Stability and Growth Pact , of the Action Plan for Financial Services , of the plans for liberalisation , offers enough opportunities for coordination .
Coordination at the expense of participation is something we will never agree to , but we will support coordination for the purpose of implementing our common objectives .
The internal market enhances competitiveness in Europe and in the world , but it does not ban competition within Europe .
We need competition in products and competition in systems !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialists say yes to the Stability and Growth Pact , which is something that we need .
Stability cannot be an end in itself , it must serve growth .
Europe needs a more innovative policy for growth .
To achieve this , we must invest more in European infrastructures .
The collective profitability of infrastructures is always much higher than their direct financial profitability .
How many regions of Europe have experienced greater development due to a network of high speed trains , due to a new motorway , a more modern port or an airport ?
The communication networks and energy transmission networks are also a factor in development and growth .
Ten years after the launch of the trans-European networks ( TEN ) , we must point out that few projects launched back then have been completed .
What is worse , the increase in mobility has resulted in all the existing infrastructural networks being saturated .
Those who advocate the liberalisation of the energy markets do not seem to be aware of the obvious lack of existing inter-connections for energy transmission .
Similarly , those who desire a liberalisation of rail transport do not seem to be aware that the existing capacities on the rail networks are already saturated .
This is true of passenger transport and freight transport .
We clearly need to extend trans-European networks in all areas .
This is a typical Community policy since the trans-European networks , the name says it all , Mr President , do not stop at national borders but serve the entire European economy .
The Commission would therefore be well advised to make improvements to trans-European networks and to extend all these networks .
Trans-European networks must receive European financing .
The Union 's budget and the European Investment Bank must be used .
Public and private finance is necessary .
The European infrastructural policy serves growth , serves immediate employment but above all it serves growth and therefore employment , in the medium and long term .
I would like to finish , Mr President , by thanking the two rapporteurs , and especially my colleague Mr Bruno Trentin , for the 2002 report .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to express the support of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party for the two reports by Mr Trentin and Mr Marinos , which deal with two key issues within the excessively complicated EU economic and monetary policy mechanism , of which the stability pacts and the broad economic policy guidelines are key components .
I would like to highlight the following points : firstly , that we fully support the policy of budgetary rigour and the fulfilment of commitments established in the stability pacts .
Therefore , we regret very much that the Member States , in the Ecofin Council in February , if my memory serves me correctly , did not support the Commission proposal with regard to the concern for the development of the Portuguese and German economies and the administration of their respective budgets .
I would also add our concern at the French Government 's recent announcement .
Therefore , I support the policy of budgetary rigour that will hopefully give confidence and strength to the European economy and its single currency , the euro .
Lastly , I would like to point out that with regard to the broad economic policy guidelines , we agree with the Trentin report 's proposals , particularly where they aim to implement the Lisbon commitments after revision in the Barcelona Council .
We particularly agree with the difficult compromise between achieving greater competitiveness whilst not abandoning the policy of economic and social cohesion .
Clearly , this can only be achieved by putting an emphasis - as the Trentin report does , and as proposed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - on the information society and the expansion of technological research and development activities .
This will clearly give rise to the information- and knowledge-based society that will allow us to improve quality and be more competitive , which we hope for at the end of this decade .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group , I would also like to thank our esteemed fellow Member , Mr Bruno Trentin , and to congratulate him not only on his personal qualities , but also because I believe that the report adopted last night by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs contains a strong political message .
The message is that , if Parliament adopts this report , it will be rejecting the ' wait-and-see ' strategy favoured by the Member States ' governments and is calling for a stronger qualitative growth .
This message is conveyed by highlighting the fact that , in the triangle that economists know well , in other words that formed by the volume of public debt , the volume of public revenue and the volume of public expenditure - whether this is current expenditure or , more importantly , investment expenditure referred to in this report - we must also take into account the level of public expenditure needed to achieve the objectives defined at Lisbon and also at Gothenburg .
And one does not need to be a genius to realise that this message runs counter to widely held views .
To be convinced of this , one merely has to watch the election broadcasts by the main political parties , which all place the emphasis on reducing public revenue and fail to specify which areas of public spending should therefore be decreased accordingly .
Bearing in mind , therefore , the increasing tax competition between the Member States , I think that Amendment No 7 is an absolutely crucial amendment , because it warns against the pressure that public expenditure is under .
Besides the tax aspects which we do not think are covered sufficiently in the report , this is another reason why we feel that Amendment No 8 is an absolute minimum in terms of corporate income tax and the implementation of the conclusions of the Primarolo report .
But we must also - the Commissioner is well aware of this - move forward with environmental taxation and taxation on revenue arising from capital , which are all areas where the debate is stalling .
Lastly , Commissioner , as far as the Stability and Growth Pact is concerned , my group will not vote in favour of the Marinos report , because I think that there is a contradiction , contrary to what other speakers have said , between the Trentin report and the Marinos report .
The Marinos report calls for the strict observance of the stability programmes .
I personally believe that , in the interest of citizens , it is unwise to refuse to launch a debate on the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is unwise to seek to accomplish , at any cost and within strict timetables , budgetary balances : the level of public debt of the Member States is more important than simply complying strictly with budgetary balances .
I think that there is a connection to be made between the rise of extreme right groups in Europe and the fact that the States no longer know how to respond to the basic needs of their citizens , or in any case these needs are not being properly satisfied .
We need public funding that is sufficient to meet these needs .
Mr President , we have , in the European Union , an internal market , and a unitary currency in twelve of its Member States , but we do not have a communitarised European economic and fiscal policy and nor do we have a policy on employment .
This is our fundamental dilemma .
Opinions will differ to a marked degree as regards the Guidelines .
If we make growth our priority , we can discuss whether or not it presupposes a high rate of employment , which makes for greater purchasing power and hence strengthens domestic demand .
We can discuss whether to roll back supply-side economic policies a bit in favour of those that are demand-driven , but we will not solve the problem if we do not sort out communitarised policies .
The Member States are jostling for position among themselves , which means that a common framework needs to be laid down , at any rate to provide guidelines for economic policy .
How much can or should be budgeted for expenditure on investments ?
Is it really necessary - as is stated in the text - to prioritise the reduction of outgoings , or can we not change the revenue side by means of tax justice ?
Why does tax law not treat partnerships and corporate enterprises equally ?
Why is it that not every business or private individual pays tax on the profits it or they make ?
It is frameworks such as these that we can lay down and thereby enable there to be a level playing field in every country .
The question we have to ask ourselves - which I think Mr Karas framed in an improper way - is not to do with the Left wanting to engage in social policy as against economic policy or to oppose employment with stability .
Good employment policy and low unemployment are merely the precondition for growth actually being achieved .
We get growth only if the products that are manufactured are capable of being sold .
That means that the two are linked together .
That is why we have to give some thought to how to fit economic and social policies together much better , rather than setting them up in opposition to each other .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank Mr Trentin for his excellent report and for his work , which quite clearly reveals the slowdown in the progress of our Community 's economic policy : a fact that has become extremely clear , as has - and I am taking advantage of the presence of the Commissioners in the Chamber - the issue of poor cooperation in economic matters between the European Union and the European Parliament .
This is not , then , just a question of hoping that , in the future , the cooperative effort between Parliament and the Union will become reality . This is a real necessity if we still believe in the prevalence of politics over a certain type of economy , characterised by lobbying , which has certainly not yielded the desired result thus far , as is shown by the figures on the economic slowdown .
What , then , can we hope for in such a situation ?
I feel that , faced with the current momentous problems of our world - which have been mentioned , touched on today - we need to start to reason , to attempt to apply our great Europe 's entrepreneurial capacity to the problems of social cohesion which were evident in Mr Marino 's report too .
We need to be able to define the new relationship between the new economy and the Welfare State in terms of the modern context , the Welfare State needs to be redefined for the modern age .
We are attempting to do so in Italy and we are succeeding , but only by means of a great struggle to remodernise the relationship between capital and the world of work and achieve a great synthesis of the two , with a view , not least - and this is my invitation to Mr Trentin and the other Members of my committee - to what is going to happen in a few years ' time with enlargement , which is now almost upon us .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , chaired by Mrs Randzio-Plath , recently visited Bulgaria , where we were able to take a look at the budget of the applicant States , with some practical concern for what the implications will be for our economy .
We must therefore act as if enlargement were on our doorstep and congratulate ourselves on our endeavours .
In my opinion , Mr Trentin was right to refer in his recommendation to the age-old , noble values of which the Europeans are traditionally the champions ; the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has therefore made good progress along this road , which is the road to the practical creation of an essentially inclusive European State with a sound economy .
You can speak your mind , but you also have to back up your words by action .
And this is what is sometimes lacking when it comes to implementing agreements concluded in the socio-economic field .
Since the Stockholm Summit , integration of social and employment policy and environmental policy into economic policy has been an objective in order to achieve sustainable development .
The Barcelona Summit two months ago prompted the inclusion in Mr Trentin 's preparatory report , by amendment , of a whole host of social and employment objectives .
Although I can trace the social and employment objectives in Mr Trentin 's report , I believe that there is insufficient consideration for environmental aspects .
It appears that integrating economic and social policy is more a matter of course than integrating environmental policy into economic policy .
Might the reason lie in the fact that environmental policy costs money and yields economic results that are not immediately measurable ?
I would therefore call for clear and concrete environmental objectives to be included in the guidelines for economic policy , in addition to references to the importance of the environment .
Objectives relating to energy consumption and the reduction in CO2-emissions spring to mind .
Economic growth will need to go hand in hand with the responsible use of our natural resources .
Finally , I understand that the method of open coordination does not function entirely satisfactorily .
In practice , it transpires that the use of this method is often too unregulated and the method itself is not clearly defined .
As a result , cooperation by means of the method of open coordination is not sufficiently binding for the Member States .
It is therefore desirable that it is made clear how cooperation between the Member States is taking place in the field of employment and social policy , taking into account the responsibilities of the Member States .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
Two - almost magic - formulae , typical of a certain type of Europeanism are constantly being proposed in this Chamber : the European social model and the social market economy .
The underlying implication - which is , in reality , often expressed - is that this is where the distinction between the European model and the US model lies , the former being an altruistic , inclusive model and the latter being an egotistical and cynical model .
I feel we would do well to ask ourselves whether these labels actually correspond to the facts in reality , whether the European social model genuinely does protect the weaker sections of society and the marginalised .
Does our economic policy really produce better results than that of the US ?
The Council texts before us today are pervaded by the optimistic , consoling mantra of the Lisbon goal : making Europe the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world in ten years .
This is , of course , an excellent proposal , but we are overlooking the fact that two years have passed already and that the European economy is still at the starting post , that the necessary reforms are being postponed or diluted from summit to summit and that the hopes of Europe 's unemployed of economic growth bringing them work are still linked to the resumption of growth in the US economy , which is the motor for growth .
It is a constant factor : we set grandiose , ambitious goals and then , when we fail to achieve them because it has become unrealistic to pursue them , we have to just resign ourselves !
The reforms need to be speeded up .
The demands made upon Italy in this year 's broad economic policy guidelines are the same as those which have been made throughout the past five years , but nothing effective is being done to meet the requirements relating to the labour market , pensions , the liberal professions and the liberalisation of the markets .
I will end , Mr President , with a warning : only ten years ago , Japan was still seen as an invincible economy with a social model offering a remarkable level of protection .
Now , a long recession coupled with the country 's inability to effect liberal reforms in its economy appear to be inflicting torture on Japan which is as long-drawn-out as it was unexpected .
These are , of course , different situations which cannot be compared , but the fate of Japan is a warning which we in Europe would do well to heed .
We have therefore come to an end of the list of Members who spoke on behalf of their group .
As a voting session is soon due to begin , I shall suspend the joint debate on these two reports .
The debate will resume this evening at 9 p.m.
( The sitting was adjourned at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Mr President , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 16 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 32 , 33 and 34 .
It can also accept , in principle , Amendments Nos 8 , 14 , 15 and 18 , after they have been reworded . It rejects the other amendments .
Mr President , I recommend the adoption of the common position without amendment .
In discussion yesterday in Parliament , questions were raised as to whether there was full harmonisation or not .
I want to make a statement to the House that there is full harmonisation in respect of information to consumers prior to the conclusion of the contract on , for instance , the supplier , financial services , the distance contract and the redress mechanism .
Particular concern was expressed in relation to Article 3 ( 4 ) on the information on contractual obligations to be communicated to the consumer during the pre-contractual phase .
In particular , concern was expressed as to whether this was in conformity with the e-commerce Directive , and I want to give an assurance that , in my opinion , it is .
I refer the House , in particular , to recital 56 of the e-commerce Directive .
I assure the House that , for instance , web sites will still be subject to the country of origin principle .
As for Article 42 , I would say that this is necessary , having regard to the fact that further harmonisation legislation is still pending and the article is therefore necessary .
I urge the House to reject Amendment No 49 , as the wording of the article is correct , as it says that ' the laws shall be approximated ' .
This is the normal wording to be found in a directive , and the other form of wording you would find in a regulation .
Finally , Amendment No 50 should also be rejected , as it requires the inclusion of a specific date of 2003 , which is inappropriate .
The appropriate approach is to stipulate , as is normal , two years after adoption .
In the circumstances , the Commission recommends the adoption of this without amendment .
Mr President , I would like to respond to the Commissioner 's position by saying , in my capacity as rapporteur , that it corresponds completely with my recommendation to this House .
Let me say , for the information of Members of this House , that , at any rate in the German version produced by our interpreters , whenever the Commissioner spoke of amendments , the word was rendered as ' articles ' .
The numbers that the Commissioner has cited refer , however , to the amendments rather than to the articles of the original text .
My group asked for these to be voted on separately , but I can withdraw this request .
A mistake has been made .
This means that Amendments Nos 13 to 23 , which were to be voted on separately , can now be voted on en bloc .
Mr President , should you not be asking us to vote for the text ?
You are changing the vote around and reversing it .
A " yes " vote should be for keeping the text and a " no " vote should be against the text surely ?
The last time you did this it was rather confusing .
I can tell you that the Commission is willing to accept all the amendments to the common position of 18 February 2002 , since we believe that the amendments tabled do not only improve on the common position , but in many places they help to clarify it .
Mr President , in paragraph 7 , we should delete the words " Advisory Committee on Tourism " , so the paragraph reads : ... " calls for the Forum to meet in public " .
This is the only solution that is correct .
I ask colleagues to approve it .
Producing homogenised statistics for the whole of the Union could prove to be a useful exercise , and that is why we voted in favour of the report .
It is common knowledge , however , that governments distort and manipulate statistics in all sorts of ways , even those in an area as straightforward as unemployment .
The fundamental disparity between employees ' salaries and those of their employers is all the more reason for us to obtain reliable statistics on income .
Employers know , to the nearest penny , how much their workers earn , but do the latter have any idea as to their employers ' income ?
The total amount of capital income and , more generally speaking , information on how capital income works , are kept under wraps by virtue of the infamous ' trade secrets act ' , which exists to hide all instances of waste , speculation and corruption .
Because of a lack of transparency , European Union statistics on the income of the rich will always be unreliable , whether they are homogenised or not .
We are , of course , in favour of scientific and technical cooperation between Europe and India and exchange visits by scientists within the framework of the parallel programmes .
For this reason , we did not vote against the report , but at the same time we refuse to endorse it .
This is because , behind the façade of ' cooperation ' , there is a reality , and primarily that which has surfaced out of a distrust for those who are being exploited and is revealed by the very examples cited by the rapporteur .
The rapporteur states that poor countries must do without the energy sources that rich countries use because they are too expensive for them .
The report makes no mention whatsoever of the causes of this poverty : centuries of colonial exploitation , followed by imperial exploitation by India .
The report makes no mention either of those who have benefited from high energy prices , such as European companies which include global oil , gas and electricity giants .
The rapporteur depicts as helpful the fact that the European Union is installing , in rural areas of India , alternative energy technologies , the patents of which usually belong to the above-mentioned energy giants .
The report recommends that the European Union provide farmers with technologies to process their agricultural produce , so that they can ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The British Conservatives voted against this report due to growing concerns about the effects and implementation of such agreements .
Firstly , we are unconvinced by the benefits of agreements which are of huge cost to the European taxpayer and yet seem to supply limited benefits to EU fishermen as a whole .
Secondly , we remain sceptical over the financial proberty of such schemes , and how such proceeds are spent .
The effect on local indigenous fishermen continues to be highlighted , and yet the attitude that the EU can simply come in and take the livelihoods of such subsistence fishermen is worrying .
But finally we have seen the damage the CFP has done to the fishing stocks around our own coastlines .
The CFP has been an unmitigated environmental disaster .
We believe that it is simply wrong to suggest that the only answer to such a dire situation in our fish stocks is simply to up anchor and go and repeat the exercise in someone else 's waters .
Mr President , Mrs Maij-Weggen 's report refers to the list of documents to be made accessible to the public .
Tell me , Mr President , which European Parliament document is most faithful and closest to reality out of all the documents issued by Parliament that we have to include in the register ?
You do not reply but I am sure you have guessed : the most faithful European Parliament document can only be a video recording of the plenary sittings .
Do you realise , Mr President , how faithful the recording would be , showing the moment when Mr Fatuzzo delivers his explanation of vote and all the other Members gaily chat amongst themselves , with my blessing , of course ?
Indeed , Mr President , I would rather you did not call them to order !
Mr Fatuzzo , please let me point out to you that any explanations of vote that you give should actually have something to do with the way you voted .
The European Parliament has just adopted what appears to be a highly commendable report on the list of its documents that are directly accessible to the public .
But although transparency appears to be respected , there is creeping censorship at various stages of parliamentary work .
For example , written explanations of vote must , in theory , be no more than 200 words , as stated in the Rules of Procedure , but this word limit has not always been strictly enforced in order to allow Members to express their opinions fully and clearly .
This tolerant attitude seems to be frowned upon in some quarters : despite the fact that the European institutions often spend money as if there is no tomorrow , Parliament has recently decided to save money on paper and ink by cutting 100 words here , 50 words there of Members ' explanations of vote .
In the Minutes of the sitting of 25 April 2002 , I drew attention to instances where my explanations of vote had been shortened .
We must simply bear in mind that the Union spends a considerable amount subsidising associations which merely serve to spread propaganda pure and simple .
It obviously prefers to listen infinitely to servile associations , rather than find out the opinions of the representatives elected by the people .
We are seeing a whole programme of ' new governance ' taking shape before our very eyes .
. ( NL ) Once upon a time , the government used to be the private property of king and nobility , all decisions were secret and people did not all enjoy the same civil rights .
We have come a long way since then .
Practically nobody would like to return to those days , but the last vestiges have still not been fully stamped out .
It is very convenient for leaders and large businesses if citizens cannot access information , if they cannot access it in time or if they are unable to respond in time to measures which privileged groups find important .
There is even fear for the consequences of democracy and openness which may conflict with traditional opinions on stability and state security held by leading groupings .
Within the EU , the extent of public access differs greatly between northern and southern Member States , and between large ones and small ones .
This allows for a great deal of secrecy to continue to exist at EU level , such as the Councils of Ministers , which meet behind closed doors and which have assumed the role of senate off their own bat .
The proposal to declare all EP documents , such as attendance lists , written questions , Minutes , voting results and the lists of staff , public from now on is right and proper , but this does not constitute a step forward .
I assumed that these documents had always been in the public domain , but obviously I have nothing against stressing this point .
The fight goes on .
The Treaty of Amsterdam introduced the concept of openness and transparency into the Treaties , in such a way as to give any citizen of the Union , and any natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in a Member State , a right of access to Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
For that reason , Parliament provided in its Rules of Procedure that ' Categories of documents which are directly accessible ( and unabridged ) shall be set out in a list adopted by Parliament and annexed to these Rules ' .
It is precisely this procedure and this list that the Maij-Weggen report deals with . This report warrants our full support , because it makes another positive contribution at European level to formalising the principle of transparency and of public access to documents , here in the specific framework of our Parliament .
. ( DE ) I wish to emphasise at the outset that I am unreservedly in favour of Parliament working in a transparent manner and also of all its documentation being made accessible to the public .
I nonetheless voted against Mrs Maij-Weggen 's report .
Parliament has a political task , and , in the conciliation procedure between the Council and Parliament deals with political questions - sometimes sensitive ones - and the work of the delegations can even touch on live political issues .
I consider it irresponsible for us to make ' working documents ' accessible to the public .
Official documents and working documents are quite different things .
The conciliation procedure in particular deals with the political implementation of different positions taken by the two institutions , Parliament and the Council .
If all the thinking set down in the working documents is made public at the outset , then we can give up politics .
The Council will be delighted to know in advance what Parliament has in mind .
There is always a connection between my explanations of vote and the reason for my vote for or against a motion , Mr President , although you need to listen very carefully to understand it .
With regard to the Foster report , for example , which deals with aviation security , the fact that , as I was flying to Strasbourg , Mr President , I was thinking precisely about aviation security and about this report through which Mrs Foster rightly calls for the implementation of specific measures to ensure that flights are secure , would appear , at first glance , to have no bearing on the matter .
I was reflecting that the security envisaged for us by Mrs Foster is so very secure that I hope aircraft do not lose that swaying , rocking motion which enables us to sleep even when we are up among the clouds .
Mr President , I voted for the report not least because , as an airman , I am in favour of improving security .
Moreover , on the subject of security , I am quite concerned by the fact that , for reasons of foreign policy , we are forced , or rather we have been persuaded , to welcome 13 dangerous Palestinians to our country who have been released from the Church of the Nativity , which they had taken over by force .
Indeed , it would not make sense for this European schizophrenia to improve security in one area while , at the same time , exposing us to considerable risks - a fact of which I am certain - for I am sure that the fact that these 13 Palestinians were not released means that they are not honest and are , in any case , a danger and a hazard for our citizens .
We voted in favour of all the amendments which seek to strengthen safety both for the staff of airlines , airports and companies based in airports , and for air passengers .
However , we rejected the amendments which , on the pretext of maintaining balanced competition , bow to pressure from the lobbies - primarily the airline lobbies - and will do nothing more than delay the implementation of essential measures or will ensure that the measures taken will not meet the legitimate expectations of the public and the staff concerned .
In recommending that the authorities finance these measures , the rapporteur is acknowledging the fact that the market , the laws of competition and profit , in other words , the capitalist functioning of the economy extolled by the European institutions , are incompatible with passenger and worker safety .
And unfortunately , air transport is by no means an exception in this area .
. ( NL ) Unlike trains or buses , aircraft are completely dependent on the uninterrupted operation of their engines for their safety .
If these engines fail as a result of technical problems or deliberate sabotage , then the aircraft will crash .
In such cases , not only the passengers will be the victims , but also those on the ground where pieces of the wreckage land .
We have witnessed this , inter alia , in the deliberate crash in Lockerbie in Scotland and in the air disaster above the Amsterdam district of Bijlermeer that was caused by carelessness and secrecy .
Safety is subordinated to the way in which civil aviation is currently being organised .
It is based on competition between private companies that wish to acquire the largest possible share of the passenger market at the lowest possible cost and rates .
Thanks to the absence of tax on kerosene , they already have the edge on transport on the ground .
They prefer to pass on safety costs to the government instead of factoring them into the price of air tickets .
Mrs Foster usually acts as the voice of airline companies in this House and wishes , above all , for the aviation market to grow unhindered .
I have great difficulty with the continuous series of proposals that are based on the survival of an organisational model that will ultimately lead to uncontrollable accidents .
It is time that the EU acts in European airlines ' interests since they are one of the most severely affected industries of the events of 11 September .
I fully support this report , therefore , which aims to lift the financial burden for paying for increased security that airports and airlines currently face .
If Europe 's airlines are to stay competitive with their American counterparts , they cannot afford to shoulder the additional burden that 11 September has thrown at them .
Indeed , in the present climate where American airlines enjoy massive financial handouts , tax breaks and state aid , it is grossly unfair to expect Europe 's airlines to survive , let alone compete , when they are currently compelled to pay for new increased security measures .
I also welcome the move to delay the entry into force of this legislation until 31 December 2003 : airlines need time to carry out the necessary retraining and to purchase additional equipment .
Mr President , I vote for this report on financial services , both on my own behalf and as representative of the Pensioners ' Party .
Why is that ?
Well then , Mr President , when I went to catch my flight at Milan Malpensa airport , instead of the group of pensioners who usually come to see me off , I found the notary , Mr Barbati , who is my own notary .
' What are you doing here , notary ? '
I asked him . ' You can hardly be described as a pensioner ! '
' I know , Mr Fatuzzo , ' he replied , ' but Amendment No 21 in Article 6 ( 3 ) ( b ) ( i ) on page 16 / 22 of the document places a question mark over the use of a notary when contracts are signed which fall within the scope of the directive . '
For this reason , since the amendment was adopted , I voted for the motion , not least in order to safeguard the jobs of notaries .
. ( DE ) The Council 's new Article 3 ( 4 ) is a very remarkable cuckoo in the nest , and a very dangerous one too .
In practice , this article means that , even at a stage when no contract has been entered into - when , for example , information , advertising , offers etc are posted on a web site - it is not sufficient for the service provider to adhere to the laws of the Member State in which he is based ; he also has to be familiar with those of the other fourteen , with all their idiosyncrasies .
Furthermore , a service provider would have to set up not just one web site , but fifteen , each tailored to the legislative quirks of the various Member States .
Obstacles of that sort make it scarcely possible to speak in terms of a common internal market !
This article also puts the consumer at a disadvantage , as the legal uncertainty that results from this is more likely to deter businesses from offering their services via the Internet , which , as a medium , is convenient for the consumer .
Like Article 3 ( 4 ) , Article 16 of the common position envisages an exception - admittedly one with a time limit - to the country-of-origin principle and to the e-commerce directive , in that it permits the Member States to impose national rules on a service provider based in a Member State if the service provider 's Member State has not yet transposed the directive .
This totally absurd way of going about things could become a dangerous precedent and should therefore be removed from the text .
( Explanations of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , I voted for the measure tabled by the Chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mr Bouwman , who is rightly concerned to protect employees in the event that their employer becomes insolvent .
How could I do otherwise ?
When are we going to concern ourselves , then , Mr President , with the bad debt of States as regards pensions ?
There are many citizens who receive their pensions late : that is bad debt on the part of States .
There are many citizens who , after working for a great many years , receive tiny pensions which amount to starvation rations : that is bad debt on the part of States .
There are many widows who receive less than half the pension their deceased husband received : is this not just as serious employer bad debt , which I hope Mr Bouwman will proceed to settle in some fashion one day .
The only reason why we voted in favour of these amendments is because the obligation to ' set up an institution which guarantees that the workers concerned are paid outstanding claims ' is supposed to ensure , throughout the European Union , that workers who have lost their jobs as a result of their employer going bankrupt will receive at least partial legal compensation payments .
This protection is , however , scandalously limited .
The texts of the European institutions themselves stipulate that certain categories are excluded from this protection such as home-helpers and fishermen who are paid from shared proceeds .
Additionally , however , there is an amendment which states that ' Member States may set limitations to the responsibility of the guarantee institutions ' .
In other words , if a general obligation is defined , the States can do what they want , and essentially place a ceiling on compensation payments paid to workers .
As regards the financing of these guarantee funds , Amendment No 6 hypocritically states that ' the employers shall contribute to the financing , unless it is fully covered by the public authorities ' .
Although it is , without doubt , better , in terms of the protection of workers , for the public authorities to pay compensation in the event of bankruptcy of the employer , in any ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) At first reading , the Council regrettably chose not to accept some of the proposals that we had tabled and that Parliament had adopted which sought to achieve better protection for employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer , amending the 1980 directive to enable it to cope with the frequent cases of insolvency in the European Union .
Although the Council position already represents an improvement on the previous situation , it was necessary to insist on the amendments designed to include , in the scope of the directive , new forms of work and new labour relations and the directive 's extension to cover severance pay , as laid down in ILO Convention No 173 ( 6 ) .
The Council position remained set on cases provided for in national legislation .
Although we voted for the amendments tabled in the report , we are bound to regret the fact that it did not go further , and specifically that it opted for reaching a compromise solution with the Commission , which will carry out an in-depth study and hold a joint public hearing with Parliament as early as this year on the situation of workers in light of new forms of labour relations .
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Pack 's report on the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 .
Ah yes , I dreamed about Mrs Pack , Mr President .
Strangely , however , in the dream , Mrs Pack was married to three Members of the European Parliament who are sporting champions : Mr Mennea , Mr Messner and Mr Vatanen .

In the dream , however , Mr President , Mrs Pack picked up a club and set about beating me , she beat me , reproaching me : ' What are you going to say tomorrow at the European Parliament when you explain why you voted for the motion ? '
It is strange , Mr President , but , when I woke up this morning , all my bones were aching .
Even though the beating happened in the dream , I am still aching .
This is an excellent initiative and I fully endorse the goal of highlighting the educational value of sport .
Much can be gained from establishing partnerships between sporting organisations and educational establishments .
As a Member from Ireland , I am particularly pleased that this proposal is to dedicate 2004 to Education through Sport .
This will coincide with the Irish Presidency of the Union in the first half of 2004 and I can assure colleagues that Ireland will play a most prominent role in many of the actions envisaged .
Ireland has a long sporting tradition , and in particular an amateur and voluntary tradition .
We are all aware that a number of important sporting events will take place in 2004 .
The European Football Championships will be held as well as the Olympic and Paralympic Games in Athens .
The proposal envisages 2003 as a preparatory year , with some activities beginning to coincide with the academic year 2003-2004 .
Ireland will play host to the Special Olympics in 2003 , and the contribution of the EU to the organisation of this event is also worthy of praise .
This will be a unique sporting and cultural experience for the athletes taking part , from 160 international delegations all over the world .
I fully support this report which recognises the diverse advantages that sport has to offer , from improving social skills and integration to working with and including voluntary organisations .
Here in the EU , we constantly reiterate the need to promote integration : sport is the ideal way to achieve this .
For too long sporting activities have come second to so-called formal education .
To relegate sporting activities is to deny the host of benefits that sport brings ; it is something at which all people can succeed , regardless of class and race .
So , the promotion of sport also bolsters and enhances other Community projects , ranging from the fight against racism and social exclusion , to the inclusion of disabled people .
Since so many of the EU 's goals can be partially realised by promoting sports , the EU must promote sport as a functional as well as recreational activity .
Lastly , once Member States begin to co-operate more in this domain and demonstrate how they have mainstreamed sport into their education systems , we will finally come to realise the full potential that sport has to offer .
Mr President , I voted for this report , which refers to the extension of the Tempus III programme .
The words ' Tempus fugit ' have come to mind .
What has ' Tempus fugit ' got to do with anything ?
It is written on many clocks .
I am sorry , Mr President , but I reflected that , with the passing of time , young people and workers become pensioners if they are lucky .
Therefore , the invitation I extend - to myself and also to Mr Ojeda Sanz and to his Tempus III programme - is to bear in mind that we need to think harder , work harder , do more and make greater efforts to ensure that young people - who will , if they are lucky , become pensioners one day in the future - are also able to live comfortably during this period of their lives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report , and did so because I believe that tourism 's future lies in the development of sustainable tourism which takes account of ecological considerations and promotes them .
In Austria , which is a tourist destination , the principle of sustainable development is of primary importance to the tourist sector .
Protection and maintenance of the countryside and of sensitive regions have demonstrated their potential for the future and are characteristic of our country 's practice of what is termed ' soft tourism ' .
I therefore expressly welcome the Commission 's initiative to develop and implement an Agenda 21 to promote sustainable development of tourism in Europe .
The proposal that has now been put forward for TEMPUS III , to incorporate the aim of ' promoting understanding between and rapprochement of cultures and developing free and flourishing civil societies ' , exactly along the lines laid down in the Barcelona Declaration of 1995 , which established the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , is of great importance .
It is also of specific importance that this should be done at a time when it is intended to extend the Tempus III programme from next year to encompass countries and territories also covered by the MEDA regulation ( Morocco , Algeria , Tunisia , Egypt , Israel , Jordan , the Palestinian Authority , Syria and Lebanon ) and no longer apply only to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe - currently covered by the Cards and Tacis programmes .
Indications from the experience of the Tempus I and II programmes for trans-European cooperation in university studies have been largely positive , which is why we are confident about the innovations now being proposed for Tempus III , although with the reservation that a thorough and objective assessment must be carried out .
We have confidence in the various evaluations of the Tempus programme , which show that this is a valid instrument for fostering mutual understanding , and we consider that it is precisely in this spirit that all its programming of activities should be undertaken .
One of the good things in this life is that Dante 's is not the only comedy ; Parliament puts one on from time to time .
The report and the motion for a resolution on a European strategy for tourism , an industry which is hugely important to the economy of and employment in the European Union and which is widely neglected , contains a number of excellent points , which is why I shall vote in favour of it .
However , I should like to add the following :
First : the European Union should revert to the idea of a special programme on tourism , such as the PHILOXENIA proposal which came up against opposition from a number of Member States .
Secondly : one specific aspect of Community policy should be support for small and medium-sized enterprises in tourist areas which risk being bled to death by the major tour operators in the European Union .
Thirdly : we need a broader-based policy to reconcile tourist developments with the history , landscape and specific traditions of individual tourist areas , many of which have already been disfigured by impersonal , industrial tourist developments .
The MPF ( Mouvement pour la France ) Members voted against the Torres Marques report , which calls for a European tourism policy .
We believe that this area is the responsibility of the national , even regional or local , authorities , and that cooperation should not be forced .
Yet the Commission and the European Parliament have been working relentlessly for years , firstly with a ' communication ' , then a ' White Paper ' , at an ' informal meeting ' , then an ' own-initiative report ' , to take over this responsibility .
The Commission has set up its own internal ' Tourism Unit ' and Parliament has allocated responsibility for tourism to one of its parliamentary committees .
They succeeded in slipping the words ' tourism for all ' into the conclusions of the recent Council meeting in Bruges .
The Spanish Presidency has just produced a ' working document ' on the subject , which even mentions the ' ethical dimension ' of tourism .
They all want European competences , European funding and European staff for tourism .
The Torres Marques report that we examined today concludes by calling on the Convention considering the future of the Union to propose that the tourist sector has ' a solid legal basis enabling it to give force to Community measures ' .
Is this not an admission that everything that has been done so far in this area has no legal basis ?
I welcome the Commission 's initiative in proposing ways to boost our tourist industry , which is an industry able to make a major contribution to local , regional and national economies .
I am fortunate to live in one of the most beautiful places in the Union , namely West Cork in Ireland .
I mention this simply to indicate that I am fully aware of the benefits that carefully-developed tourism can bring to a region .
We must get the balance right : protect the natural beauty , heritage and environment that give an area its attraction , while at the same time make the most of natural assets to improve the local economy .
I note that the Spanish Presidency took the initiative to organise a special Informal Council of Tourism Ministers .
I welcome in particular the decision hold a seminar on the fringes involving the tourism stakeholders .
The tourism industry in Europe was extremely hard hit in the past year following 11 September .
Some Member States , including Ireland , were additionally afflicted by the foot and mouth crisis .
Any assistance that Europe can offer to kick-start the industry is very positive .
I await the bringing forward of specific programmes and measures in which stakeholders in the tourist industry can participate .
. ( SV ) Tourism is an important engine for the development of economic activity in many parts of Europe .
Naturally , we support the promotion of cooperation within the tourist sector so that this can be developed both economically and socially throughout Europe .
Subsidiarity is nonetheless something we safeguard and , for that reason , we are abstaining from voting on this report . The introduction of a legal basis and a common framework for tourism would encroach too far upon the subsidiarity principle .
. ( NL ) There is no common public opinion in Europe .
Some issues are considered extremely important in one EU Member State , while they leave the inhabitants of another Member State completely cold .
If there are opinions on certain topics , they will be completely contradictory or they will be the same right across the groups .
Important examples of this are tobacco growing , the role of the regional funds , the funding of the common agricultural policy , the choice between Brussels and Strasbourg as the EP 's meeting place , tax facilities for remote islands , ocean fishing and tourism .
When the topic of tourism is raised in the EP , this invariably revolves around the issue of transferring the income from the people living in northern Member States to the Mediterranean beaches .
Far less attention is paid to the effects on the environment , traffic , safety and consumer protection , although there are many difficulties in those areas specifically .
These problems in particular are only considered to be the responsibility of the local and regional governments , while the ' tourist as a milch cow ' is seen as something that falls within the EU 's remit .
In practice , we always adopt documents that underline the economic importance of areas that rely heavily on tourism for their revenues .
In many cases , these areas want even more tourists , preferably spread equally across the four seasons .
It is only out of solidarity with the inhabitants of economically weak regions that I am not voting against these proposals , but I am of the view that we do not solve anything by adopting such paper proposals .
. ( DE ) Tourism 's future lies in the development of sustainable tourism which takes account of ecological considerations and promotes them .
In Austria , which is a tourist destination , the principle of sustainable development is of primary importance to the tourist sector .
Protection and maintenance of the countryside and of sensitive regions have demonstrated their potential for the future and are characteristic of our country 's practice of what is termed ' soft tourism ' .
I therefore expressly welcome the Commission 's initiative to develop and implement an Agenda 21 to promote sustainable development of tourism in Europe .
It is to be hoped that this package of measures will mark a further step towards realising a European form of tourism that respects the environment and conserves resources .
Tourism is now already an important economic sector in Europe and also has very high potential for development over the next few years .
The Commission 's statement contains quite a few sound proposals as to how employment and the dynamism of the sector can be promoted further .
An open coordination method and a strengthened role for the advisory tourist committee would be important factors in this connection .
We also welcome the fact that tourism is to be made sustainable in the long term through a European Agenda 21 for tourism .
We believe , however , that the current report does not accord sufficient respect to the subsidiarity principle .
Setting up a European framework programme for tourism would place a further burden on the EU budget , which is already overstretched .
Nor is it possible to give tourism policy it own legal basis in the Treaties .
Even if there is a need for coordination , tourism can be dealt with at national and regional levels , for example when it comes to marketing .
The report also appears to lack confidence in the sector 's own capacity for development .
The tourism industry is important for the future of all EU Member States ' economies and it is vital that the EU focuses its attention on tourism 's future .
Indeed , over the next ten years , employment in this industry is set to increase by a massive 15 % .
The tourism industry has benefited from the single currency and its continued growth is directly linked to the fact that EU citizens now possess more disposable income .
However , we must not rest on our laurels but ensure that tourism remains dynamic and that this growth does not stagnate .
This is why I fully endorse this report .
Tourism should become treaty based , not so that operators incur excessive regulation - indeed , the growth of the industry depends upon its ability to innovate independently - but so that it is seen as a serious European issue .
This would also establish some kind of long-term and binding EU tourism strategy .
This will guarantee that European tourism stays on target and caters for the future needs of Europe 's holiday-makers .
. ( FR ) I voted for Mrs Torres Marques ' report and I congratulate her on her excellent work as rapporteur .
The tourist sector is of vital importance to the European Union , which is the world 's most important tourist destination .
Tourism contributes to our economy and societies in many ways : creating employment , boosting European territorial development , and promoting cultural exchange between European citizens .
In proposing a planning framework and practical measures to promote tourism , the Commission is recognising its importance and tackling a number of problems facing the European tourist sector , caused , in particular by increased international competition .
I believe there is only one way to combat this competition : quality .
I am convinced that the Commission must be guided by this imperative need for quality in the field of tourism .
That is why , for example , I drafted proposals in favour of vocational training in the tourist industry , in order to develop skills in this important employment sector .
I am sorry , however , that the Commission proposal is not more ambitious .
I would like to see a commitment to reducing the VAT rate for services in the restaurant sector and possibly other tourist sectors ...
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I think Dante will turn over in his grave at hearing himself compared to Mr Fatuzzo , but thank you in any case , Mr President .
I have to say that I voted for the Gröner report on a new impetus for European youth , page 8 of which tells us that Mr Gröner is of the opinion that political parties should do their bit to involve young people too , in particular encouraging them to stand for political appointments at local , national and European level .
I agree with this , Mr President , but there is one problem : how am I going to get young people to stand for the Pensioners ' Party ?
That is the first question which springs to mind .
The answer , Mr President , is that the Pensioners ' Party has a section called ' Young people for pensioners ' , and it has a great many young members on its books and in the assemblies where it has been elected .
Thank you for allowing me to make this point , which I could not omit to do on this occasion .
The motion for a resolution by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport contains a number of fine proposals .
However , whether or not it will have any degree of success in transforming the bleak future facing young people throughout Europe , as expressed either in their indifference towards the process of European integration or in the protests staged by its more progressive sections during European Council summits , is debatable .
This sort of transformation cannot be based simply on specific , fragmented measures ; it requires a sea change in Community policies : we need to ditch budgetary prudence in favour of employment , we need to ditch privatisation and support state education , we need to ditch the policy of persecution and introduce a support framework for young people in a spiral of drug and alcohol dependency and we need to ditch the idea of fortress Europe and start integrating immigrants ' children .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur 's analysis of the White Paper is to be welcomed , although it makes some controversial and unnecessary proposals .
Nevertheless , the report highlights various important aspects of the process , specifically where it states that the White Paper does not meet the expectations created by the consultations that were held in terms of either quality or quantity since , despite the organisations participating in the consultation process complaining about the proposals that were not included and even those that were considered and which can be found in Annex 1 , these were not included in the White Paper . Examples of these are issues relating to education and employment .
Furthermore , the White Paper twists the opinions of young people to say the opposite of what was meant .
An example of this is the use of the expression ' the capacity for adaptation ' of young people to a complex
. ( PT ) Our view of the White Paper presented by the European Commission on ' a new impetus for European Youth ' is that we largely agree with the criticism of our colleagues in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport who condemned the Commission for having initiated the consultation process with pre-established ideas and for conducting the process in a way designed to guarantee that these ideas were accepted .
Furthermore , we also consider it crucial to ensure that , in future , greater attention is paid to the needs and interests of young people across the board in the various policies of the Union .
Lastly , we also regret the absence in the appropriate chapter of the White Paper of an explicit reference to the numerous Community programmes - from the Structural Funds to programmes such as Urban , Equal or even Meda - which have for a long time been pivotal instruments of Community policies and in which we must increasingly promote a sufficient number of projects that will benefit young people .
We are therefore very happy to support the report by Mrs Gröner .
. I fully endorse this report , which calls for a revitalisation of European youth policy .
Whilst young people have not been entirely marginalised in the project of European integration , there has not been enough sustained emphasis on their importance for the future of Europe .
Indeed , the future of European integration depends upon the interest and support of the next generation , and since war is not at the forefront of young people 's minds - and will no longer act as a catalyst for integration - it is vital that we include them now .
A stronger European youth policy can help to bolster and reinforce measures taken at national level to deal with universal problems such as drugs and alcohol .
Finally , since all Member States face the lamentable situation of increasing voter apathy - particularly amongst the young - the call for more young political engagement is most welcome .
It is more useful to look for a pan-EU solution to this problem than for Member States to seek a solution individually .
Mr President , I do not think there is any harm in making people smile while explaining the reasons for one 's vote .
I voted for the report which proposes to appoint Mr Lucas Papademos Vice-President of the European Central Bank .
Why did I vote for the report , Mr President ?
Well , I had another dream last night .
I dreamt that I was invited to lunch at Lucas Papademos ' house - in Athens , of course - and that he let me take a bathe with him in his swimming pool , but the pool contained euro coins , not water .
Like Uncle Scrooge , he was swimming in euro coins , and he said to me : ' My dream is that all the candidate countries will adopt the euro immediately : indeed , the whole world should adopt the euro . '
So , Mr President , what better candidate could there be than Lucas Papademos ?
Moreover , when I woke up , I found that my pockets were full of euros because I had gone swimming with all my clothes on , being too embarrassed to take my clothes off among the euro coins .
Mr Fatuzzo , last night I , too , had a dream .
I dreamt that Parliament eventually got to decide on a change to its Rules of Procedure .
.
( FR ) I abstained from voting on the appointment of Mr Papademos as Vice-President of the European Central Bank , both out of a desire not to be directly involved in the implementation of the euro , but also because of certain statements made by the candidate during his hearing .
Several times , he evoked the principle of accountability to which the ECB is supposed to adhere , as if it were a given fact .
I would like to emphasise that this principle does not exist , as accountability normally goes hand in hand with penalties .
In fact , the ECB is bound merely by the obligation to report to the European Parliament .
What is more , these reports are not even transparent , as we do not know how the Governors voted in the ECB Governing Council .
Secondly , Mr Papademos confirmed that the ECB was considering modifying voting modalities in the Governing Council , which could have been anticipated from the draft Treaty of Nice .
In particular , we appear to be moving towards abandoning equality in governors ' votes , a rule which was made much of originally but which , in practice , has had many negative repercussions on decisions , particularly with regard to interest rates .
Another Maastricht illusion bites the dust !
Mr President , as you see , people are starting to copy Mr Fatuzzo 's explanations of vote .
I am pleased that they are following my example because they are calling for the European Parliament to have a single seat : not a seat in Brussels , one in Strasbourg and one in Luxembourg but a single seat .
I support that demand , Mr President , and I put this question to you : what costs more , the few minutes Mr Fatuzzo spends delivering explanations of vote or having three seats for the European Parliament
with three buildings , and three offices for each Member and each employee .
If we succeed in having a single seat for the European Parliament , I would be willing to stop delivering explanations of vote in celebration of the major saving made .
That is where the saving needs to be made , not on Mr Fatuzzo 's minute-long speeches .
Mr President , I believe we are here to discuss serious matters , not to make jokes .
We have voted for the Parliamentary budget estimate at a time when Parliament has also asked to know the cost of the three seats , in a report which we adopted last month and sent to the European Convention on the Future of Europe .
We feel that this vote is important and that , by voting for the Stenmarck report , we are highlighting what President Chirac would call the preposterous situation of our working methods : three seats and a tremendous waste of public money .
That is why a group of MEPs now want to mark this vote by delivering explanations of vote , in the hope that their message will reach the Convention , whose eminent representatives are indeed sitting right here in this venue .
The message is this : give us one workplace , a single seat in Brussels .
Mr President , I too have voted in favour of the Stenmarck report , despite the fact that next year , a large proportion of the costs will once again be spent on buildings in Luxembourg , Brussels and Strasbourg .
If the awful developments in the Netherlands over the past few weeks have taught us anything , it is that there is an enormous chasm between the citizens and their elected representatives .
This does not only apply to the Netherlands , but also to France , for example .
The European Parliament 's travelling circus is one of the symbols of waste and power politics to which citizens are opposed .
Let us indeed persuade the Convention to call for an end to this mad situation .
The European Parliament can organise its work more cheaply and more effectively by meeting in one place .
This would send a strong message to the European citizens that we are taking their concerns seriously .
This building could become a European university .
I suggest we call it the Fatuzzo University .
Mr President , you mentioned a change to the Rules of Procedure in your response to Mr Fatuzzo .
I would remind you that the role of court jester is an essential one !
The parliamentary jester probably plays the same role , and perhaps we would be better off listening to him entertaining us rather than obsessing over matters of seats , which fuels populism more than you think .
Mr President , I too have voted in favour of the Stenmarck report .
This report makes it abundantly clear that more than one third of our budget disappears into the ridiculous travelling circus between the three chairs of the European Parliament .
The costs , however , are not only financial .
Needless to say , it is a total nightmare from an organisational point of view too .
The French Government has decided that Air France should not operate any direct flights between Amsterdam and Strasbourg , so to get here is a disaster on its own .
It is apparently possible to build a TGV to Disneyland but not to Strasbourg .
The biggest problem with the travelling circus , however , is political .
As Parliament , we must monitor the Commission and the Council , but they are based in Brussels .
This simply undermines our political credibility , and we must settle this matter as an absolute priority .
Needless to say , we should try to do this before the enlargement , for then we will still be able to give the French something else by way of compensation .
I am prepared to strike a good deal on this .
The Convention should now make this a priority , so that this ridiculous travelling circus is done away with .
Mr President , I too voted in favour of Mr Stenmarck 's report , which is very sound and makes clear the costs of all this taking to the road .
We must highlight this issue and discuss it in the Convention and in this House .
I visit schools every week and , every time without exception , I am asked the question : why do you persist in moving between Brussels and Strasbourg ?
They know nothing about the EU , they perhaps do not know who President Prodi is , but they know that we move between Brussels and Strasbourg , and they think that that is insane .
So do I.
We make ourselves a laughing-stock .
We are like a travelling theatre company .
Because we operate in different places , the Council and others can say that , yes , it is a travelling Parliament and does not have very much influence .
The cost is enormous . The waste of resources for ourselves as MEPs is also considerable , and there are always problems in getting here , what with cancelled and delayed planes etc .
We need to make this beautiful building into something permanent . A Fatuzzo institute is a really excellent idea .
It must have a significantly more important function than at present , however , so that , in the future , we can put our energies into the important political issues and not into travelling between Parliament 's two cities .
Mr President , I believe that , as my fellow Members , Mrs van der Laan and Mrs Malmström , have quite rightly said , this matter is , of course , eminently political .
I have been an advocate of Strasbourg for many years , along with my radical colleagues , but I feel that the deterioration in transport links and a number of services now makes it impossible to support Strasbourg .
It is a question of political dignity .
Obviously , changes need to be made .
The plenary Chamber in Brussels , which certainly looks more like a Supreme Soviet than a Parliament , will have to be taken down .
We will also , however , have to take action with regard to the Parliamentary calendar for the coming year .
The Brussels part-sessions must be given real dignity .
We must ensure that they are of the same standard as our part-sessions here in Strasbourg .
We must therefore at least double the length of the part-sessions , and we shall make every endeavour to ensure that that happens during the next session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , irrespective of the vote we have each cast regarding this report , I feel that clarification is necessary , for there are very many - maybe not all but certainly very many - Members who are burdened by this fact of having three seats and particularly by the way our work is carried out alternately in Brussels and Strasbourg .
There are problems of huge administrative costs , there are staffing costs which must not be underestimated , the level of organisation has fallen , which means disorganisation , and procedures are lengthy to administer ; then there is concern , the result , in some cases , of anger and disappointment , on the part of the citizens when they are informed of this situation .
These , therefore , are the reasons for our - differing but united - votes on the issue .
Mr President , I too voted in favour of the Stenmark report and would like to add that we all know that the costs of enlargement cannot at present be estimated , but that we have to take care that they do not exceed their limits , as the European public will take an unsympathetic view .
That means that we must make savings .
We often , and passionately , discuss the costs of translation , which are high and likely to rise in future .
We should instead be working towards being able to reduce the costs of a seat for Parliament .
The public does not understand how we can presume to say that we can solve Europe 's problems when we are unable to agree on a location .
Mr President , before the Members of the European Parliament and the citizens who , in order to be able to work properly and express their opinions , are raising an issue concerning the European Parliament and the fact that a third of the budget is being used to maintain a circus which is of no use to anyone , this is being held up as an example of populism .
It is precisely those people who do not want to respond to this criticism and who do not want to see the taxes paid during the years of Realpolitik called into question , who have pulled the wool over the eyes of their own countries and unwittingly promoted the cause of those who have constantly upheld these causes even though they have been met with silence every time ; we , however , feel that this can be , that it is a practical political initiative which is in the interests of all the citizens .
Mr President , I too voted for the Stenmarck report , which - as a number of other Members have already pointed out - reveals the costs of an absurd situation .
I feel that it is impossible to explain to any European citizen now - not 20 or 40 or 50 years ago - why we still have two seats .
This is an irrational , idiotic situation , not just from the financial point of view but also in terms of the practical organisation of Parliament 's work .
I believe that Parliament must issue a clear signal , and one way to do this , as Mr Dupuis pointed out , is by starting to increase the size of the Brussels part-sessions , calling for a situation that no longer has any sense to be eliminated and for the European Parliament to make sense outside this House too , in other words to be a Parliament with a single seat .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's seat and meeting place on historic ground here in Strasbourg is certainly significant .
I do think , though , that this historical significance , by reason of which this long fought-over plot was sought out in the first place , gives us another task for the future : to enable Europe 's citizens to continue to understand what Europe is all about .
Today , the man in the street asks us on various occasions why we cannot agree on a place to meet ; this argument from history might well have been justified in the past , but cannot , I believe , have any validity in the future .
I believe it will be far more meaningful to make clear to people our desires for the future and the decisions we take about it here .
It surely cannot be that we are , at one and the same time , deciding on packages of austerity measures while spending a third of this House 's costs on travel .
Mr President , I am afraid that Mr Duhamel cannot tell the difference between what is populist and what is popular .
If only the European citizens could be familiar with the issue and decide on this problem impacting on the European Parliament 's budget , I feel that not even in France would there be even a tiny minority in favour of continuing with similar expenditure and the consequences - which have already been mentioned - for Parliament 's work .
It is not just a question of money : the dignity of Parliament , of its work , of its organisation and of its individual Members depends on it too .
I therefore thank the Members who have been willing to stay behind a little longer to talk about this matter .
In actual fact , I believe that Parliament must shoulder the responsibility for making these decisions , maybe even initiating an open debate with the Council , and that it must be prepared to take the matter to the Court of Justice as a practical display of its unwillingness to continue to travel between three different seats .
I find the budget laid aside for the nonsensical tracking backwards and forwards from Brussels to Strasbourg almost impossible to support .
There is no reason for such absurd peregrinations on political or economic , organisational or geographical grounds .
It leads to inefficiency and waste .
Unfortunately too many of the public believe this nonsense is a decision of Parliament and are not aware it is the product of the unholy deal done for the worst of all reasons at Edinburgh in 1992 under the presidency of John Major .
Britain got a declaration on subsidiarity , an opt-out on the social chapter , thankfully overturned by the Labour victory in 1997 .
Germany got the recognition of Croatia and former Yugoslavia and , in consequence , a series of interlocking civil wars the results of which colour European history still today , and hence the perpetuation of an absurdity in Strasbourg we all hoped would finally end .
We are now left stranded in Strasbourg until Parliament finds the political will to exert its own best interests and remove itself to Brussels with the odd symbolic sojourn in Strasbourg for formal occasions .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on progress and perspectives in immigration and asylum policy .
I am pleased to welcome Mr Rajoy Brey to introduce the debate on behalf of the Council .
I am pleased he has taken the time to be here today for this delicate and sensitive question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank the European Parliament for giving me this opportunity to appear here to give my assessment of the progress we have made during the four and a half months of the Spanish Presidency of the Council of the European Union in what I believe to be one of the key areas of the European Union 's Justice and Home Affairs policy ; immigration and asylum .
The progressive development of a common immigration and asylum policy is an essential part of the area of freedom , security and justice we Europeans have proposed creating in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This immigration and asylum policy must be based on a balanced and global approach .
This global framework , in accordance with the Conclusions of the Tampere European Council , must be founded on four fundamental premises : the adequate management of migratory flows , the quest for fair treatment of third-country nationals , cooperation with countries of origin and the establishment of a European asylum system .
Making progress on these four guidelines was the inspiration behind the Spanish programme of objectives and priorities for the Presidency of the Council of the Union .
All of this taking good account of the renewed impetus provided by the Laeken European Council of 14 and 16 December 2001 , which put the emphasis on the necessary balance between the protection of refugees in accordance with the principles of the Geneva Convention of 1951 , the legitimate aspiration for a better life and the Union and its Member States ' capacity for receiving refugees .
Furthermore , we have tried to prioritise those instruments which the Laeken Conclusions considered most urgent to adopt , such as the Global Action plan to combat illegal immigration .
In accordance with these ideas , I am going to try to organise my comments on the progress over these months in the field of asylum and immigration by dealing with what I believe must be the two main sources of inspiration for this policy : progress towards a European asylum system and the appropriate regulation of migratory flows , in accordance with the following premises : respect for legality , the fair treatment of third-country nationals , cooperation with States of origin and the fight against illegal immigration and human trafficking .
On the establishment of a common European asylum system , we have taken very important steps at these last two formal Councils of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers .
I would like to highlight the directive establishing the minimum rules for the acceptance of asylum seekers in the Member States .
This proposal intends to guarantee that asylum seekers arriving in our States enjoy a minimum level of rights essential to a dignified life , including housing , free movement , family regrouping , schooling and education for children , access to employment and professional training .
The Council , following its meeting of 25 April , has achieved a general political orientation on the text of the directive and now we must study the proposals contained in Parliament 's opinion and establish the position of the fifteen States with regard to the contents of the opinion .
In this same field of asylum , I would like to concentrate on another legislative instrument , which we approved on 28 February and which seems to me to be extremely important : the Council Regulation establishing certain rules for the implementation of Regulation No 2725 / 2000 on the creation of the " Eurodac " system .
Having created the Eurodac system in December 2000 , implementation rules became necessary to establish the procedures for identifying asylum seekers by means of an electronic comparison of their fingerprints .
This will facilitate the application of the Dublin Convention which , as you well know , determines the Member State responsible for the examination of asylum applications .
In the second section of my speech on the progress made so far during the six months of our Presidency , I am going to focus on the key elements of our immigration policy , which is governed by the central idea of the appropriate management of migratory flows , which includes both the idea of legally regulating those flows in accordance with the fair treatment of third-country nationals , and combating clandestine immigration , in particular human trafficking , governed by the idea of cooperation with countries of origin .
In this respect , we have tried to make progress with the gradual unification of our visa systems .
To this end , at the General Affairs Council on 18 February , both regulations were approved , establishing a uniform model for visas and a uniform model for the form for issuing a visa granted by Member States to holders of a travel document not recognised by the Member State issuing that form .
At the last Justice and Home Affairs Council of 24 April , we supplemented these rules with the Council Decision approving a uniform model for visa applications .
Together with this unification , we have also achieved a general approach for the Regulation establishing a uniform model residence permit for third-country nationals .
Amongst other advantages , this regulation will help in the recognition of documents by police border control authorities , which will benefit their holders and will help with better detection of false documents .
Secondly , in order to financially support certain actions proposed by the Member States aimed at promoting cooperation and coordination between national administrations and the transparent application of Community legislation , in the fields of immigration , asylum and borders , at the last Council in April all the Member States reached a general agreement for the approval of the ARGO Programme , which will be in force for five years and will receive EUR 25 million .
Thirdly , there is no doubt that the appropriate management of flows requires the adoption of effective measures to combat clandestine immigration , in particular human trafficking .
In this respect , the Conclusions of the Laeken European Council urged the approval of a Global Plan , which we were able to discuss at the informal meeting of Ministers in Santiago de Compostela and which we formally adopted at our meeting of Ministers on 28 February .
Very much inspired by the Commission Communication of November 2001 , the Plan is designed to be a programming guide , which will help with the planning of actions which we can start to implement in order to effectively combat the phenomenon of illegal immigration .
Allow me to briefly explain the main actions and measures included in this Plan .

Firstly , visa policy ; secondly , the promotion of the exchange and analysis of information relating to the problem of illegal immigration ; thirdly , the plan deals with a series of measures prior to the crossing of borders ; fourthly , the plan focuses on improving the quality and efficiency of border controls ; fifthly , another aspect dealt with by the plan are the policies of readmission and repatriation ; sixthly , the operative role of Europol in the fight against human trafficking will be increased ; and finally the Plan includes many repressive measures to combat these crimes .




It is now a question of making progress with the necessary protection and assistance for victims , the fight against illegal contracting by employers , the confiscation of the proceeds from this trafficking and of the means of transport used , and to make it obligatory for transporters to meet the costs of the repatriation of foreigners who do not meet the requirements for legal entry .
This plan has borne fruit , ladies and gentlemen .
Thus , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council following its approval , we adopted certain measures in compliance with it .
Likewise , the Council Conclusions on illegal immigration and human trafficking by sea .
These Conclusions seek an integral response by the European Union to the massive arrival of immigrants by sea , on the basis of the notion that migratory issues must have a prominent place in the EU 's external relations .
In my opinion , this is a fundamental issue which we must be very conscious of and , above all , we must act accordingly and as quickly as possible .
I repeat , migratory issues must have a prominent place in the EU 's external relations .
Turning more directly to Justice and Home Affairs issues , we are going to prioritise measures such as the carrying out of a study to improve the control of sea borders , prevention , and the adoption of operative measures , in particular the exchange of information , which is already yielding very good results , and we are going to strongly urge States of origin and transit States to combat human trafficking and readmit illegal immigrants who leave their territory , amongst other things .
Secondly , as our Heads of State and Government requested in Laeken , we have gone ahead with the determination of a list of third countries with which we must negotiate new readmission agreements , setting the general criteria for that determination .
During April we have also carried out a risk assessment operation in the main airports of the European Union , known as the RÍO operation , whose results , which I presented during the Council held on 25 April , will allow us to improve the cooperation between the border control authorities of the Member States and Europol , and also to ascertain the methods , routes and other procedures employed for the clandestine introduction of immigrants into European Union territory .
Also with a view to this type of cooperation , during this six-month period , the Strategic Committee on Immigration , Borders and Asylum has met for the first time , with the participation of the Heads of the External Border Control Services .
This meeting , which is to take place periodically every six months , has established a strategy for improving the operative cooperation of Member States in relation to the control of external borders , in aspects such as risk assessment systems , the situation of our sea borders , and specific training for our agents running border controls .
Furthermore , we have improved the mechanisms to resolve the situation of foreigners who do not fulfil , or who have ceased to fulfil , the conditions for entry or residence , by means of Conclusions on the obtaining of travel documents for the implementation of repatriations .
From another point of view , and as I suggested at the beginning of this speech , in order to manage migratory flows properly , it is essential to promote cooperation between the countries of origin , transit and destination .
In recent months , we have intensified the Union 's external relations in this area .
I would very briefly like to mention the contacts we have held .
As a follow-up to the meeting of the Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers on 28 February , we held a meeting with the candidate countries during which we dealt , amongst other things , with the control of external borders .
At this meeting , we communicated a catalogue of recommendations and best practices in relation to the control of external borders and admission and expulsion procedures within the Schengen area , which we had approved that same day .
Similarly , and for the first time within the Union , the fifteen Member States held a meeting with the Russian Justice and Home Affairs Ministers , during which we dealt , amongst other things , with the issue of migration , the management of borders and the readmission policy , and we also communicated to the Russian representatives the catalogue of recommendations I mentioned earlier .
Thirdly , at the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference in Valencia of 22 and 23 April , we dealt with cooperation in the field of the social integration of immigrants , migration and the movement of people , and to this end we approved a regional programme within the Valencia Action Plan .
Furthermore , this Plan indicates the will of the parties to hold a Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference focussing on the issue of migration and the social integration of immigrants during the second half of 2003 .
Finally , I would like to mention in particular the Conference on Migration , held within the framework of the ASEM process , in Lanzarote , on 4 and 5 April .
This initiative , which stemmed from the Summit of ASEM Heads of State in Peking in October 2000 , has served to lay the foundations for dialogue and cooperation between both parts of the world on the general situation of immigration , the management of migratory flows and the fight against illegal immigration .
As a result of this meeting , a Declaration was approved which stresses the need for cooperation between Europe and Asia in order to organise migratory flows in an integrated fashion and which specifies , amongst other aspects , the establishment of a network of national points of contact for continuing the dialogue and developing future actions .
So far my speech has focussed on the concrete results achieved over recent months .
I would also like to stress the significant impetus which has been given by the various working groups to the different legislative instruments , in the field of both asylum and of immigration .
I can confirm that there has been considerable progress on the work on the proposed Council Regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for an asylum application , known as Dublin II , or the directive establishing minimum rules on the status of the refugee .
In the same way and in accordance with the modified proposals on the minimum rules for the procedure for granting and withdrawing refugee status and on family regrouping , which the Commission presented on 30 April , we will promote the continuation of the work to move these issues forward .
As you will be aware , the Commission has recently presented the Green Paper on a Community policy of returning illegal residents and the communication on " Guidelines for the integrated management of external borders " , and we will try to ensure that it is studied by the competent bodies of the Council .
Turning to the field of legal immigration , significant progress has been made on the discussion of a proposed directive regulating the status of non-EU long-term residents and the directive relating to the conditions for entry and residence for the purposes of employed and self-employed work .
Under our Presidency a study has begun of a proposed directive on the issuing of short-term residency permits to victims of human trafficking who cooperate with the competent authorities .
Finally , within this section on progress made , I would like to refer to the promotion of European Union action plans with third countries .
In particular , in relation to the dialogue with Morocco , there has been progress in the work of the ' Social Affairs and migrations ' group , which held its second meeting on 12 March of this year in Rabat .
I would also like to stress that the High-Level Group on Immigration and Asylum has agreed to send a mission of experts to Morocco to assess a border control programme .
I would like to end my speech by very briefly explaining our work perspectives until 30 June 2002 .
At the last sitting of the Council of Ministers on 13 and 14 June , the Spanish Presidency will deal with the issue of creating a Visa Database , with regard to which we have consulted the guidelines of the common system for the exchange of visa information .
In June we intend to present for your approval draft Council Conclusions which will indicate to the Commission which aspects must be considered and examined in the viability study .
This system will represent a further step in the implementation of the Global Plan against illegal immigration and human trafficking and will prevent the issuing of a visa by a consulate of one country of the Union when it has already been refused by another consulate of another Member State .
At the end of this month we expect the results to be presented of a viability study on European border policy which , under the auspices of Italy , is being developed by a working group which also includes representatives from Germany , Belgium , France and Spain .
We also intend to submit a proposal for a decision to the Council on the signing of the readmission agreement negotiated with Hong Kong and the draft negotiation mandate for the Commission in relation to an agreement of this type with the Ukraine .
Furthermore , if during these months sufficient progress is made on the proposed Regulation known as Dublin II , we will submit it for discussion at the final Council of our Presidency .
I would like to end by once again thanking the Commission and Commissioner Vitorino for the fundamental role they have played in these efforts , which would not have been possible without their help .
I would also like to thank Parliament for its dedication and cooperation , which have given great impetus to the European Union 's policy on immigration and asylum during the almost five months of the Spanish Presidency of the Council of the Union .
I believe that the assessment of results and perspectives is positive and I can confirm that we are fulfilling many of those objectives which were contained in our working programme and which I was able to present to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on 4 February .
Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen , and , in particular , thank you very much , Mr President .
Mr President , there are all too many things I have to apologise for , and one of them is that I am not Commissioner Vitorino .
I am standing in for him this afternoon - insofar as that is possible - because he is attending an important meeting in Canada .
I am pleased to have the opportunity to take part in this debate , firstly because we know , as politicians , how important and sensitive all these issues are and how they require honest , transparent and constructive debate and discussion .
Secondly , because there is a close connection , as the Vice-President has just made clear , between external relations policy and immigration - both legal immigration and illegal trafficking in human beings - and related issues .
Those were issues that we managed with strong leadership from the Spanish presidency to discuss at the recent meeting of the Mediterranean partners in Valencia , and I shall come back to them later .
I was able to discuss these issues as well myself on a recent visit to the People 's Republic of China .
The Commission very much welcomed the conclusions adopted at the Laeken European Council and especially the confirmation of its commitment to the policy guidelines and objectives defined in 1999 in the second semester at Tampere .
The Commission supports the new impetus to reduce the backlog in the fields of immigration and asylum legislation defined in the scoreboard which was established to review progress on the creation of an area of " freedom , security and justice " .
We are delighted that the Spanish presidency has given a new dynamism to this process .
It is worthwhile recalling that the main proposals necessary for the implementation of Article 63 of the Treaty and the Tampere conclusions are already on the table .
Therefore it is mainly up to the Council to speed up its work .
The political agreement at the last Justice and Home Affairs Council on the proposal on laying down minimum standards for the reception of applicants for asylum in the Member States signified the start of much-needed movement in this direction .
The Commission is once again grateful for the efforts of the Spanish presidency .
Negotiations are under way regarding two other legislative proposals on asylum , namely a Council Regulation on criteria and a mechanism for establishing responsibility for examining asylum applications to replace the Dublin Convention , as well as a Council directive on the qualification and status of persons as refugees or as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection .
The Commission will also pursue the implementation of the Eurodac system as quickly as possible in the hope that Member States will soon make the necessary provisions to take part .
As for the other subjects under discussion , the Commission will continue to contribute to the follow-up and the outcome of all these debates .
In that sense , we warmly welcomed the rapid adoption of the Action Plan on the fight against illegal migration and human trafficking , which was based on our communication .
As promised , the Commission will swiftly take the necessary steps to ensure its implementation .
The first initiatives have already been taken , as the Commission has adopted the Green Paper on a Community return policy on illegal residents .
In view of the highly complex nature and sheer scale of this phenomenon , the primary aim of the Green Paper is to launch a debate and to sound out all the interested parties .
The Commission has also recently launched a communication on the integrated management of the European Union 's external borders .
This issue will be considered on a Community-wide basis rather than as a set of national systems and will , I very much hope , map out the route to the longer-term objective of setting up a European corps of border guards or police .
Furthermore , following the Laeken invitation , the Commission tabled a new amended proposal on family reunification on 2 May in order to make it easier to find a consensus on this extremely sensitive issue .
As also requested by the Laeken Summit , the Commission will also shortly bring forward an amended proposal for a Council directive on minimum standards on procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status .
Furthermore , the Commission supported the willingness expressed in Laeken to better integrate migration policy with the external policy of the Union .
It would therefore welcome any initiative aimed at giving a new perspective to the High Level Working group on Asylum and Immigration that was created by the Council in 1999 .
Its mandate merits an update so that it is brought into line with the current situation .
The Commission intends to present a proposal of programme cooperation with third countries before the end of the year .
It will be based on the experience gleaned from the implementation of the new budgetary instrument created by the European Parliament .
I just want to say how much importance both António Vitorino and I attach to this particular issue : the relationship between the subjects we are debating this afternoon and external policy .
There is plainly an intimate connection between our success , for example , in promoting sustainable development and demographic pressures .
There is clearly an important role for us to play in helping other countries to deal with illegal trafficking in human beings , which is just as much a threat and , in some cases , a greater threat to them than it is to those richer countries which are the targets for those who traffic in human beings .
Over Easter I was in China and was able to take further the discussions that we had begun , thanks to the initiative taken by Zhu Rongji on how we can assist to develop programmes in China , which will make it less likely that people will put themselves into the hands of those who seek to move other human beings around the world , sometimes with fatal consequences , as we saw at Dover a couple of years ago .
We have been very impressed by the positive way in which the Chinese authorities , led , I repeat by Mr Zhu Rongji , have responded to our own ideas , and I hope that we will have in place shortly some viable programmes in areas such as information and training , which will help to deal with a very serious problem for China and for us as well .
This is , of course , a model for what we want to do in other places .
In the field of re-admission , the Commission is about to finalise an agreement with Sri Lanka .
This is the second agreement at Community level of this kind , the first one , I am delighted to say , having being concluded with Hong Kong .
The Commission will continue its efforts to achieve the other agreements for which it has the mandate to negotiate and will table the necessary proposals to extend this approach in as coherent a manner as possible .
Finally , in line with its communications concerning the introduction of open methods of coordination both for immigration and asylum , the Commission will shortly propose the implementation of a European system of information exchange on migration , asylum and countries of origin , as called for by the European Council .
The new action plan on statistics requested by the Council in May of last year , the development of the activities of a virtual European Observatory on migration and the take-over of the Council committee on exchange of information activities by the Commission will all be developed .
With regard to the extremely important question of the integration of migrants , the Commission wants to complement the instruments which have been developed in the fight against discrimination and racism with some new specific initiatives in this field .
This is an exceptionally important area for us and we should not have needed recent electoral manifestations in order to convince us of the importance of this subject .
Once again , I want to thank Parliament for allowing me to fill in for my colleague .
I say , as a fellow Commissioner , that all of us in the Commission are very well aware of the enormous importance of this subject politically , and I am certainly aware of its enormous importance in the discharge of my principal responsibilities in the area of external relations .
Mr President , there is no question that the most developed countries have an inescapable obligation to show solidarity in relation to immigration .
It is also an essential instrument in combating poverty and the social imbalances in the world and , furthermore - and this must be stated clearly - it is necessary to the maintenance of growth and prosperity in our countries .
However , it is the case that migratory flows towards the European Union have increased dramatically in recent times and our capacity for reception is not unlimited .
So much so that it is no exaggeration to say , as the Council has pointed out , that proper management of immigration is Europe 's greatest challenge today .
We must ensure that the immigrants we can receive are protected by and subject to the law , that they assume the rights and obligations that implies and that they fully integrate into the society receiving them and share the values on which that society is based with the other citizens .
It is proven that illegality leads to marginalisation .
We must therefore prioritise the fight against the illegal trafficking in human beings , that is , against organised crime and mafias , in close cooperation with the third countries of origin and transit , and we must demand greater commitments from some of them .
I would ask the Commission to produce and present a report to this House on this issue , because the desire to reach readmission agreements is essential in this field .
I agree with Commissioner Vitorino that there is a link between foreign policy and immigration policy .
Both the Spanish Presidency and the Commission are promoting greater cooperation in police and diplomatic areas , including , of course , the visa policy , which I believe - and Commissioner Patten will surely agree with me - can perfectly well fall within the framework of the work to create a common European diplomatic corps .
We must also consider economic aid for specific cases such as the Canary Islands , for example , where there is a shortage of reception centres to deal properly with the flood of refugees and immigrants who find themselves in an illegal situation .
Finally , Mr President , I believe it is time to leave behind demagoguery and irresponsible statements .
My group believes - and I propose - that the time has come for a great European pact on immigration which excludes this issue from party political confrontation .
Mr President , in relation to the words of Mr Galeote , I would like to say that this morning I ate my breakfast with certain comments by the President of the European Council , in which he says that the European Socialists are guilty of promoting , through their policies , the emergence in Europe of extremist and radical movements and that , in contrast , the President of the Spanish Government and the Council expresses his desire to toughen the immigration policy .

For a moment I thought this morning that Mr Rajoy would come here to communicate the good news of a new immigration policy which - according to Mr Aznar - was going to counterbalance these errors of European Socialism which have led to the emergence of the extreme right .
I am delighted to see that this is not the case , that you have settled for an explanation of the conclusions of the Tampere European Council , the main approach of the European Council 's proposals over recent months .
I am delighted about this and I am therefore only going to speak about this field .
I believe that we also have differing points of view on this , Minister .
As Mr Patten has said , we have on the table a legislative working programme - but not only that - presented by the Commission following the Tampere conclusions .
Two and a half years after that Council there has been little progress .
You have mentioned some progress and I will return to that .
This has an impact on both the content and on interinstitutional relations .
I am referring to cooperation with Parliament .
I must say , Minister , that we are perplexed by situations such as the one created by the approval in the Council of the proposal on admission conditions for asylum seekers .
We are perplexed because you tell us that you are going to look at what Parliament 's proposals are .
I must tell you that they are proposals on a first draft which bears no relation to the one adopted and it will be difficult for us to go on working like this .
We have the same problem with the common rules on entry for residence , the body of rights for third-country citizens .
For us , all of this takes the form of concrete proposed directives the results of which we have not seen during these years following Tampere .
You tell me that there have been results .
I would like to ask you what they are .
The fight against illegal immigration is a part of this immigration policy which is yet to become a common European policy , but I believe that it would be much more effective if it were part of a genuine common structure of immigration policies .
I am in favour of it , but I am also in favour of an immigration policy which is better suited to the needs of the labour market , because otherwise , Minister , this lack of suitability will lead to irregular contracts , or rather a lack of contracts , and I believe that this is the worst of the ' lamada ' effects .
Finally , and in line with the working plan proposed by the Commission and which the Council should adopt , I would like to ask the following four questions : What does the Council think of Mr Prodi 's proposal with regard to border police ?
What does the Council think about the Green Paper on repatriation ?
Can you give us a timetable for the implementation of the Tampere proposals ?
What does the Council think of their content given the way they have been presented by the Commission ?
Mr President , the timeliness of this debate is beyond dispute .
The recent rise of anti-immigrant sentiment in France and the Netherlands shows what happens when governments fail to respond to the challenge of immigration .
We know that , quite apart from the valuable contribution which immigrants bring to our societies in terms of increased cultural diversity , there are sound economic reasons for a policy of managed immigration , such as meeting labour shortages and funding our creaking pension systems .
Indeed , our prosperity will depend on immigration .
The question therefore is : what policy should we adopt to make immigration politically acceptable ?
What we must not do , as too many socialist governments have done , is to bury our heads in the sand and refuse to address the challenge .
It is in large part the failure of EU governments to police our borders , to tackle discrimination and xenophobia , and to integrate immigrants harmoniously into our societies that has led to this impasse .
No wonder public concern continues to grow .
The Liberal Democrat approach would be to open the front door a little , by providing legal avenues for immigration , in order better to close the back door to illegal immigration .
This approach has been successfully pioneered by the Canadian Government , and is reflected in the European Commission 's proposals for a common immigration policy .
It is one we would do well to consider .
A policy of managed legal immigration , co-ordinated among Member States , does not mean a free-for-all .
Incentives to immigrants to settle more evenly across their host countries would help .
A policy which balances rights and duties , so that those newly arriving understand that they can work in their host country and enjoy free movement in the Union and other benefits of EU citizenship , would be helpful too .
But they must also understand the need to make an effort to integrate and to live by the rules of the society they join .
It is nonsensical political correctness to dismiss any requirement that immigrants should learn the language of their host country .
Moreover , proper support for integration must be provided and we must combat discrimination and racism wherever it is found .
In this regard , I would pay tribute to the work of the European Union Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , and I commend to political parties the Charter of Political Parties for a non-racist society .
We also need to invest more in our justice systems and the enforcement of legal judgments - we can only expect immigrants to respect core values if we too ensure that these values are respected fully by existing society .
A policy of managed immigration requires tough action to control the Union 's external borders and I therefore congratulate the Commission for its initiative on a common border guard corps .
We also need to do more to help the poor and dispossessed , as the Commissioner said , in their countries of origin , so that they do not have to resort in desperation to criminal gangs of people-smugglers .
Most people do not want to up sticks and move elsewhere , so helping to relieve the pressure of illegal immigration is yet another argument , if one were needed , for promoting global free trade and making progress towards the UN target of 0.7 % of GDP for development aid .
As far as asylum policy is concerned , here again the Liberal Democrat Group is broadly supportive of the Commission 's proposals and often sceptical of actions proposed in Council .
In conclusion , we believe that there is both a moral and an economic case for managed immigration and a humanitarian approach to asylum .
We in the ELDR Group will support the Commission in its efforts to move the Union towards the common policies foreseen in the Amsterdam Treaty .
For in the words of that great Liberal J.K. Galbraith : " Migration is the oldest action against poverty .
What is the perversity in the human soul that causes people to resist so obvious a good ? " .
Mr President , I agree with much of what Mr Watson has just said , even if I do not share his belief in the power of free trade to help solve these ills .
I welcome some of the statements this afternoon and particularly the attendance of Commissioner Patten .
For too long , we have seen these issues purely as a question of law and order , rather than international and economic relations .
Migration is a development issue , as the Swedish government has demonstrated by the way in which it organises its ministries .
My group is fine with the idea of a common asylum and a common immigration policy if it is going to be of a higher standard than that which we currently have .
I have yet to be convinced that this is going to be the case .
We have heard a lot this afternoon about the need to control borders , but maybe not quite so much about why people are so desperate to cross them .
For some , it is a freely made choice - that is as it should be , and part of what it is we are trying to create with the idea of free movement within the European Union .
Others , of course , come through force of circumstance because they see no future and no economic possibilities for themselves .
We have to remember that the remittances from such people often outweigh the aid which our governments give .
I think that the European Union also has a duty to examine its own policies , to see where these act as factors which actually encourage people to feel forced to migrate .
It is a good time to examine this in the run-up to the Johannesburg summit on sustainable development .
We need to look at sustainable development and the way in which we give economic possibilities to all .
I was recently amazed to meet somebody from a Romanian embassy , who told me that the environmental clear-up for her country was important , but would have to be done after they had seen to the security of their borders because those were the priorities they were faced with .
The other issue which we really need to look at is how we create an immigration policy - allowing people of all skill levels to enter , which is what business tells us we need - as well as looking at legal routes to asylum .
Mr President , in many of our countries , we are now seeing a shift to the right and growing xenophobia .
I previously understood that , in Mr Watson 's view , this was due to an unwillingness to tackle this evil at root .
I believe , however , that we need to be alert to another aspect of the matter , namely to the fact that the xenophobic parties - for example , in my own country - are strongest where there are fewest foreigners and weakest in those areas where there are most foreigners .
I believe we must also see xenophobia as a symptom of other things , namely the fact that fear in itself is often more powerful than the object of fear and the fact that the background to a great deal of all this is a powerlessness that stems from social exclusion , which is also a consequence of increased competition .
Before we began the debate in this House , I had just visited the UNHCR 's web site to see what the situation was , and , unfortunately , it had not of course changed for the better .
There are still more than 21 million refugees who , as such , come under the responsibility of the UNHCR , and there is a corresponding number of internally displaced people who are refugees within their own countries . That of course says something about the enormous need there is for action to be taken .
We also need to devise a common policy and to take measures jointly .
It would be useful however if , before we begin , we were to agree upon what heading we were to act under .
Is the aim to reduce the number of refugees for whom the UNHCR , with its scarce resources , is responsible , or is it to reduce the number of refugees who reach , or pass through , the gates of the EU ?
I should like to thank the Spanish Presidency for its report , because things are of course happening along the way .
Matters are proceeding slowly and , in my view , too slowly where a number of the issues are concerned .
It is not completely clear , however , under what heading the work is being done .
Unfortunately , I have to say that the heading under which the Danish Presidency will be acting when it takes over shortly is crystal clear .
The Danish Minister for Europe states very clearly that the purpose of a common policy for the EU is to stem the tide .
There is , of course , a logic here , and the desire for tighter control , increased border surveillance , more of Eurodac and more of Dublin makes sense in this context .
None of these measures make sense , however , if all that is relevant is the second project , aimed at reducing the total overall number of refugees .
No one can be in favour of the Mafia 's earning money from human trafficking , and no one can be in favour of an activity that results in the death of innocent Chinese in Dover or anywhere else , for that was not of course a unique event .
Bodies are washed up on the coasts of Europe every day as a result of completely unscrupulous Mafia methods .
When , however , we ourselves are involved in criminalising anyone who helps refugees and when we also criminalise those acting from good , heartfelt Christian or other religious motives or for humanitarian reasons , then we are directly implicated in supporting the Mafia in this project of theirs .
When we do that , we are cramming poor people 's money directly into the pockets of the Mafia .
When our response to the 21 million refugees is higher walls around ourselves , then we are stuffing poor people 's money into the pockets of those who should have enough money as it is .
It is important to combine our efforts , but we cannot shut out the surrounding world , no matter how high the walls we build . We are therefore concerned here with the sharing of responsibility , more aid for crisis prevention , improved aid to developing countries - and , on that issue , I should be very interested to know if the Danish Liberals support the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party - more support for the UNHCR 's work and greater courage on the part of European politicians in resisting populism and xenophobia .
Mr President , there is an urgent need for an effective European initiative to distinguish between the right to asylum of those fleeing situations of physical oppression and immigration with a view to seeking better economic conditions , for a European project that will prevent ad hoc solutions being proposed from country to country .
The case of the 13 Palestinians released from the Church of the Nativity and the Italian Government 's proposal to treat the solution of transferring them to Europe as a European matter is evidence , at last , of the intention to give the Union a role in issues which have hitherto been left to the Member States to resolve .
It is impossible to deny that a biblical exodus towards the Union countries is taking place .
What might have seemed scenes from dramatic films until a few years ago are now images we see daily in the media : ramshackle old lighters , disused barges , sailing boats from the time of Sandokan the pirate and overflowing dinghies bring hundreds upon hundreds of despairing people to our shores who have often spent copious amounts of money to get that far and are subjected to days and days of deprivation and hardship .
Many of them , men , women and children , die during the journey or are thrown into the sea by their captains , as happened along the coasts of Sicily and Puglia .
And we are still wondering whether there is a need for legislation preventing illegal immigration .
Without rules there is no freedom , and without freedom there is no progress and no dignity of life .
Europe is behind schedule in its implementation of the third pillar and it has thus far proved incapable of adopting a single political and legislative position , nor can it hide behind the Convention in the hope that it will be able to find quick solutions .
Problems there are , and we are quite aware of and support the efforts being made by the Spanish Presidency .
A European corps of border police must be created as soon as possible , working cooperatively on land and at sea ; it is right for there to be a database for entry visas but it is also right that every country should have a responsibility to identify all the people who do not cross its borders legally or who are not in possession of valid identity documents , using digital fingerprinting , amongst other techniques .
We must distinguish between the regular immigrants who have been living in our countries for years and those who enter them illegally , often without a real excuse , who are serving , sometimes even unwittingly , the purposes of certain criminal groups .
Moreover , we must address the situation resolutely and take political action against those countries which are guilty of allowing immigration to continue as well as those countries in which there is a type of political system which places the lives and physical health of their citizens in danger .
The European Union must review its trade agreements with countries which fail to respect human dignity .
We must all take up arms daily in a relentless political battle against international criminal groups - which raise funds by trafficking human beings .
( Applause from the public galleries )
I would remind our visitors in the public gallery that it is not the custom in the House to respond in that manner to speeches .
Mr President , what is progress , and what are the perspectives in the Council 's report that we are talking about ?
If that question were to be encountered with no preparation other than sincere humanitarian sentiment , it might be naively imagined that political efforts should be aimed at deterring and preventing the persecution and political oppression that give rise to the asylum problem , as well as at distributing both wealth and political influence or , in short , democratising the prosperity of the world which is at present concentrated in a few dominant centres , including the EU , that function as oases in a world of social , economic and political misery .
That , however , is not the Council 's perspective .
On the contrary , because development of the EU 's political and economic power - which necessarily takes place at the expense of the surrounding world - always is , always has been and always will be , politically speaking , the overarching guiding principle of the European Union 's policy .
Nor do the perspective and the progress talked of by the Council consist of making every possible effort on behalf of asylum seekers and immigrants .
It is not the interests of foreign immigrants , including those of our fellow human beings in distress , that we primarily have in mind .
No , the concepts of making progress and adopting perspectives have far more limited meanings .
The idea is that immigration policy should be of the greatest possible benefit to ourselves .
It is a question of restricting the right of asylum as far as possible , as is stated in the phrase ' stem the tide of refugees ' .
It is about using our repressive systems to take measures against something called illegal immigration .
This takes place in conjunction with a particularly well-developed legal imagination and by means of surveillance , fingerprinting , the Eurodac regulation , the free exchange of personal information and other measures bordering on the methods used by police states .
In short , we are concerned here with developing and consolidating Fortress Europe .
Ironically , all these measures are described as progress .
With cruel humour , we even bid these foreigners welcome in what we describe as an area of freedom , security and justice .
As a Danish citizen , I am ashamed to have to acknowledge that my country is a pioneer of this whole short-sighted , callous and xenophobic immigration policy .
Not only has Danish policy , which in actual fact prevents asylum seekers from being able to exercise their right of asylum , infected the other Member States .
Right now , the Danish parliament is also debating a draft law which is striking in the way it clamps down on , for example , asylum procedure so that this can best be characterised as ' administrative harassment ' .
What is more , this is being done in cooperation with the xenophobic right-wing Danish People 's Party .
I have to admit that the prospects for further so-called progress under the Danish Presidency are frightening .
Madam President , today we are reiterating that illegal immigration must become a fundamental factor in the European Union 's external relations , and we have heard many speeches in this Chamber vehemently condemning the danger represented by this phenomenon .
We can therefore say that Pim Fortuyn 's sacrifice may not have been in vain .
I should like to say that if , as he says , ' Holland is full ' , so is Italy , so is Padania , so is Europe .
With regard to the proposals put forward , well then , the Spanish Presidency is talking about the creation of a European corps of border police , which no one could oppose , but it must be a corps equipped with adequate resources , the necessary rules and instruments to make its action effective .
Digital fingerprinting is only the minimum requirement : of course , we need the necessary connections and the necessary cooperation to be in place .
On the subject of cooperation , I would like to further stress the responsibilities of a State such as Turkey : it is unthinkable that the famous carrette del mare ( unseaworthy old tubs ) which have already been mentioned should continue to set off from the harbours of that country , bearing hundreds if not thousands of illegal migrants carrying weapons and drugs to the southern coasts of Italy , for example , setting them down in the south so that they can spread up the country to Padania .
Now , I feel that we should make very specific demands on that country , which is hoping to enter the European Union ; we must demand very specific undertakings to genuinely block the activities of the mafioso groups involved in the international trafficking of migrants .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , migration is putting the European Union under increasing pressure .
Networks of smugglers are making billions out of illegal immigrants and , at elections , the public shows its displeasure at EU immigration policy being far from ideally organised .
We need Europe-wide strategies on immigration and asylum , and so I am pleased by the Spanish offensive , which I emphatically support .
Our expectation must be that speedy and reliable asylum procedures be rapidly implemented , in accordance with our decisions , that we decide on strategies for the deportation illegal immigrants and of those whose applications for asylum have been rejected , and that we make rules for the lawful economic migration of labour , which must be what the Member States require , and within the limits of their capacities and needs .
I welcome the way in which decisive steps are being taken to combat illegal immigration , whether by the introduction of the ' Eurodac ' system or by joint patrols of the external borders by a Eurocorps , doing the best job possible with the aid of satellites and radar .
In addition , though , we do of course need help on the spot , in other words , measures to create stability and provide help in the countries of origin .
What we must firmly reject , however , is what assails our ears from Europe 's left .
At national level , arguments that we neither want nor need are served up in beer halls , whilst , at the European level , the left-wing clientele is kept happy with demands that the public neither understands nor supports , such as , recently , for all applicants for asylum to have access to the labour market from day one on and to have freedom of movement right across the European Union , even though only 10 % of them can acquire refugee status .
Thank God the Council and the Commission are supporting us , the Group of the European People 's Party , in taking this sensible line on immigration and asylum policy .
You on the Left - your policy is not accepted .
Not only is it not accepted ; if it is proceeded with , it will incite more Le Pens .
That is something we do not want !
That is something we do not need !
So I rejoice at the Spanish Presidency 's commitment and support Commissioner Vitorino 's initiatives .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , almost three years on from the Tampere Council , which established a strategy for creating a European area of freedom , security and justice and laid the foundations for a work programme and a common policy in the field of immigration and asylum , we can now take stock of the progress made or not made and of the current state of affairs .
I am afraid to say that the result is neither positive nor encouraging .
Implementing the Tampere conclusions , the Commission has indicated through a legislative programme the need to develop a proactive policy which recognises that the pressure from migration is going to continue and that ordered migration can bring benefits for Europe , for the migrants themselves and for their countries of origin .
The approach proposed by the Commission involves a comprehensive policy which addresses all the issues - economic , social , political and humanitarian - and provides for close cooperation between government actions and initiatives of the social partners , the associations and local and regional authorities .
As we know and as you , President-in-Office , have pointed out , all this means working on five policies simultaneously : defining legal immigration channels , combating illegal immigration , equal treatment in line with the principles of non-discrimination against non-Community citizens and with integration policies , partnership with the countries of origin , and the establishment of a European asylum system .
Despite this positive line taken by the Commission and the incorporation of Parliament 's contributions , our progress is neither positive nor encouraging .
I feel that the Council is largely responsible for all this for , on the one hand , it is laying down a path to follow - as it did , indeed , at Tampere - and , on the other , it has constantly failed to fulfil its undertakings or to shoulder its ensuing responsibilities .
The Council and many governments are overlooking the fact that one of the causes of immigration is precisely our own labour shortage .
We have to admit that we have failed to identify the needs of our labour market or to see the need to combat illegal working , to see the link between these concerns and an effective immigration policy .
We focus purely on security issues which , although important , need to be addressed in a balanced way with a policy based on respect for the law and the rights of individuals .
As regards security and immigration , however , some of the governments in Europe , such as the Italian Government , tend to practise a combination of alarmism and utopianism .
Immigration is seen solely as a threat against which the country must defend itself , people 's fears are fed and it is promised that the problem will miraculously disappear ; populist slogans imply that the State and the police are justified in anything they do to secure order .
The opposite is true , however .
A responsible security policy must be based on two , interconnected pillars : firstly , holding the doors open to the flows of legal immigration , with precise rules and limits , and I do mean holding the doors open , not flinging them wide .
The other pillar is an effective fight against illegal immigration .
Failure to do the former will mean having to step up the latter , however , for the most desperate people , those determined - or forced - to emigrate , throw themselves into the arms of the criminal traffickers offering to take them to Europe in their floating death traps .
Although it is true that the citizens ' concerns cannot , indeed must not be ignored , it is also true that these concerns cannot be addressed , much less resolved , through alarmism or blind , repressive policies .
Madam President , initially , immigration in our countries was mainly labour immigration .
It represented a mutually beneficial relationship between immigrant and host country .
Then it became aid immigration , characterised by a period of compromise and uncertainty .
Finally , in the past few years , it has really become human trafficking : clandestine workers , prostitutes and slaves , as we see in their hundreds in the streets of all our capital cities .
This situation , where we are seeing both immigrants and host countries fall victim to uncontrolled immigration , is of course unacceptable .
It is the result of thirty years of naïve optimism on the part of the European left , whose good intentions are equalled only by the disastrous results .
It is certainly a good thing that we are discussing the matter here , but allow me , in conclusion , to say that we must handle this with the greatest care .
We cannot decide for people who will bear their family name or who will be their next-door neighbour .
These things are of paramount importance and , if you go too far and take the risk of killing off the nations , you will also , and perhaps you will pay more attention to this , be taking the risk of killing off Europe .
Madam President , I would like to end this round of speeches by making two brief comments .
The first is that it is perplexing that at its recent meeting in Seville the European Socialist Group should have accused the Spanish Presidency and the People 's Party of having a frivolous attitude to immigration .
What is frivolous is for the Socialist Group to say one thing here in Parliament and then do something else in the Council by means of its governments ; it is also frivolous to approve reports in the European Parliament which promote illegal immigration and offer asylum seekers rights which not even Community citizens have , such as the recognition of the right and obligation for them to be guaranteed nurseries for their children .
The incoherences of the Socialist Group and its complete lack of ideas and sensible proposals is therefore alarming .
This is what leads to extremist tendencies in Europe - although they will not want to hear this today - such as that of Mr Le Pen .
Secondly , the association agreements with third countries are there for a reason , but some of these countries only see them as a source of funding and do not apply those parts which relate to cooperation and dialogue in such important areas as their taking responsibility for regulating migratory flows from their territories .
And Morocco is a clear example , as demonstrated by what is happening on its borders with Spain .
Let there be no mistake : if the countries from which immigration originates do not put their house in order , the problem will continue .
I believe we shall have to start thinking about making serious demands within the framework of the commitments made within agreements .
Our external borders are not closed to those who wish to cooperate in our development in a legal and regulated fashion or those who want to live together on the basis of respect , which must be mutual , for the customs , cultures , security and liberty of those of us who live in the geographical and political area of the European Union .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , speakers , Commissioner , I would like to speak briefly , starting with an initial comment and then moving on to my responses to some of your speeches .
Although I should not make comments of a personal nature , the first comment I am going to make is personal , but I am making it because I believe that most of my colleagues in the Council agree with it .
There is absolutely no doubt that immigration has been and still is the most important phenomenon to affect the European Union and will remain so over the coming years .
It is a phenomenon which will cause much greater changes than the very creation of the EU and the progress we have seen during its construction .
It is therefore an issue on which we must work with the necessary skill , sufficient balance and wisdom in terms of what is said and - and this is much more important - what is done .
I believe that we must work to bring the positions of all the Member States closer together in this field , since , amongst other things , we are now , at the very least , an area of free movement of persons , goods etc .
The ideas I believe we have been working on in recent times are the following : firstly , Europe can be - in fact it is , has been and can continue to be in the future - a reception country , because people can without doubt earn a good living here and because furthermore - let us not deceive ourselves - there is a great amount of activity by many people which contributes to the economic growth of our countries .
However - and this is the second idea I wanted to express here - immigration must take place legally and we must state clearly that it can not be infinite , because , amongst other things , infinite immigration creates infinite marginalisation .
In this respect , we must make an effort to act as responsibly as possible .
Thirdly , we must make an effort to integrate people who live outside the European Union with those who live inside .
That integration effort must be made by the public administrations of the countries of the Union and also their societies , but we must also demand that all those people who come from outside accept the basic rules of co-existence which we have in the countries of the European Union , which are our Constitutions , our principles and our values , because this affects all of us .
There is no doubt that immigrants have rights , but they also have obligations , just as the nationals of the countries of the European Union have .
The fourth idea is that we have to fight hard against illegal immigration .
We must do this by improving our police systems , visas and border controls .
I believe that the action plan against illegal immigration is a good route and that it should lead to many rules which in the future will make us more efficient , but I would also like to point out , as I said at the beginning of my intervention - and this is an aspect which I would like to emphasise in particular - that we must turn the immigration policy into a fundamental element of the European Union 's foreign policy , which - I believe - makes absolute sense if we accept , as I believe we are almost all accepting today , that immigration is the most important phenomenon of our times .
Those were my initial comments .
Now I would also like to clarify some of the issues raised here by various speakers : it has been said that little progress has been made , even that no progress has been made , under the Spanish Presidency .
I believe that in my first speech I summarised what the Spanish Presidency has done in relation to immigration during these six months .
Obviously everyone can interpret this as they see fit , and by being subjective one can become extremely anti-objective , but , in any event , in case it is of any use to those who hold this view , I would suggest that they make a comparison with what has happened in the past : we should remember that the area of security , justice and freedom , was born in practice in Amsterdam , that it entered into force in 1999 and that a very important dimension of the Union , the economic dimension , has existed for many years , but that almost fifty years passed before we had the euro and even now many Member States , as is their legitimate right , still do not have it .
Therefore , we should not be pessimistic when it comes to progress and neither should we look after number one , because that will do no good , nor bring in any votes , and furthermore I imagine that that is not the intention here .
Thirdly , I would like to make a comment with regard to some speakers ' insistence that we have put the emphasis on the fight against illegal immigration and not on other issues .
Well , it is true that we have put the emphasis on illegal immigration , because it is an important issue , because there was a strong Laeken mandate and a Commission communication and , above all , because everybody wanted it , but we have also put the emphasis on active policies , such as integration policies and the promotion of legality .
We have talked about the general approach in the Council with regard to the proposed directive on the reception of asylum seekers .
The action plan for combating illegal immigration contains very important preventive measures .
We have initiated a series of dialogues with countries of origin and transit ; including Asian countries .
We have made progress with directives relating to illegal immigration which contain integration measures and we have made progress with the Union 's own action plans ; I do not therefore think that statements of this type are justified .
With regard to certain concrete issues raised - and this will form the fourth section of my speech - I would say the following : in relation to the directive on conditions for asylum seekers , it is true that a general approach was achieved in the Council on the same day that Parliament issued its opinion , but we are now going to work as Fifteen and we are going to take account of the suggestions made by this Parliament , as we always have .
With regard to the European police - another of the issues raised - we will present a viability study on the 30 May in Rome .
This study is headed by the Italian Government with the cooperation of three or four other EU countries , including Spain .
As for the Green Paper , I believe it is adequate and that we should make progress on European repatriation policies .
I believe that we would be making a great error if , in order to combat illegal immigration , we did not make an effort to cooperate with the countries from which the immigrants originate .
It is true that this effort must be accompanied by cooperation policies .
That is why I said that it was essential that immigration policy be treated as a key policy within our foreign policy .
But how can we fail to be in favour of the Green Paper proposed by the Commission ?
Finally , with regard to certain comments that have been made on racism and xenophobia , I would like to say that at the last meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council in April , following a communication from various countries of the European Union and of the current Presidency , we have approved a declaration against racism and xenophobia .
The truth is that declarations against racism and xenophobia can be adopted - and they must be adopted because luckily we live in one of the most civilised regions , which are most respectful of the rights and freedoms of all the people of the world - but that that approval is perfectly compatible with compliance with the law and the fight against illegal actions which , in the field of immigration , are taking place every day .
I believe that this is the Council 's position on this issue .
These are the approaches we are working on and on which we are going to work until the end .
I am grateful for the Commission 's words and efforts , which without doubt govern all the actions of the Council and I am also grateful for the suggestions , comments , opinions and criticisms the Members have expressed here and I thank the President for her patience in allowing me to speak for longer than I should .
Thank you , Minister .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the joint debate on
the Council and Commission statements on the EU / Russia Summit of 28 May 2002 , and
report ( A5-0156 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hoff , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council on the EU and Kaliningrad [ COM ( 2001 ) 26 - C5-0099 / 2001 - 2001 / 2046 ( COS ) ] .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , aware of the role played by Russia on the international stage , the European Union has attached particular importance to that country within the framework of its external relations .
One of the many examples of this is the summit which is held with Russia every six months under the different Presidencies of the Union .
In June 1999 , the European Union adopted a common strategy with regard to Russia , the ultimate aim of which is to strengthen the strategic association between Russia and the European Union .
The fundamental intention of this is to promote the consolidation of democracy , the Rule of Law and the market economy in Russia and to increase the stability of Europe , promoting global security and confronting the common challenges facing the European continent by means of intensified cooperation .
The 9th EU / Russia Summit will take place in Moscow on 29 May ; during that summit we will assess the progress in our relations in various areas , on the basis of the results achieved since the last summit , which took place in Brussels last October .
We will take note of the progress made since then and establish new objectives for our relations .
There have been numerous meetings between the European Union and Russia since the last summit in Brussels .
The cooperation agreement , which is the contractual basis of our relations , has proved to be an enormously effective instrument in terms of a fluid dialogue in all its various aspects .
Furthermore , the orientations established by the Laeken European Council , have set concrete guidelines for the Union 's policy on Russia .
An important contribution to the preparation of the summit , the agenda for which is being finalised at the moment , has been made by the 5th EU / Russia Cooperation Council , held in Luxemburg on 16 April .
The formal preparation of the summit has begun with various working meetings held in Brussels by the Presidency , the Commission and the Secretary-General of the Council with the Russians on 29 April and 13 May .
There were also contacts in Brussels on 23 April between President Prodi , accompanied naturally by the Commissioner responsible for External Relations , Mr Patten , and the Russian Prime Minister , Mr Kassianov , for the preparation of the summit .

Also in Moscow , on 27 May , on the eve of this meeting , the deputy Vice-President of the Spanish Government , Mr Rato , together with the Commissioner responsible for European Union economic affairs , Mr Solbes , will make a presentation of the euro to the Russian financial sector .
On that same day there will be a conference in Moscow on the integration of the European Union and Russia in the twenty-first century with the participation of various representatives of the Russian Government , the Commission and myself representing the Presidency .
It is important to point out that the Russia / EU Summit will take place soon after the Russia / US Summit , when President Bush will be in Moscow .
This meeting between Russia and the United States will take place between 24 and 26 June .
And just a day after the NATO / Russia Summit , our summit with Russia will take place , on 29 May .
There is therefore a sequence of events which will consist of Russia holding a summit with the United States on 24 to 26 May , then , on 28 May , the agreement with NATO will be signed in Rome , and this will be followed by the Russia / EU Summit in Moscow .
With regard to the contents of the summit , the European Union and Russia have so far agreed a draft agenda covering the following points : recent events in the Russian Federation and in the European Union , security issues and the fight against terrorism , Russia / EU relations and international issues relating to the different regions of the world .
I am going to expand on some of these points .
Firstly , with regard to recent events in the Russian Federation , the summit will deal fully with the reform process under way .
Secondly , in relation to the development of recent events in the European Union , the Community will report on the state of the enlargement negotiations , the development of the discussions within the framework of the European Convention and the development of the security and defence policy .
With regard to security issues and the joint fight against terrorism , Russia intends to report on the results of the Russia / United States and Russia / NATO Summits - this consultation is of particular importance today , given the announcement of the reduction in nuclear warheads .
The situation in terms of cooperation in the fight against terrorism will also be examined .
You will understand perfectly that this issue is a priority for both the Union and for the Russian Federation .
Relations between the European Union and Russia must naturally appear in several points on the agenda .
A joint declaration to be issued at the end of the summit will include the conclusions by the two parties on the numerous points in the chapter on relations between Russia and the European Union .
The declaration will have the same structure as the one relating to the Brussels Summit and will refer to foreign , security and defence policy , cooperation in terms of justice and home affairs , Kaliningrad , the common European economic area , trade and investments , energy dialogue , the environment and nuclear security , and scientific , technological and space cooperation .
I will comment briefly on all of these issues .
With regard to international issues of mutual interest , both parties have named the Middle East , Afghanistan and the Balkans as priority issues , for which the exchange of information is particularly useful , since both the European Union and the Russian Federation share concerns and responsibilities in these areas .
Furthermore , the European Union has particular interest in cooperating with the Russian Federation on the prevention of conflicts in areas of common interest , such as Moldavia , especially in relation to the Trans-Dniéster conflict .
With regard to the issues relating to foreign , security and defence policy , at this Russia / EU Summit we hope to agree an ad hoc declaration on the strengthening of dialogue and cooperation in the political and security fields .
The declaration must reflect the progress observed in the implementation of the new cooperation mechanisms agreed at the Brussels Summit .
Furthermore , the declaration must refer to the document which we hope will be adopted at the European Council in Seville on means of cooperation and consultation between the European Union and Russia in terms of crisis management .
This important document will involve the development and establishment of the general principles for cooperation between the European Union and Russia in this field , which were adopted at the previous Paris , Moscow and Brussels Summits , and at the European Council in Nice .
With regard to cooperation on justice and home affairs , there has already been one result which the summit will acknowledge , which was the meeting of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers of the Russian Federation and the European Union , which took place on 25 April on the initiative of the Presidency of the Union .
This has been the first time that Ministers from the Union and the Russian Federation have met to discuss common issues which fundamentally involve the whole issue of organised crime , immigration problems and the fight against terrorism .
One of the significant results of this ministerial meeting is the approval of a joint resolution on the designation of central points of contact for the exchange of information on organised crime within the framework of the Action Plan to combat organised crime in Russia .
The ministers also dealt with the situation of Kaliningrad , which is of particular interest to Russia .
I would like to refer to this next , because the situation of the Kaliningrad enclave is an issue of particular importance in terms of relations between Russia and the European Union .
In the very near future this Russian enclave , which is currently surrounded by Lithuania and Poland , will become an enclave within Community territory , when these two countries join the Union .
Therefore , in terms of its relations with the European Union , it is one of Russia 's priorities to find a satisfactory solution , above all , to the problems of the free movement of people .
This fundamental problem of the movement and transit of persons stems from the transit between the enclave and the rest of the territory of the Russian Federation between the time when the candidate countries join the Union and the time when they fully apply the Schengen legislation .
This issue was dealt with at the meeting of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers between the Fifteen and Russia , which I mentioned previously , and the Russian Federation communicated a memorandum on this issue .
This issue was also dealt with during the recent visit by Prime Minister Kassianov to the European Commission .
Naturally , Russia 's positions do not entirely coincide with what the Member States have agreed and we as Presidency have made considerable efforts to create a common approach , and in producing it we have taken particular account , of course , of the interests of Poland and Lithuania given that they are future Members of the Union which have been kept informed of the progress of the exchanges with Russia on this issue .
This common line has been confirmed by COREPER and has been communicated to the Russians .
In terms of socio-economic problems , various activities which are at the preparatory or the implementation stage are going to require a sum of some EUR 40 million within the framework of the TACIS programme , intended for a package of measures aimed at implementing various activities within the enclave .
To this sum we have to add the bilateral contributions of the Member States .
The European Union is naturally prepared to study other formulae along with the Russians for funding which bring the standard of living of the inhabitants of Kaliningrad into line with the general economic context of the area surrounding it , essentially the two Member States , Poland and Lithuania , which we hope will very soon be members of our Union .
With regard to the common European economic area , which is another of the great issues in this bilateral relationship , the high-level group for the development of the concept of the common European economic area was formally established on 6 March 2002 and it met on 26 March .
In December 2001 the first informal meeting took place .
The summit will receive a provisional report on this issue , which will form the basis of the ad hoc declaration suggested by Russia .
The Union would like to achieve a declaration by Russia of their intention to adopt European levels , bringing their legislation closer to the Community acquis .
At the Commission 's meeting with Prime Minister Kassianov , which I mentioned earlier , the Russian Prime Minister indicated that he was aware that the majority of the work of legislative approximation falls to Russia and the results of the high-level group will be presented at the Autumn Summit 2003 .
I will now comment on Russia 's accession to the World Trade Organisation .
Negotiations are continuing in relation to that accession following the significant impulse they have been given since last Autumn .
Currently , the main differences relate to the agricultural , services and telecommunications sectors .
At the meeting with Prime Minister Kassianov , the Commissioner responsible for Commercial Affairs , Mr Lamy , indicated that the Russian declaration on energy prices would also be a condition for progress in negotiations relating to the WTO .
In short , it does not appear that there will be any substantial progress between now and the summit .
At that summit the desire to promote the process will be demonstrated by the high frequency of meetings .
This issue bears some relation to the consideration of Russia as a market economy .
This is one of Russia 's main priorities within its relations with the European Union and at the recent meeting both Commissioner Patten , who is here today , and Commissioner Lamy , indicated to Mr Kassianov that the Commission was willing to study the possibility of granting Russia the status of a market economy .
Although I should point out that the Presidency has detected , in its exchanges with the Member countries , that there are still some difficulties in terms of the internal sensitivities within the Union 's industrial sectors and in terms of the negotiations with the Russians , which , as I have said , are continuing .
The Presidency at least hopes to achieve a solution in principle which is acceptable to both parties before the summit .
With regard to these two issues : the WTO and Russia 's status as a market economy , one of the most important points in the relationship between the European Union and Russia is the energy dialogue .
Amongst the main Russian concerns in this field are the possible negative consequences of enlargement for its energy exports to the new Member States , as well as the attention to capital originating from the European Union necessary for the modernisation of its infrastructures .
For its part , the Union insists on the need to create the best possible conditions for foreign investment .
Something else the Community has constantly demanded is the ratification by Russia of the Treaty we negotiated many years ago , the so-called energy charter and the transit protocol .
We hope that at this summit a declaration will be adopted on the energy dialogue , as the Russians have proposed .
Also relating to energy is the issue of nuclear security , in turn determined by respect for the environment .
In relation to this issue of the environment and nuclear security , the Community has indicated to Russia that one of the results we would like to achieve at the summit would be a commitment from Russia to ratify the text of the Kyoto Protocol as soon as possible .
To this end , prior to the Barcelona European Council , the President of the Council and the Commission , Mr Aznar and Mr Prodi respectively , addressed a letter to President Putin .
With regard to nuclear security , our interest focuses on the signing by Russia of the agreement known as the Multilateral Nuclear and Environment Program in the Russian Federation .
Despite the fact that at the 5th EU / Russia Cooperation Council in Luxembourg on 16 April , the Russian Foreign Minister , Mr Ivanov , announced that the outstanding issues relating to the signature of this agreement had been resolved , at the last minute problems have arisen on the Russian side which may delay this signature .
Furthermore , I would like to stress the importance of environmental aspects in the implementation of the northern dimension action plan .
Another issue is that of scientific and technological cooperation .
Since the entry into force of the cooperation agreement with Russia relating to science and technology last May , cooperative relations in this field have made progress .
This instrument , together with the international ITER agreement , forms the current basis of our joint work .
It is possible that Russia will present its idea of establishing a joint research and technology centre in the Arctic .
In principle , the idea may be included within the framework of our scientific and technological cooperation , but we will need to know more details about the nature of the Russian proposals .
Given that the Arctic is an important source of energy supply for the European Union , we should analyse the possibility of including the centre in the field of energy dialogue .
In conclusion , the 9th Summit will be an opportunity to assess the various aspects of our relations with Russia and to establish new cooperation objectives for the future .
We also hope that it will strengthen the already considerable dialogue between the Union and Russia and that opinions will be exchanged on issues of current international importance .
This will thereby strengthen the strategic association between the Union and Russia , which is based on a range of shared values , the essential components of which are democracy , the Rule of Law and respect for human rights .
I am delighted that we are able to hold this debate in the presence of Mrs Hoff , whose excellent report I will return to a little later .
I am sure that everyone is extremely pleased that she is with us this afternoon .
I would like to focus first on the wider issue of the EU-Russia Summit in Moscow at the end of the month .
As the presidency has said , this Summit will mark the culmination of an intense schedule of high-level meetings between the European Union and the Russian Federation and it comes at a historic moment in relations between Russia and the West , with the Russia-Nato Summit in Rome at the end of the month .
I will not repeat all the important meetings which the presidency has referred to , but we welcomed in particular Prime Minister Kasyanov 's visit to the Commission on 24 April , and the meeting of European Union Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs with their Russian counterparts was exceptionally important .
A special Cooperation Committee is taking place in Kaliningrad this week precisely to discuss all the Kaliningrad-related issues . And we continue to hold discussions on crisis management and conflict resolution on a monthly basis with the Russian ambassador to the European Union .
But what about content ?
Is the intense programme of EU-Russia meetings making progress ?
My answer is yes , albeit slowly .
There is still a lot that both we and Russia need to do to become reliable strategic partners .
But we can also welcome many changes that are taking place in Russia radically to reform the legal system , the economy , the military and the administration .
Allow me to comment briefly - I will not cover all the ground covered by the presidency - on the main issues that will be discussed at the Summit .
We are satisfied with the way relations are developing in the field of ESDP , in which Russia is a natural key partner .
Our message to Russia , however , is that security and defence policy needs to be seen as part of our broader political dialogue that also covers some of the present " frozen conflicts " in Europe , notably Transdniestria , which is a source of tremendous instability for Moldova , a future European Union neighbour .
As regards the World Trade Organisation , we will reaffirm our political support for Russia 's accession . But we will not be shy in defending our interests , as in any trade negotiation .
As Russia 's main trading partner , the European Union will play a key role in defining the entry standards in the Geneva negotiations .
From our perspective , the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement is the point of departure , and Russia must , at least , go beyond the concessions already made in it .
Turning to the related issue of Russia 's demand to be treated as a market economy in anti-dumping procedures , the Commission has already submitted a proposal to the Council that will improve the position of Russian companies , and we are looking at whether there is more we can do to meet their concerns .
As the presidency said , it was a subject that we were able to discuss with Mr Kasyanov .
We hope that in return Russia will be able to respond to our proposals , notably concerning double energy pricing , and the adoption of a conciliation system under the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to help ensure trade disputes are tackled in an objective , efficient and non-politicised manner .
The Summit will also examine a progress report from the High Level Group on a common European economic space .
This long-term initiative is meant to underpin Russia 's ongoing economic reforms and should help Russian companies to take advantage of the prosperity that European Union enlargement will bring .
Against the backdrop of accession to the World Trade Organisation , cooperation with Russia should promote coherence between our respective legislative standards based on studies of the likely benefits for Russian industries .
The Summit will also look at a progress report on the energy dialogue , which moved into a more concrete phase at the Brussels Summit last October .
The presidency referred to the importance of the environment in our dialogue .
We will , among other things , be pressing Russia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol , ideally before the UN Johannesburg Summit on Sustainable Development in September .
Let me to turn now to the question of Kaliningrad , which is rightly high on Parliament 's agenda , as demonstrated by Mrs Hoff 's excellent report and the visit on the ground by the parliamentary delegation for Russia in April last year .
We will also take careful account of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights drafted by Mr Oostlander .
We share Parliament 's view that , as part of Russia , Kaliningrad is essentially a Russian responsibility .
We also believe that European Union enlargement is an opportunity from which Kaliningrad can greatly benefit , rather than a threat .
The Commission has made huge efforts to work with Russia on Kaliningrad , addressing both the impact of enlargement and future development policy as part of a comprehensive approach .
We have made clear our willingness to increase financial and technical help to deal with the challenges faced by Kaliningrad , to facilitate cooperation between customs and immigration authorities in Russia , Lithuania and Poland , and to address the movement of persons and transit issues by exploring the flexibility permitted by the Schengen acquis .
Under excellent leadership from the Spanish presidency , Member States have recently confirmed that we cannot derogate from the Schengen acquis , nor undermine the enlargement negotiations themselves .
Visa-free transit corridors are not acceptable to the applicant countries .
I hope Russia will accept this and work with us to make border crossing - which is the real impediment to progress - quicker and easier .
Efforts are needed from both sides since we need to agree on how to take forward some key issues before further assistance can be offered .
In this context , we shall be looking for progress on a readmission agreement and improved cooperation on border management .
We also hope that Russia will make easier the establishment of consulates in Kaliningrad and in mainland Russia , and ensure that those who live in Kaliningrad are issued with passports that conform with international standards .
We hope that the special meeting of the Cooperation Committee tomorrow in Kaliningrad can make further progress on these issues with a view to the Moscow Summit .
I would also like to say a few words on human rights and democratic principles where we continue to have concerns regarding the rule of law and media freedom .
The Summit will provide a further opportunity to underline the benefits for Russia of improving her image in these areas and our willingness to support the development of democratic institutions through Tacis .
The situation in Chechnya remains hugely worrying and reports of human rights violations during so-called " mopping up " operations have not , unfortunately , stopped .
Our position remains simple and clear .
We condemn terrorism world-wide , including in Chechnya .
Our calls for a political solution which , without prejudice to the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation , satisfies the majority of the Chechen people , does not undermine our support for the fight against terrorism everywhere .
We will also continue to raise with Russia the issue of operating conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid .
In spite of difficult security conditions on the ground , we demand concrete improvements to facilitate the conduct of humanitarian operations according to basic safety and efficiency standards .
In parallel , we will insist that any repatriation of Chechen displaced persons should only take place on a voluntary and unconditional basis .
Finally , we also intend to make progress in the field of crisis management and conflict prevention .
Against the background of our efforts to establish closer political and economic relations , the European Union has made clear to Russia that it expects her to act in full accordance with the values she committed herself to respect when entering the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
These basic principles constitute an integral part of the strategic partnership that we are trying to build together .
This is a defining period in anchoring Russia firmly in the community of democratic nations .
Against the backdrop of Russia 's accession to the World Trade Organisation and the agreement on a new format for cooperation between Russia and NATO , we are confident that the EU-Russia Summit in Moscow will bring our bilateral partnership one step forward , rendering our cooperation more concrete and effective .
The Commission is ready to continue to play an active part in this process . I am confident that the European Parliament will continue to make a very valuable contribution as well .
I want to make one final , simple point .
We share so much with Russia : much geography and , in some respects , too much history .
The only sensible option for both of us is to make our relationship work as successfully as possible : economically , socially and politically .
This is a really significant strategic partnership - a partnership enhanced by enlargement .
Perhaps we still have some of the ghosts of the past to lay to rest ; ancient suspicions to bury once and for all .
But the view of the Commission is that we should do all we can to make this partnership work and work well .
There is no other sensible option .
But a partnership involves traffic in both directions : it involves give and take and understanding the other side 's point of view .
We understand that , and I am sure our Russian colleagues will come to understand that as well .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Allow me , in turn , to welcome our fellow Member , Mrs Hoff , to the House . She is the rapporteur for the report on the communication from the Commission to the Council on the European Union and Kaliningrad .
Mrs Hoff has been kind enough to come here today , and I thank her on behalf of us all .
I shall now give the floor to Mrs Erika Mann , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Madam President , thank you for your kind words .
I know that my colleague Mrs Hoff would like to address a few words to you herself at the end of the speech which I am going to read out on her behalf , but I will thank you at the start .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the accession of Poland and Lithuania will make Kaliningrad not only a Russian enclave , but also an enclave of the European Union .
This problematic , unique and positively paradoxical situation results from the fact that Kaliningrad , being Russian territory , falls within the scope of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Moscow , but is in fact rather more affected by European Union enlargement .
Attention was drawn to Kaliningrad 's precarious situation as long ago as 1994 , in a report by Parliament which described the future of the Kaliningrad region as a matter of immediate and pressing importance for Russia , for the states bordering on the region , and , equally , for the European Union .
The practical response was , even then , to decide on measures which have become , in the meantime , even more relevant to the area 's growth prospects .
One can take as examples of this the encouragement of cross-border cooperation as well as the increased integration of the Kaliningrad area into European transport and telecommunications structures .
It is to be regretted that adequate use has not been made of the time that has elapsed since then .
Now , in the context of the strategic partnership which we are aiming at and of which you have spoken , new possibilities are taking shape , involving the neighbouring Poland and Lithuania , for finding solutions to Kaliningrad 's situation , solutions that will ensure the area 's viability and perhaps even enable it to play an active part in joining the partners together .
At the same time , I would like to echo what was said as long ago as 1994 by emphasising that any consideration of Kaliningrad 's future development must start from the premise that the area will continue to belong to Russia under international law and that its legal status will be determined solely by those competent to do so in Moscow and in Kaliningrad itself .
There are two possible scenarios , one negative and the other positive .
A negative scenario would see the European Union 's relationship with Russia under great strain , with both sides having failed an important test of their ability to cooperate and prevent crises in accordance with the partnership agreement .
In the positive scenario , however , Kaliningrad could take on the overall role of a centre of economic activity and as a point of reference for transport links , commercial activity and modern services in a dynamic Baltic region .
The area could , by piloting the implementation of economic structural reforms , influence the whole of north-western Russia and bind this cross-border region more closely with Europe .
An amicable settlement on Kaliningrad could , in short , be a model for how the partnership between the EU and Russia might become practical rather than existing in name only .
New flexibility is , in the meantime manifesting itself on both sides as the acute need for action becomes apparent .
I welcome President Prodi 's recent reference to the need to make arrangements for Kaliningrad even before Poland and Lithuania join the EU , the Commission having elaborated some ideas on the subject in its 2001 communication on Kaliningrad .
What is also positive is President Putin 's evident commitment to a constructive negotiated solution .
I do not propose , in what follows , to go in to detail into the various areas which we need to sort out together , but I would like to make just a few basic observations .
People are understandably touchy about the issue of visas and border controls , and here a balance needs to be achieved between tight controls on the EU 's external borders on the one hand , and the need for easier passage across the border on the other .
Russia will also have to face up to the need for fundamental acceptance of the rules applicable under Community law , and we are working on the assumption that it will accept them .
On this point , the EU cannot allow any exceptions to be made , as this would be to prejudge the cases of other border regions .
For its part , the European Union should , at the same time , be considering what range of options there might be for a less onerous visa system within the Schengen boundaries , over and above the instances referred to in the communication .
My report includes a number of proposals for a way ahead on this .
The inclusive offer to partly integrate Kaliningrad into the Baltic area must be revived , but not by a border regime that excludes people .
Flexible arrangements for the transport of people and goods may well be important preconditions for Kaliningrad 's growth process , and they also have symbolic value in the eyes of people in the no-man 's-land between containment and exclusion , but , despite what many in Moscow continue to believe , they are not enough to bring about growth on their own .
We have seen that at the open borders of Poland and Lithuania .
Kaliningrad 's economic indicators are mainly negative and still show no definite upward tendency .
The living standard in the border region is significantly inferior to that in Russia as a whole .
One essential cause for the persistent downturn is certainly Kaliningrad 's problematic geographical situation and its favourable treatment as regards taxes and customs duties , the whole of which has a natural tendency to facilitate criminal activity .
Any opening up of Kaliningrad to the outside world must therefore be combined with profound economic and administrative reforms in the region .
Without these , there is the danger that local industries , which are uncompetitive , will largely be cut out of the market by their foreign competitors and that foreign investors will be even less committed in Kaliningrad .
It is , therefore , to the leaders in Moscow and Kaliningrad , who bear responsibility for the region , that we appeal for the creation on the ground of the conditions for good governance in the form of administrative , legal and political structures that work , are transparent , and can be relied upon .
At the same time , there are many ways in which these efforts might be supported .
In particular , it would make sense to set up an investment agency that could lay the financial foundations for this .
This of course involves continued intensive cooperation within the TACIS framework and the willingness to make funds for this purpose available through the international financial institutions , among which I particularly mention the European Investment Bank .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would very much like to conclude by handing over to my colleague Magdalena Hoff .
. ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will forgive me if I remain seated .
I am not yet well enough to stand while I talk to you , but please do not think I am being rude .
Also , I do not wish to talk for longer than necessary , but I would just like to thank everyone who has helped in preparing the report , which Commissioner Patten has said the Commission will take into account in the negotiations at the Moscow Summit .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The fact that the debate on this report is being held in the right place , that is to say during a joint debate on the Russian Federation , makes it clear once again that we still believe it is up to the Russian Government to ensure that reasonable conditions prevail in Kaliningrad .
A delegation from this House recently visited Kaliningrad , and anyone travelling through this region or walking through the city is bound to be horrified , unless they close their eyes .
We had an opportunity to discuss matters with the mayor of Kaliningrad , who complained bitterly that the last visit by representatives of the European Union had raised hopes about the construction of a new hospital .
In this context , help for patients with TB is particularly important .
Everything that has been mentioned by the previous speakers - human rights issues , public health and environmental policy - are issues that must be tackled and where help is needed .
One thing is sure , and we should not lose sight of this , because it also underscores what Commissioner Vitorino has said : there will be no real peace in Europe until we have managed to breathe life into the partnership and cooperation agreement .
I hope we will succeed , but I will not be too concerned as long as the points mentioned here by the various representatives of the presidency , the Commission and of this House itself are also discussed at the Moscow Summit .
Many thanks for giving me a few minutes ' speaking time .
I am sure we will continue to strive to ensure , working jointly where necessary , Mrs Lalumière , that what has been agreed by Parliament so far is actually implemented and becomes a practical policy .
Thank you very much indeed !
I would particularly like to thank Erika Mann , who , when I asked her if she would present my contribution here agreed to do so without hesitation .
Thank you very much , Erika !
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Hoff .
We are all aware of your tremendous commitment with regard to all the Central and Eastern European countries , particularly Kaliningrad .
You can be sure that we were very moved by your message and that each of us , for our own part , will try to make the wishes you have expressed today a reality .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , both on behalf of my group and also on a very personal note I would like to pay homage to Magdalene Hoff for her excellent work in general and for her outstanding work on Kaliningrad .
Because of the importance of this occasion , I would also like to thank you , my dear Magdalene - I have never before addressed anyone by their first name in an official speech , this is the first time - for our many years of excellent cooperation both here in this House of course , but also elsewhere , by which I mean Germany 's European movement , the Europaunion .
Please accept my very best wishes for a speedy recovery , and many thanks for your marvellous work !
I would like to express my sympathy for the victims of the attack in Kaspiisk in Dagestan , who were murdered on 9 May .
There were many children amongst the more than 30 people killed .
As Commissioner Patten has already said , terrorism can never be justified .
We hope that nothing like this will ever happen again .
As Commissioner Patten and Mr de Miguel , the President-in-Office , have said - and I hope that they will raise this at the summit - we call on the Russian Government , should it turn out that these attacks , these acts of violence were committed by Chechens - and in the case of Dagestan that is a supposition for which there is still no proof - not to equate these terrorists , these perpetrators of violence with the Chechen people . No , the civilian population of Chechnya should be protected ?
( Applause )
... and we should use the negotiating process to ensure that Chechnya has a good future .
Overall , we believe that our relations with Russia are of a strategic nature .
Our relations with the United States are of strategic significance , our relations with the Mediterranean area are of strategic significance and of course the enlargement of the European Union is also of strategic significance , but as I have said , so are our relations with Russia .
Our relations need to be founded on democratic principles , on the rule of law , on social and market-economy principles and above all on human rights and human dignity .
It is on that basis that we wish to cooperate with Russia politically , economically and in terms of security policy .
We also want to emphasise what has already just been mentioned here - a common European economic area and maximising cooperation with Russia .
However , I would like to add , because this is occasionally mentioned , that I cannot imagine , and nor can the majority of my group , in fact I think we are as one on this , that Russia could become a member of the European Union , in view of its size .
I think that needs saying , in all honesty .
However , we do want to extend economic relations , to dismantle trade barriers and to encourage greater investment in Russia .
That means overcoming certain obstacles .
We wish to cooperate in the area of internal security .
Not long ago I visited Finland with the chairman of our group . Finland shares a common border with Russia and has exemplary security controls on that border .
We need to create something comparable for all our borders with Russia .
I wish to call on the Russian Government to do its part to make sure that we also achieve security in relation to Kaliningrad .
As I have already used up my speaking time , I would just like to add that we have every intention of stepping up relations with the Russian Federation , because security in our continent in the twenty-first century is largely dependent on the European Union and Russia being able to act , and on Russia hopefully also being democratic , because together there is a great future for us in the European continent that we share .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , Magdalene Hoff , on behalf of my group I wish to thank you for your valuable work . We are very enthusiastic about this report and have adopted it unanimously .
At the same time we obviously hope , Magdalene , that you will be able to come back to work and that we will be able to make use of your immense knowledge of Eastern Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , Kaliningrad will prove to be either a positive or negative example of relations between the EU and Russia , one that will either take the form of cooperation or mean problems .
A good scenario would be one which gave rise to a pilot project for Russia and our whole next enlargement process . It would mean compliance there with WTO regulations , leading to Russia 's membership of that organisation .
Respect for the law , stability , and civil society would grow and start to become established , and we would aid the process using our entire arsenal : TACIS , PHARE , Interreg , and so on .
Our trade would increase and people would be able to move freely .
A bad scenario would be one in which the gap in living standards grows wider , creating unrest within the Union , whereas unrest is now to be found outside the Union .
It would be a rudimentary kind of civil society - crime is already 2 % higher than elsewhere in Russia - and the movement of the population might turn into a new Berlin crisis .
This is therefore a scenario we do not wish to see , although it must be borne in mind that now is a time of opportunity for us , if Russia 's new administration understands that .
In any case Kaliningrad will become a barometer of our relations .
It is true , as Commissioner Patten said , that the EU-Russia Summit in the coming weeks will represent a culmination point .
Russia has a lot of problems and one is that relations between Russia and the United States of America have been of very little benefit to the Russian people , who do not really understand the situation .
For this reason we should propose a five-point programme to bring our relations closer : the European Economic Area , WTO membership , cooperation on energy , the northern dimension and a concrete Kaliningrad Agreement .
Just five points , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr President , I have tried to listen carefully to the Council and the Commission and have to say that the Commission has , as usual , been more honest in describing where our partnership stands today and in pointing out that it is a question of both give and take , for I think that the results are notable by their absence .
Further shadow boxing and fine-sounding speeches are more in evidence than actual results .
I also believe that there is an alarming risk that , to some extent , relations between the United States , Russia and the EU will come to resemble those we are seeing in the Middle East .
Are we in the EU the only people to be concerned about human rights , freedom of expression , media pluralism , the environment and , perhaps too , the position of the organisations representing citizens ?
What is actually happening in Kaliningrad ?
What is in fact happening in the energy dialogue ?
We are waiting for results .
What is happening with the environmental partnership in the northern dimension ?
In the context of quite a few summits , the EU has said that something must happen .
The EU has made decisions to enable it to finance important environmental projects in north-western Russia , but the Russian Federation is not playing its part .
Are we to promise WTO and NATO membership or should we perhaps demand results from the Russian side as preconditions for such membership ?
The Presidency and the Commission touched upon the issue of responsibility for nuclear waste , and specifically the MNEPR Agreement .
How many times are we to see the Presidency , for example the Swedish Presidency , seeking results ?
The issue is postponed , first for six months and then year after year , while all the time we know that the clock is ticking for untreated waste and that the submarines in Murmansk may begin to leak .
We also know that , in my country , we have major problems with land transport to Russia where agreed deadlines are not complied with and additional costs are incurred .
I would also appeal to you to address difficult issues in the negotiations with Russia .
I would say , finally , to the Presidency that other summits and other heads of government have not hesitated to address the situation of kidnapped children .
This issue must also be addressed in a serious dialogue .
I myself am aware of quite a few children , for example Maria Sobeva and Tommi Ylönen , who have been kidnapped and taken to Russia .
Mr President , Elisabeth Schroedter , our colleague from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will be talking about Kaliningrad in a moment .
On behalf of the group , I should also like to express thanks to our fellow MEP , Magdalena Hoff , for her immense efforts and 100 % commitment to Eastern Europe .
In my view , she deserves a mention here .
Fellow MEPs , we have all listened carefully to the speech by Mr Miguélez .
For fifteen minutes , and more , he talked about Russia , but never mentioned Chechnya .
How is this possible , Mr Miguélez ?
I do not understand .
There has nevertheless been a great deal of consultation with the Russian authorities recently .
Lengthy discussions have been held , and what is the outcome ?
Business as usual .
We have talked about the economy .
I even heard my own Prime Minister mention this when he met Mr Kasyanov .
Despite this , surely we have now learnt from the conflicts in Kosovo , in Bosnia Herzegovina , that conflict prevention is crucial .
That it is the alpha and omega of every peace policy .
We give Russia an enormous amount of financial aid : EUR 65 million via Echo for humanitarian services , and 2.5 billion over the past decade via Tacis .
Should we not be able to use this money to engage in conflict prevention at long last ?
Mr Miguélez , I urge you not only to talk about the economy and free trade in Moscow , but also about Chechnya , about observing human rights , and the persecution of environmental activists . I implore you to do this .
You will help make the European Union more credible if you do .
Mr President , the world has changed in recent years , and unfortunately not always in the direction of greater peace and security or more partnership and peaceful coexistence .
Since the Second World War , the peoples of the world have given the UN Security Council many rights and a high degree of responsibility for security and for maintaining peace .
Even if the Soviet Union no longer exists as a victorious power and as a former second superpower alongside the USA , Russia , as its successor state , is not an unimportant country .
Russia has nuclear weapons , it has boundless resources , and it has played a key role in shaping European and world history in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries .
The expanded European Union has greater scope for partnership with Russia if the residual fears stemming from the Cold War can be overcome and if , for example , economic cooperation with the candidate countries from Central and Eastern Europe can be harnessed and not deliberately excluded .
If we wish to move away from a policy of conflict throughout Europe we should not create new confrontational situations based on a new geographical strategy . We should instead offer Russia a genuine and practical partnership .
In doing that we certainly should not treat the number of meetings and summits as some kind of yardstick .
No , what we need to measure is real results .
Our area of common interest is so great that cooperation and economic partnership with Russia is the only reasonable way forward , which in the long run will be of benefit to both sides and will promote security and lessen social tensions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , a few days ago , General Lebed , a man who played a decisive role in the peace negotiations with Chechnya , passed away . Both you and many members have been completely silent on the subject .
General Lebed died in an accident , probably an assassination ; officially , it was one of those mysterious helicopter crashes we have so often seen in that part of the world .
General Lebed 's concept of territorial integrity was slightly different from yours . It was not only the outline , the borders that he wanted to preserve , but territorial integrity , which meant integrity of the people , their lives , the inhabitants of an area .
Today , listening to you and to the Council and the Commission , we do not really receive the impression that Chechnya will be one of your priorities , one of the issues at the heart of the meetings that take place week after week between you and the Russian authorities , as our fellow Member and chairman , Mr Staes , said .
As we have come to expect from Mrs Hoff , she has drafted a very balanced and expert report on Kaliningrad .
I have to say that I have a great deal of admiration for the way in which she has done this and for the tact with which she also continuously underlines Russian interests , so that we , in our concern for Kalinigrad , do not meet with any distrust from Moscow .
Mrs Hoff is extremely skilled in this area . In fact , Kaliningrad is one of her specialist areas , and I have therefore always listened with great respect to her reports and her judgment , in particular , and we have always been quite happy to cross swords in the past .
Kaliningrad is not Konigsberg any more .
Anyone who has ever lived there will recognise very little and will no longer feel at home there .
We would have hardly paid any attention to the region if it were not for the fact that it will be forming an enclave in the European Union .
Proximity brings with it responsibility , and I believe that this has also been an important motive for the rapporteur .
We should take an interest in the future of the people who live there .
This is why it is right that the rapporteur not only considered the macro aspects , but also the practical day-to-day needs of the citizens of Kaliningrad .
Our main concern in this respect is not to allow them to be left in isolation .
The roads to the other parts of the Russian Federation must be easily passable , as must those to the future EU Member States .
The latter are possibly considered to be more important than the former .
In my view , travelling to the European Union unhindered takes priority .
Hence the pressure to solve the visa issue , albeit within the Schengen framework - we should not kid ourselves - in a flexible manner .
After all , many of the restrictions are man-made .
The problems at the borders are all too often caused by sluggishness on the part of the staff , time-consuming , bureaucratic habits and suchlike .
It is therefore of major importance for a mentality to be instilled which befits the rule of law , democracy and a social market economy .
Needless to say , developing contacts between civil-society organisations in the European Union and in Kaliningrad and elsewhere in Russia could also prove crucial , because these particularly deal with day-to-day actions .
I should like to thank Mrs Hoff for accepting my amendments from the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and particularly for the humour with which she has responded to the ploys which I have used in the process .
Many thanks and I wish her all the best .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mrs Hoff for her excellent report .
I think that it is much better than the first report , it is significantly better than the Commission document , and I very much hope that this report will go down in the history of this House , because it goes a great deal further and the cooperation involved in its preparation was outstanding .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for largely accepting my amendments .
There is of course a danger of us constantly hearing the same eloquent but trite speeches about how important cooperation is , and about how special Kaliningrad 's situation is . However , for the people of Kaliningrad there is a genuine fear , a fear based on reality , that the situation will deteriorate as regards transit arrangements , freedom of movement and cooperation between NGOs , leading to greater poverty and escalating unemployment .
That is why we need new approaches to the instruments available , new approaches to minor border traffic , new approaches to economic cooperation , new approaches to transnational cooperation and above all - and , Commissioner , I would like to appeal you once more about this - new approaches to the use of financial instruments .
A joint action plan also needs a joint fund .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that the EU-Russia Summit provides a great opportunity for a historic partnership .
This partnership , which needs to cover both economic and political matters , is one of the key requirements for a peace and stability policy in the twenty-first century .
Europe and Russia are a great deal more dependent on each other than might appear to be the case at first sight .
Whenever there has been strife between Europe and its individual states on the one hand and Russia on the other , this has had a major impact on world politics .
The present situation demands that we should create a starting point that prevents such conflicts arising in the long run .
This requires us to establish mutual respect and a basis of trust .
The Chechnya conflict is of course a major problem .
Above all , we need to be wary about unilaterally condemning Russia without taking into account the overall background to this conflict , such as the role of financiers , arms suppliers and raw materials interests .
Mr President , I should like to add my voice to those of all the speakers who have thanked Mrs Hoff and expressed their admiration for her work and for her physical presence here having been so seriously ill .
I genuinely believe that Mrs Hoff 's report is a fine example of the essential contribution that the European Parliament makes to the work of the institutions .
Commissioner Patten rightly stated that the substance of this report will guide and inspire us in our relations with Russia .
The Presidency takes the same view .
Consequently , I should like to express my gratitude for this important work , which is often carried out quietly and anonymously , because it is right that sometimes , such as now , it should step into the limelight and be publicly acknowledged .
I wish to say that I agree with practically all the opinions that have been expressed here on all the aspects , both positive and negative , of our relationship with Russia .
These relations are as they are and not as we would like them to be .
Russia , with all its advantages and with all its disadvantages , is a great country , with which we share a common area : the great European plain .
It is , furthermore , a country with which , due to the special historical circumstances in which the Union now has to live , and by this I mean the end of the cold war , the fall of the Berlin wall , enlargement towards the countries of the east that were previously satellites of Russia , for which the Second World War was to blame as were we , since we left many of these countries - and our historical conscience pricks us about this - under Russia 's influence .
We now have to make up this lost ground and we are doing so with enlargement , which consists of integrating into the great European family all these countries that were cruelly separated from it .
At the same time , however , Russia is there and , consequently , Russia is no longer the distant Eastern adversary of the bipolar world that it once was .
Russia is now our neighbour .
Once enlargement takes place , we will have to share not only borders , but also , as in the case of Kaliningrad , we will have to share responsibilities , because , regardless of their nationality , the inhabitants of Kaliningrad are human beings about whom we must be concerned because we are committed to this city 's not becoming a pocket of poverty tacked onto the Union , but a pocket of prosperity .
Creating an area of prosperity and leaving , for example , a pocket of poverty in Kaliningrad has no place in the European Union 's scale of values .
Similarly , we want to see Russia make progress in all areas , at both the economic and commercial level and at the legal and institutional level and also in relation to respect for the great humanist principles , for human rights and for the Rule of Law , that are our badge of identity .
This is why we have to work on all areas , increasing , as best we can , our cooperation with Russia in the economic and commercials spheres .
Also , as we have already stated , within the third pillar , we have already made significant progress , by holding meetings between Russian and EU Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs and on the issue of respect for human rights .
I have not mentioned Chechnya , because a sitting was dedicated almost entirely to this issue last month and I should like to remind Mr Staes that if he wants to know what the Presidency 's position on Chechnya is , he should attend the sittings or read the Minutes of this Parliament , because it is unacceptable for us to hold a debate on Chechnya lasting hours , for the Presidency and the Commission to state their position and the following month for someone to claim that we are saying nothing on the matter .
Mr Staes had the opportunity to be here and to participate in this debate if he had so wished .
If he was not present , it is neither my fault nor that of the Presidency , but his own .
I would say the same to Mrs Thors , who has been reproaching the Presidency .
I should like to remind her that her country of origin , Finland , held the Presidency of the Union a short while ago and I should also like to remind her that Spain was actually the first country , at Presidency level , to visit Kaliningrad .
I would also remind her that we are a very long way from Kaliningrad , unlike Finland , which lies just opposite that city .
Consequently , if any reproaches are to be made on these matters , they should be fair ones .
We have done all that we could , in excellent cooperation with the Commission , which is doing an admirable job , and with which we have had an excellent relationship .
I believe that we are making great efforts to take steps forward with Russia , steps that are sometimes smaller , sometimes larger , but little by little we are building a relationship and frankly , I do not think there are currently grounds for reproaching anyone .
Mr Miguélez , surely you are now taking matters too lightly .
It is really impossible for me to condone your behaviour .
It is true that a debate on Chechnya took place on 10 April .
It is true that the Council made a statement on that occasion .
I took part in that debate ; let there be no mistake about that .
Since 10 April , however , various meetings have taken place at ministerial level .
If I have my facts right , a Cooperation Council took place in Luxembourg on 16 April .
A Justice Council and a Home Affairs Council have been held .
Mr Kasyanov , the Prime Minister , has visited Brussels .
He has met various dignitaries and our own President of the Parliament .
He has met Mr Verhofstadt , Mr Maystadt and Mr Prodi .
All my sources of information also suggest that the Council does not really take Parliament 's view into consideration .
That you do nothing to actually place the Chechen issue on the political agenda .
If you really believe that you do not need to read the compromise resolution that is before us today and that you do not need to listen to Parliament 's ultimate question - which will hopefully be answered tomorrow - namely to place the Chechen issue separately on the agenda , then I think , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that you are really not doing your job at the moment .
, Council . ( ES ) I shall answer the point of order because I should like to state that the issue of Chechnya is and has always been a feature of all our contacts with all the members of the Russian Federation at all levels and , very specifically , at the meeting of the Cooperation Council that took place in Luxembourg , and at the dinner with the Minister for External Affairs , Mr Ivanov , the issue of Chechnya was discussed at great length and both the European Commission and the Council Presidency clearly conveyed our opinion to the Russian Federation , and this opinion tallies completely , of course , with that of Parliament .
The European Commission also had the opportunity to express our view to the Russian Prime Minister , Mr Kassianov , who was in Brussels two weeks ago on an official visit .
We have always stated our opinion , in all meetings , at all levels - including the political level - and we have never allowed the issue of Chechnya to be excluded from our bilateral talks but we have always discussed the matter with the respect that is due to a sovereign country .
Of course , we would never confuse the issue of Chechnya with accusations of murder , such as we have heard here today , and I am talking about the accusation that General Lebed was murdered by the Russian Government because he held certain positions on Chechnya .
This is not , of course , the type of language we use , Mr President .
Mr President , I do not know why the Spanish Minister feels he is being accused .
I value the work that is being done for Kaliningrad , but I believe that , in common with the Commission , we have reason to wonder whether we are achieving the result we desire .
Sometimes , it seems as if our relationship with Russia is merely a ' give ' relationship on our part and a ' take ' relationship on theirs .
Unfortunately , we have many examples of this .
One is the northern dimension in which , as the Commissioner also pointed out in another context , we only have a plan of action , but no action plan .
The problem is that we have repeated time and again that we wish to achieve results .
Perhaps these summits are a reminder of the EU 's own in which the decisions are based on wanting to achieve something later .
The real results , which is to say those that should be of crucial importance to the environment I live in , are not apparent , however .
In this area , I would appeal to the President and the Commission : the whole of the EU needs to make an active and vigorous contribution .
Mr President , thank you for giving me an opportunity to depart from the agenda and to address a comment to my colleague Magdalene Hoff .
We as the Group of the Party of European Socialists and as German Social Democrats in particular wish to thank Mrs Hoff for coming here today .
Despite her severe illness and the fact that she is confined to a wheelchair , Mrs Hoff , who has been a Member of the European Parliament since 1979 , refused to forego the opportunity of presenting and defending her report in person , with the help of my colleague Erika Mann .
We Social Democrats who as German Members of Parliament have for many years had the pleasure of working with her , have only one thing to say : we are proud of our colleague !
I would like to present her with a bouquet of flowers , with your permission , Mr President , because there is no provision for such a thing in the Rules of Procedure . I hope that I will be joined in this gesture not only by my Social Democrat colleagues but also by all Members of this House , who can be proud to have a fellow Member of her calibre in their midst .
The next item is the Commission communication on public finances in the Economic and Monetary Union .
Mr President , it is a great pleasure to present this third report on Public finances in EMU 2002 to Parliament . It consists of an analytical report prepared by the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs , as well as a Commission Communication that sets down the main policy conclusions .
One aim of the report on Public finance in EMU is to help ensure that the Commission continues to play a leading role in the evolving debate on budgetary policy in the Union .
It provides a detailed description of budgetary developments and prospects at Member State level and for the euro area as a whole .
In addition , it provides important clarifications on the scope and methodologies used in the budgetary surveillance process at EU level : this enhances the transparency of our evaluation of Member States ' budget positions .
Finally , it takes a forward looking approach by presenting an analysis of some key budgetary challenges which must be tackled at EU level in coming years .
Let me turn to the main conclusions of the report and start by making some comments on recent budgetary developments and prospects .
2001 proved to be the most challenging period for fiscal policy in the three-year history of EMU .
While the budget deficit for the euro area reached 1.3 % of GDP , the first increase since 1993 , the framework for budgetary policy has performed reasonably well during the current slowdown .
First , Member States had scope to let the automatic stabilisers operate so as to cushion the negative shock , especially those countries which had already achieved a budget balance or surplus .
Secondly and in contrast with previous economic downturns , no country still in deficit embarked on unwarranted expansionary policies .
Thirdly , Member States have been able to continue with planned tax reforms designed to remove supply side rigidities , despite claims from different quarters that the SGP was tying the hands of the authorities through arbitrary and inflexible rules .
In brief , fiscal policies have remained broadly neutral providing a balanced policy mix which was supportive to growth while guaranteeing price stability .
This broadly positive assessment needs to be balanced with the recognition that four Member States ( Germany , France , Italy and Portugal ) still have large deficits that do not meet the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In particular , deficits in Portugal and Germany have risen to levels approaching the 3 % of GDP reference value which prompted the Commission to activate the early-warning mechanism .
It is important to recognise , however , that the recent economic downturn was neither particularly severe nor long lasting . Unless all Member States reach the medium-term targets set down in their programmes , future downturns could provide a much sterner test for the EU 's framework for budgetary surveillance .
The focus of attention in recent months on the number one issue - the early-warning mechanism - has meant that several important measures that strengthen the quality and coverage of EU budgetary surveillance have been somewhat overlooked .
Three particular issues are worth stressing .
First , a revised Code of Conduct on the content and presentation of stability and convergence programmes was agreed in 2001 and implemented in the current round of programmes . This has helped improve the assessment of programmes and has also enabled us to consider the aggregate impact of budgetary targets for the euro area as a whole .
Secondly , the Commission and Council have developed a common method to calculate cyclically-adjusted budget balances .
The recent economic downturn and the experience with the early-warning mechanism have underlined the importance of looking at underlying budgetary positions when assessing the budgetary positions of the Member States .
Thirdly , an assessment has been made on the sustainability of public finances in light of ageing populations based on information provided in stability and convergence programmes .
As requested by the Barcelona European Council , long-term sustainability will become a regular feature of budgetary surveillance at EU level .
Let me make a few comments on recent experiences of the early warning mechanism as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Pact .
I have repeatedly spelt out the reasons why the Commission was compelled to initiate the procedure , and so I will not dwell on this point today . Instead , I will focus on more recent developments .
As you know , the Council decided to close the early-warning procedure as both countries reiterated their willingness to implement their stability programmes in full so as to avoid a breach of the 3 % of GDP reference value and to resume the process of budgetary consolidation in order to reach their medium-term targets by 2004 .
There is clear evidence that the authorities are taking these commitments seriously .
I am encouraged by the progress in Germany on an agreement between the Länder and the central government on the control of public finances . This agreement underlines the fact that sound public finances are the responsibility of all levels of government and not only of central government .
With regard to this first experience with the early-warning mechanism , in my view it is necessary to distinguish between the process , which was difficult , and the outcome which to date has been broadly successful .
The Commission , the Council and indeed the European Parliament must take note of this first experience with the early-warning mechanism and must learn certain important lessons from it :
First of all , now that economic recovery is gathering pace , the budgetary consolidation process must start again in order to meet the ' close-to-balance ' or surplus rule so that we can deal with any situations similar to those we have experienced in the past .
Secondly , we should recognise that the budgetary constraint affecting mainly the large euro area countries in 2001 and 2002 has its roots in the missed opportunities of the high-growth period 1998-2000 .
Thirdly and as discussed in this report , automatic stabilisers should be the normal means for stabilising the economy , whereas discretionary policies should remain the exception .
Nonetheless a clear agreement between the EMU policy actors on the criteria to assess when discretionary fiscal policies are justified would increase the transparency and predictability of budgetary behaviour .
Finally , Member States need to improve the compatibility between their national fiscal arrangements and EU budgetary commitments .
I would now like to say a few words about the quality and sustainability of public finances and how we are responding to the Lisbon strategy .
As regards the sustainability of public finances , good progress has been made .
The Commission and the Council have assessed the sustainability of public finances based on the medium-term budgetary targets set down in stability and convergence programmes .
The analysis clearly shows that on the basis of current policies , there is a risk of budgetary imbalances emerging in many Member States , and these risks multiply if countries fail to reach the medium-term targets set down in their stability and convergence programmes .
This year 's report also examines the quality of public spending . An in-depth debate at EU level on this issue has been hampered by the lack of an agreed definition on the quality of public spending .
The absence of timely and comparable data specifying the purposes on which public resources are spent is also a constraint .
The report attempts to take a first step in developing the debate on the quality of public spending by focussing upon the composition of public spending , and whether it is geared towards expenditure items that contribute to meeting the objectives of the Lisbon strategy , namely raising growth and employment .
This analysis suggests that most countries have been able to improve the composition of public expenditure while at the same time containing the size of the public sector during the 1990s .
However , before drawing firm policy conclusions on the quality of public spending , there is a need for complementary analysis that takes into account the specific aims of spending programmes , their design and linkages with other economic policy instruments . This is what we will be setting out to do for the coming years .
The final issue addressed in this year 's report concerns the budgetary challenges facing candidate countries .
Once they join the EU , the full acquis communautaire on budgetary policies will apply and they will be expected to submit convergence programmes .
It is essential when interpreting the budgetary positions of the candidate countries that adequate account is taken of their specific needs and circumstances .
Budgetary surveillance will also need to take into account that the candidate countries are undergoing tremendous structural and institutional changes .
Due consideration must be given to the constraints imposed by the fact that , on average , these countries are characterised by a higher degree of volatility in output levels compared with EU Member States . They are also small open economies , which rely heavily on foreign capital to finance the process of catching up .
In the run up to accession , candidate countries are not required to fulfil the Maastricht nominal convergence criteria , but rather to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
The primary concern in the pre-accession period is medium-term macroeconomic stability , rather than achieving any particular target for the budget balance .
Medium-term budgetary policy should also pursue a structure of expenditure and revenues that effectively supports economic growth .
Finally , the emphasis on structural and institutional reform should not hide the importance of sound fiscal policies .
The candidate countries ' vulnerability to economic shocks and the external constraints they face underline their need to implement prudent policies .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
We shall now proceed to a question and answer session and I would , therefore , ask all honourable Members who intend to speak to let the Bureau know so that we can share the interventions out better , bearing in mind that the questions are to take one minute .
I should add that the Bureau will be rigorous in ensuring that speakers stick to this time limit .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to say that I regard the Commission 's budgetary policy as a great achievement and to pay tribute to the competence with which it is implemented .
However , I believe that Basel II will be one of the biggest problems in the future , in fact the greatest danger for small and medium-sized enterprises since the Second World War , if we do not do our homework properly .
What do you think the impact of Basel II will be on the 40 % of companies in Europe that do not have any equity capital , what will the impact be on tax revenue and what will the effect be on the candidate countries ?
My second point is that at present our budgetary policy involves us dealing with countries that have both budget deficits and also high unemployment .
What programmes do you think would help to get these problems under control again ?
The question you are asking me is rather off the track of today 's debate , which is of a much more general nature , but it is certainly true that debt - both private and public - is a problem that must be resolved .
We are aware of the fact that private debt is posing specific problems in some countries of the Union .
And where public debt is concerned , our fundamental approach remains what it has always been : to rapidly reduce such debt , especially in those countries in which debt is reaching levels equivalent to the Gross Domestic Product .
In order to achieve this , we are creating specific primary surplus programmes to enable a rapid reduction of public debt .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to ask three very brief questions .
Does the Commissioner think as he said , that the Stability and Growth Pact should be considered to be neutral regardless of whether the economic cycle is experiencing faster growth or slower growth ?
My second question is , does the Commissioner think that it is unimportant whether public spending is undertaken as current expenditure or as investment and whether investment expenditure should not be considered as an instrument to combat a cycle of economic depression ?
My third question is , where does growth feature in the Stability Pact ?
As I stated in my presentation , I believe that the automatic stabilisers are sufficient in practically all cases , but it is essential that a position of surplus balance is reached first , so that these mechanisms can be fully effective .
The report to which I am referring contains a specific chapter dedicated to the cases in which a discretionary budgetary policy could be used , and you can read in the report that , in our opinion , this must only be used in very specific cases , affecting just one country and in a limited range of circumstances .
Of course , investment helps growth and , for this reason , we have always considered investment expenditure to be more useful than some types of current expenditure .
Nevertheless , this does not mean that it justifies exceeding the established objectives of the Stability Pact .
Therefore , I say yes to investment , but within the confines of the Stability Pact .
Commissioner , you mentioned the issue of population ageing and the related question of pensions .
The failure to carry out pension reform in the principle European countries is preventing savings benefiting from economic growth , is jeopardising national budgets and is a source of intergenerational injustice .
The calls for pension reform are repeated year after year , month after month , but no action is taken in the Member States : do you not think that it is necessary for the Commission to make more specific statements , giving more specific figures and requiring more specific undertakings , not least in order to inform the public of what is happening , of the risks we are running in the area of pensions and the risks we are continuing to hand on to the new generations ?
Otherwise , we will still be here in a year , two years , five years ' time , saying the same things without anything having changed .
I do not share the view that nothing is happening .
I think that enormous progress has been made on this issue .
Firstly , with regard to statistics , I am sure you are aware that two reports have been published , one by the Committee on Employment and another by the Committee on Economic Policy , which undertake a study of forecasts for the growth of long-term expenditure in the Union as a consequence of the ageing of the population , taking into account not only spending on pensions , but also spending on health .
Precisely on this issue , and taking account of these factors , within our obligations under the Stability Pact for long-term sustainability in public finances , Ecofin and the European Council agreed that revisions of the stability programmes should contain specific references to future obligations with regard to the problems of the ageing of the population in our countries .
And this must be done regardless of the debates that are taking place between those responsible for the pension systems in the various countries , within the Open Method of Coordination that was initiated in Lisbon .
Commissioner , in your report today you referred to the difficult revenue situation in the Member States , which is partly due to the structural reforms proposed by the Commission .
Is it not time to start concentrating more on structural deficits when considering deficits in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the stability and convergence programmes ? Or should we simply be insisting on qualification of expenditure as is the case in the USA when public finances are being discussed ?
If I have properly understood , your question refers to the importance we attach to the issue of structural deficits and to better control of public spending .
With regard to the structural deficit , it is true that the Stability Pact lays down nominal objectives .
It requires the Commission to assess , however , whether or not its objectives are being met .
We have introduced the concept of structural deficit in order to undertake this assessment and to discover the extent to which deviations are the consequence of developments in the economic cycle .
The basic difficulty consisted of finding a system that was acceptable to everyone with regard to developing this concept of structural deficit , which we are currently achieving in cooperation with the Council .
With regard to the problems of cutbacks in spending , it is true that the Stability Pact only lays down obligations for deficit .
Changes in income and expenditure are entirely a national decision on which every Member State must decide for itself .
All that we are doing in this new report is assessing what type of expenditure has the greatest effect in terms of the Lisbon commitments .
Logically , the same operation will have to be undertaken in future for revenues .
The decisions adopted for the supplementary budget are correct and are a step in the right direction .
Our concern at the moment - and I have already stated this publicly - is based on the fact that , apparently , the figure reached for 2002 would still leave us with a deficit of 2.8 % , which is too close to 3 % , with the risks inherent in this type of situation , especially since we know that the Portuguese Government has appointed a committee to carry out a study of the true state of public finances , the results of which we have not yet seen .
Mr President , Commissioner , at the recent Barcelona Summit , the Heads of State and Government undertook to fight against public debt and for improvements in the quality of public finance , in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact .
It appears , however , that the new French Government has received a mandate from President Chirac , even though he is one of the signatories to the Barcelona agreements , no longer to observe this objective of a budgetary position close-to-balance-or-in-surplus by 2004 .
Could the Commission please comment on these intentions of Mr Raffarin 's so-called ' government of action ' ?
The Commission does not wish to add anything to what I have previously stated .
The year 2004 is a commitment given by the Ecofin Council and ratified by the Barcelona Council .
The Commission is not in favour of changing this date because , although the stability programme stipulates that a situation of balance must be achieved in the medium term , this medium term was initially set for 2002 and has now been extended to 2004 .
We believe that continually putting back this date will not help us to address future situations of imbalance created by economic developments .
The second important feature of our study is that all Member States must be treated in the same way .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0017 / 2002 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Part I
Question No 27 by Struan Stevenson ( H-0337 / 02 ) :
Subject : Delay in the CFP reform proposals
Can the Commission explain why there has been a serious delay in presenting its proposals for the reform of the CFP to the Parliament ?
Can it also reassure the Parliament that this delay will not prevent approval of the key proposals during 2002 ?
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the publication of our Green Paper we , the Commission , have held wide-ranging discussions with all interested parties on the future of the common fisheries policy .
Many of the ideas that arose during these discussions were then taken on board in our proposals .
As part of the discussion of the proposals between the various cabinets , some new issues arose , issues that required in-depth responses and in some cases further analysis .
As I see it , we need to be in a position to undertake genuine reforms .
Another point here is the need to go into all issues in detail .
After all , this is ultimately not just about the Commission accepting my proposals , but also about an in-depth justification , particularly with a view to taking the wind out of the sails of potential opponents of reform .
We must make sure that the reform package is comprehensive and solid .
We have now made good progress with our work .
I am confident that I shall be presenting these proposals to the Commission at the end of this month .
Normally , the draft would only be deferred by one week , but for various reasons this period has been somewhat extended , partly because I was not available at certain times .
I intended , and indeed still intend , to present the draft to the Commission without any substantive changes in the proposals .
It is then of course up to the Commission to deliberate on this and to agree on a position acceptable to the majority of the Members of the Commission .
One last comment .
With regard to the procedure for rotating the Directors-General , I can assure you that there is no link between this and the proposals for reforming the common fisheries policy .
Preparations for a broadly based rotation have already been in hand for some time , and the fact that the rotation issue and the reform package have come at the same time is pure coincidence .
To suggest anything else would be quite wrong .
I wish to inform you that various Members have asked to table supplementary questions and , of course , we shall give the floor , in addition to the Member who made the request , to the first two Members whose names appear on the list given to me by Parliament 's staff .
There will only be two supplementary questions ; please do not raise any points of order because this is what the Rules of Procedure state : two questions and that is all .
I should like to ask a follow-up question .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his reply and I hear him say that he wishes to take time to produce further analysis and to take the wind out of the sails of any potential opponent .
I applaud any such effort .
Unfortunately , what appears to have happened just now is that the wind has been taken out of the sails of the whole reform which has become becalmed .
We are now in a position where we hope that we do not see the timetable derailed to the point where we may go beyond the end of this year and find ourselves in 2003 when some important derogations will have expired and we could potentially have a " free-for-all " in our fisheries throughout the EU .
That would not benefit any of us and would not benefit fish stocks , which are nearing collapse .
We have waited for this reform package for years .
Our fishermen are suffering .
Can we have a guarantee - and I am sure the Commission can give us this - that it retains its absolute independence in this matter and will not be subject to bullying from any individual Member State or any other source ?
Mr President , Mr Stevenson , I think there were two parts to your question . The first was about timetabling .
Let me try to be as clear as possible : at the end of this month , or to be precise on the last Wednesday of this month , I will be presenting the proposal to the Commission and it will be discussed within the Commission .
That much is clear .
What is more , this does not have any effect on the delay in the decision-making process , because even if we had agreed the Commission 's proposal three weeks ago , the timing of the first discussion in the Agriculture Council and also in this House would have been the same .
With regard to your second question , I would like to reiterate what I have said and assure you that I am certainly not willing to be persuaded by anyone to go beyond the framework of the discussions on the Green Paper and to discuss the Commission 's proposals .
My intention is still to propose a substantial reform and no one from outside is or will be able to influence my position , and certainly not in any unacceptable way !
I shall accept the points of order , but only after the two supplementary questions have been asked .
Then we shall take the point of order , because , at the moment at any rate , everything is quite in order .
. ( DE ) Mrs Miguélez Ramos , I would like to remind you that in my introduction I clearly indicated that we originally brought forward a Green Paper a year ago , and that provided a basis for a wide-ranging debate .
The proposals that I intend to present will of course take into account the various comments , contributions and discussions that have taken place over the last few months , as far as that is possible and as far as it can be reconciled with the objectives for reform .
However , it will not be possible for any instructions to be given to the Commission .
The Commission is proceeding totally independently over this and accepts all responsibility , and it is in that spirit that it will be presenting the proposals .
I wonder whether we have the right Commissioner answering questions on this subject given the delay to the package .
I accept that Mr Fischler continues to be committed to a meaningful reform of the common fisheries policy , but I wonder whether he would comment further on the suggestions that improper pressure has been put on other people in the Commission .
Perhaps the President of the Commission might be asked to make a statement on this matter .
Also could he confirm whether the Director-General of Fisheries was moved as part of a routine package ?
Was it the case that every other person who was moved under that package had only a few hours notice of that move ?
Is it the case that the particular difficulty in getting agreement on the package relates to a very specific part of the package and , if so , why is it felt necessary to delay the entire package of reform ?
Mr President , the issue of fisheries reform needs to be kept quite separate from the application of the rotation principle in the Commission .
I am in fact also a member of the Commission 's ' reform group ' , and amongst other things I have always been in favour of this rotation principle applying to A1 and A2 officials , so that these top-level Commission officials should be regularly rotated .
There had already been a discussion at an earlier stage about Mr Schmidt possibly leaving during 2003 , and I made it clear then that any change in the Director-General of Fisheries I had selected , and with whom I have a very good working relationship by the way , should take place either at the beginning of the reform , or at its conclusion , including the first phase of implementation .
I think it is irresponsible for us to be having a change in top-level posts now , just when contacts with the Member States in the Council , with Parliament and above all contacts with the stakeholders are to begin .
With my agreement , the Commission decided that this change should take place now , at the beginning , and that Mr Schmidt should be included in the package adopted .
It is highly regrettable that there have been communication problems and that Mr Schmidt was only informed of the Commission 's decision at such short notice .
But I repeat that this has no connection with fisheries reform .
Mr President , I would ask you to make an exception to your criteria for the following reasons : I did not know , and still do not , how I can ask a supplementary question when I have not heard the Commissioner 's answer or the reply from the author of the question .
I was genuinely unaware of this method of asking a question before knowing what was going to be debated here .
Secondly , I think that this question , tabled , it has to be said , by the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , is not just any question and opens a debate of enormous importance .
I therefore ask you to make an exception and allow me to ask my question .
I must tell honourable Members that this is not a general debate - they are clearly attending the wrong sitting .
This is Question Time and , in accordance with the recommendations that we ourselves approved in Parliament , there can be a maximum of two supplementary questions by two Members , preferably from different political groups and from different Member States .
I have given the floor in chronological order to a Member from the Spanish Socialist Group and to a British Member from the Group of the Greens and there are another four or five who wish to speak but who are not entitled to do so under the terms of the Rules of Procedure .
I am not happy about this situation , but that is how it is .
The more points of order we raise , the more we are preventing other Members from asking their questions .
You should really be aware of this and show some solidarity .
There will be another time to debate fisheries policy .
The Commissioner will be attending meetings of the Committee on Fisheries on 21 and 22 May - or whichever days suit him , since it is none of my business - and then you can discuss everything you wish .
Mr President , I would just like to contribute a few words to this discussion , which might help make the peace here .
The Committee on Fisheries will be dealing with this topic in detail next week , and I have undertaken to attend .
I will then be willing to answer any questions that arise in committee .

I have no doubt whatsoever that Mr Fischler will make himself available to you both in committee and in plenary , where you will be discussing an issue that , as Mr Nogueira says , is of great importance and runs through very deep waters , to use a fishing term .
Question No 28 by Myrsini Zorba ( H-0342 / 02 ) :
Subject : Child athletes
In recent years , ever younger athletes have been taking part in major sporting events .
In many cases , these children start being trained and schooled for careers in professional sport before they are even of school age .
Such children are not , however , in a position to make their own decisions about their future and are very often turned into semi-professionals or even objects of exploitation , while being fed special ' dietary supplements ' .
Bearing in mind that Europe is to host the forthcoming Olympic Games , can the Commission say whether it will take measures to tackle this problem , possibly as part of the campaign against doping which has already been launched and with reference to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child ?
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Zorba has raised the issue of protection for minors in sport .
In particular , she has referred to the risks involved in taking part in major sporting events for minors , who are often professionals or semi-professionals .
The subject of protection for young athletes was first approached in the declaration adopted by the European Council in Nice , which referred to the special nature of sport and its social function in Europe , and how these should be taken into account in common policies .
The Commission addressed this subject in the context of the Helsinki Report on Sport and of the European Sports Forum held on 26 and 27 October 2000 in Lille , particularly in the workshop on youth protection , and the special position of young people under 18 was examined in depth during the discussions between the Commission and FIFA on the rules for international transfers of football players , which were concluded in March 2001 .
However , there is one thing we should not forget : protection of young athletes is largely the responsibility of the Member States .
Nevertheless , the Commission 's own initiatives have done a great deal to encourage dialogue between the Member States on this problem .
In addition , whilst taking account of the principle of subsidiarity , measures have also been taken at Community level .
For example , on 22 June 1994 the Council adopted Directive 94 / 33 on youth employment protection .
This directive prohibits child labour , regulates work by minors and generally provides for all employees to guarantee that young people have working conditions appropriate to their age .
The key objective of the directive is therefore to promote better working conditions for minors without enforcing a total ban .
Lastly , the Commission has also launched various anti-doping measures , with particular reference to minors .
In 1999 , a report was adopted on a plan for the Community 's role in combating doping .
Furthermore , in the previous year various studies were financed , including a study on the protection of young athletes .
Lastly , the Commission is currently working on ideas for the implementation of a new Community anti-doping plan , which is intended to give even greater weight to the problems of combating doping amongst young people .
Of course I know what has been done in the past but , with the Olympic Games approaching , I think we should seriously consider if all these individual measures and studies are going to bring about a real Community action plan or , if the Commission encourages the Member States and the relevant decision is taken , national action plans on the subject .
The number of children taking dietary supplements and turning professional before they even reach school age is out of all proportion .
I think this represents a real threat to the health of these children , as well as flying in the face of the principle of sport for everyone on a voluntary basis .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Zorba , ladies and gentlemen , I can only assure you once again , and I have also checked with the appropriate departments , that there will indeed be an action plan of this kind .
I totally recognise your concerns in connection with the forthcoming Olympic Games .
That is why we need such an action plan , which will take particular account of the need for doping checks and anti-doping measures .

As they deal with the same subject , the following Questions Nos 29 and 85 will be taken together .
Question No 29 by Margrietus J. van den Berg ( H-0348 / 02 ) :
Subject : Leaked Commission wish list concerning liberalisation of services in developing countries
In connection with the GATS negotiations ( WTO ) , the Commission 's Committee 133 is currently drafting the EU 's wish list concerning the liberalisation of services in developing countries .
The Commission considers such lists to be outside the public domain .
But since 16 April , provisional lists for 29 countries have been publicly accessible via an NGO website .
They show that developing countries are also being asked to open up certain service sectors which , even in the European Union , are considered sensitive .
Has the Commission given preferential treatment to business ?
What role did the European Services Network play ?
Is it true that the Commission is calling for the opening-up of the water sector in developing countries , when Member States do not want to open up their own ?
Is there not some contradiction here ?
What is the relationship between the GATS negotiations and what the IMF requires of developing countries under its SAPs with regard to liberalisation ?
Question No 85 by Anne E.M. Van Lancker ( H-0350 / 02 ) :
Subject : Preparations for the GATS negotiations
In cooperation with Committee 133 , the Commission is currently preparing its mandate for the GATS negotiations .
Work is reportedly underway just now on a list of sectors the European Union wants to see included in the talks on liberalisation .
Will the Commission explain how these important negotiations are being prepared for and say what sectors are on the Member States ' wish list ?
Is it prepared to disclose this wish list to the European Parliament ?
It has repeatedly been affirmed that public goods such as education , healthcare and water would not be liberalised under any circumstances .
Can the Commission confirm that this position will be maintained ?
Will the wish list be submitted to the General Affairs Council for approval , or do these matters fall wholly within the Commission 's negotiating mandate ?
These two questions refer to the publication by certain non-governmental organisations and newspapers of the European Union 's draft wish lists concerning the WTO services negotiations .
These leaks , because that is what they are , are regrettable , as they are disrupting our own internal preparation for the negotiations ; the consultation process within the Community is not yet complete ; we are merely at the initial discussion stage and we have by no means reached a final position at European Union level with regard to the drafts .
In fact , in line with the procedures , we are in the process of consulting the Member States so that they can examine these initial requests , carry out their own internal consultations and submit their comments to us . This whole process will , at some point in the future , result in these draft wish lists being sent to Geneva .
The leaks are also regrettable in that they are damaging to our own negotiating position .
By making this type of draft negotiation wish list public , we are clearly putting the third countries to which they are addressed under pressure , and they in turn have had to confront a number of questions on wish lists which , from our point of view , were still in draft form .
Clearly , none of these things make negotiations any easier .
Lastly , they are regrettable because , for once , the European Parliament has not been informed before the other institutions , and has been informed just after the Council , in any event , which is counter to the rules we established together .
I would remind you that , within the constraints of the Treaty , which clearly gives priority to the Council , we have together adopted informal information and consultation procedures that have worked well so far . Moreover , I have no reason to doubt that they will continue to work well in future .
The final reason why these leaks are regrettable is that they give a kind of strange signal , as if a scoop had been made , as if this were a detective story and interesting discoveries had been made .
This , however , is not the case , as the broad lines of these proposals are public , having been posted on our web site at the end of the year 2000 , and there have been no changes to the political principles since then .
All negotiations comprise an initial stage for reflection , a second stage for transparency and a third stage for negotiation , out of the spotlight .
For now , we are at the reflection stage .
We have carefully consulted one another before sending our initial drafts to the Member States .
I can assure you that , with regard to Parliament 's positions on the services negotiations , in which it has repeatedly emphasised the need to ensure that public services are respected , a concern , what is more , which is also shared by the Commission and which we have incorporated into our proposals , these positions are exactly the same as those initially indicated .
We have indeed consulted and taken account of the points of view of a number of professional sectors and the points of view of a number of non-governmental organisations . None of these organisations have been given special treatment .
To summarise , these leaks are indeed thoroughly regrettable . Regrettable though they may be , however , they still have a positive side , since now that these secret documents have been made public , anyone who is interested will now be able to look at them closely and will see that these so-called secret proposals are entirely in line with the objectives that we stated publicly and that there is no hidden agenda , contrary to various accusations .
In particular , they will see that we have no intention of either promoting or requiring the privatisation or dismantling of public services in any sector or in any country .
So far , in fact , there has been only one victim of the publication of these wish lists , and that is the myth of the hidden agenda , which has been so completely discredited that I am now sometimes even suspected of having organised this leak myself in order to show how greatly what we were doing in secret tallied with what we announced publicly .
Naturally , I refute any statements of this nature .
To get to the bottom of this , let us recall briefly that the WTO services agreement is the most flexible agreement imaginable , that it allows each country to draw up a list of activities for which it is willing to offer access to its market and treat foreign providers as nationals , that any country may exclude activities it considers to be politically sensitive from its commitments and that , as a result , the problems of differing economic and social situations in the participating countries are taken into consideration .
What is more , the members of the WTO have the sovereign right to regulate trading and other activities in their territory according to specific public objectives .
This is the general principle .
On the draft wish lists in question , in line with both the negotiation proposals we previously submitted and the objectives we have already stated , our requests concern a number of sectors , which I shall list briefly : the professions , business services , shipping , postal services , telecommunications , construction and engineering , distribution , environmental services , financial services , tourism , travel , transport and energy .
Neither healthcare nor education , as you have just heard , are on this list , and we have not addressed any requests to third countries in either the healthcare or education sectors , and , I must add , we ourselves have no intention , at least at this stage , of making offers in this field .
One question remains , to which Mr van den Berg has drawn our attention : the issue of water in developing countries . This is indeed a complex matter .
We , the Commission , are convinced that , in the case of water , we have good reason to address requests to third countries with regard to water supply .
I must specify ' water supply ' , to distinguish it clearly from the problem of access to water resources , which is outside the scope of the WTO agreement on services .
We consider , following a number of international works , that , if the billion or billion and a half people on Earth who have no access to water are to have access to it in the next ten years , we will need private funding .
The volume of capital which needs to be invested in this type of infrastructure currently stands at around USD 200 billion .
Current investments stand at around USD 70 to 80 billion .
The difference cannot be remedied solely with public funds .
We therefore consider that the GATS negotiations , if properly directed , could provide a useful contribution to an international effort that has been undertaken to achieve the WTO millennium objectives in the field of water .
One last point , which was raised by Mr van den Berg . That is the question of the relationship between the requirements , or conditions , formulated by the IMF with regard to the LDCs and the WTO negotiations .
On this point , the response is as follows : the services negotiations and the IMF structural adjustment programmes are not related .
This being so , the developing countries that have or are said to have made commitments under the structural adjustment programmes should , if I may say so , use this to their advantage in the international negotiations .
Until these conditions are consolidated by the WTO , they are not considered obligatory from the point of view of the WTO and , consequently , countries which , for one reason or another , have been obliged to accept or have accepted conditions of this type from the IMF may use this advantage in the WTO negotiations .
As far as we are concerned , in any case , we are prepared to consider this very favourably .
Although we think very highly of the Commissioner , it is true that we did not imagine he had developed a secret strategy of such a kind that the hidden list was of his own making .
However , now that this list is before us , I see that the Commissioner has said that if we make a request , not one single country will be forced to endorse something which they do not want .
They decide for themselves what the public sector represents .
As I understand it , the Commissioner works on the principle of commitment , and I would like to ask him whether he can confirm once more that as far as he is concerned - and this is also a dynamic between the Commission and Parliament - this commitment in principle means that whatever we do not want to do to ourselves or ask of ourselves - for example in the field of water or in education , health care or other sectors - we will not impose on others either .
And that , should we deviate from this , we will have a careful exchange of views beforehand .
In my view , it is crucial for us to be well acquainted with this political commitment , this clear line .
And furthermore , I believe that Johannesburg is probably a good place to ensure that as far as water is concerned , access remains in public hands , but that financing from private sources could possibly be further developed .
I would ask you , Commissioner and ladies and gentlemen , to be as brief as possible because we have gone beyond every imaginable time limit to accommodate this question .
Very briefly , please allow me to distinguish clearly between Community and WTO service systems .
We have Community systems , which we enforce for our own reasons , and , within the WTO , we adopt positions that are sometimes different .
We can , of course , rather than just making sure we go no further than we have internally , go less far than we have internally , and that is precisely our policy .
With regard to your second specific question , are we asking others to liberalise sectors in which we are not ready to make commitments ?
That is not our policy : the instructions I have given and what I have said publicly are that , should we do so , we would only do so on an exceptional basis and , consequently , should the occasion arise , we would coordinate and consult as necessary .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his clear response .
I have to say that I myself was pleased with the NGOs ' reports .
I only wanted to ask the Commissioner , by way of clarification , whether , once these talks are finished , he will be returning to the General Affairs Council in order to obtain an official mandate , or does the Commission already have this mandate as part of its remit ?
It is true that particularly on the subject of water , great controversy has arisen in Europe too .
My mandate as Commissioner is the same as that adopted by the Council , and also by Parliament , moreover , in 1999 for Seattle .
The extension of this mandate and the reservations I have therefore appear in this document , which is a public document .
With regard to services , I would remind you that the GATS negotiations take place in stages : first , requests , when everyone makes requests of everyone else , then offers , when everyone makes offers to everyone else .
The deadline for requests is set at June this year , while the deadline for offers is March 2003 . It is only at the end that , having considered the requests and offers , each party takes its position .
It is then , probably towards the end or the middle of 2004 , that we shall know exactly what we are prepared to offer and I shall make these offers , as I have done so far , in cooperation with the Council , with Parliament and with a number of other professional and other sectors of civil society that are concerned by these matters .
I would thank the EU Commissioner for his answer , and I have a follow-up question .
It has been stated in quite a few newspaper articles that the Commission intends linking demands for liberalisation of services in other countries to a reduction in , or removal of , EU export subsidies in the agricultural sphere .
I believe that any such link between demands for liberalisation in other countries and the EU 's obvious reduction in its export subsidies in the agricultural sphere is indefensible and to be repudiated .
I wonder if the Commissioner can guarantee that this will not apply and that there will be no link between the issue of export subsidies for agricultural products from the EU and demands for liberalisation of public services in other countries .
Quite frankly , I do not think this type of relationship exists .
The terms of the agricultural negotiations led mainly by my colleague Mr Fischler , with my assistance , were fixed at Doha , and each one of us around the table undertook to improve our market access , reduce domestic aid and also decrease aid for exports .
Those were the broad lines agreed by everyone at Doha .
Then comes the question of quantity : how much ?
That was precisely the subject of the negotiations and , as far as I know , there is no link of the type you are suggesting between deregulation on the one hand and reductions in subsidies on the other .
.
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , we know that the GATS negotiations are intended to bring a greater degree of prosperity to developing countries , with liberalisation bringing advantages for consumers and generally being aimed at the companies in question .
That is why I am interested to know which service sectors are being given priority by the Commission in the negotiations .
Mr Rübig , I have indicated which sectors take priority .
All in all , these are the sectors in which the European Union has a clear relative advantage .
Financial services , telecommunications , distribution and construction services are the most frequently discussed during bilateral visits and negotiations .
Roughly , these sectors constitute around 70 % of the GDP of the European Union and so far they only account for 25 % of our exports , which proves that there is a great deal of potential there to be exploited .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Mr Lamy .
Second part
Questions to Commissioner Schreyer
As the author is not present , Question No 30 lapses .
Question No 31 by Göran Färm ( H-0343 / 02 ) :
Subject : Implementation of the budget
For a number of years now , the EU 's budget out-turn has been a large surplus .
This is a negative trend since it implies that committed funding is not reaching its intended destination .
In the long run this will jeopardise the EU 's credibility .
What steps will the Commission take to resolve this serious problem ?
Is the Commission in consultation with the Council and the Member States with a view to improving the implementation of the Union 's budget ?
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my response to Mr Färm 's question is as follows : in budget year 2001 commitment appropriations totalling 97 % were implemented .
This was a clear improvement as compared with the previous year , when the implementation rate for commitment appropriations was 82 % .
However , the picture was quite different for payment appropriations , where the utilisation rate of funds available was 82 % in 2001 , that is below the already low rate of the previous year , 2000 , which was 88 % .
The surpluses in budget year 2001 were chiefly due to inadequate utilisation of Structural Fund appropriations of EUR 9.4 billion , cohesion fund monies and funds under the pre-accession instruments - ISPA , Sapard and Phare .
However , another not insignificant contribution to the 2001 budget surplus came from savings in the agricultural sector totalling some EUR 1.9 billion .
In the case of the Structural Funds , the chief reason for underutilisation was delay in the introduction of programmes under the new 2000-2006 planning period .
Two factors combined in the case of Sapard and ISPA - teething problems with new activities and setting up the necessary administrative structures in the accession states .
The Commission is very concerned about this trend and has already taken a variety of preventive measures to strengthen the measures adopted in 2001 .
These include calling on the Member States , who are responsible for implementing the programmes , to strictly observe the implementation plan for the period 2000 to 2006 , including the n + 2 rule under Article 31 of Regulation 1260 / 1999 .
This rule applies to individual programmes with effect from 31 December 2002 , otherwise with effect from 31 December 2003 .
Commissioner Barnier specifically drew the Member States ' attention to this rule in his letter of 21 November 2001 .
The Commission regularly updates the Member States about commitments where there is a risk that this rule could apply .
The most recent update was in April 2002 .
The Member States were given a deadline of 31 March 2003 to submit their applications for final payments for programmes in the last planning period , that is the 1994-1999 programme planning period .
In the case of the Cohesion Fund , any decision on financing will set a binding deadline for presenting these payment appropriations .
The Commission has indicated to the Member States that it is fundamentally opposed to any extension of these deadlines .
Implementation of Structural Fund measures is in future to be more strictly monitored over the course of the year than has been the case up to now , in particular by means of the new payment forecasts to be prepared by the Member States .
These forecasts are now notified to the budgetary authority as part of the budget procedure .
Furthermore , the Commission will notify those Member States concerned that they run the risk of automatic cancellation of commitments that have remained unspent for excessively long periods .
Estimates of Member States ' requirements for the budget year 2001 under the Structural Funds in terms of payments due - excluding advance payments - were EUR 15 billion higher than the amount actually drawn by the Member States .
As regards other budget lines , the Commission is anxious to refine its forecasting of requirements , and to further extend the implementation plan for the 2002 budget , so that an early warning system would identify any discrepancies between implementation needs and funds available in good time .
This plan should enable budget implementation to be monitored over the course of the entire year , and a report will then be made to the budgetary authority in September and November 2002 , as we have already promised you .
I should like to thank Commissioner Schreyer for her constructive answer to my question .
In my capacity as rapporteur for the Budget , I was naturally able to discuss this with Mrs Schreyer in connection with the debate on the 2003 Budget , but I preferred to deal with the issue in the form of questions , for this is a much bigger problem and one that is much more a matter of principle .
The budgetary authority makes decisions about regional and aid policy because we want to achieve something in terms of employment in poor regions and in terms of aid to the world 's poor countries .
If we discover that a large part of what we have in fact made decisions about is not being implemented , then that is a major democratic problem which can lead to a decline in people 's confidence in the EU .
I therefore believe that we must get the Member States , the Council , the Commission and Parliament to implement an action plan together in order for conditions really to be changed .
I also have a final question for Mrs Schreyer .
Does the Commission think that the Member States are sufficiently prepared to really do something about the problems ?
Sometimes , I get the feeling that the Finance Ministers of the Member States are enthusiastic mostly about the fact that they are getting money back .
Is there a genuine desire to really do something about the problems together with the Commission and Parliament ?
Mr Färm , I would first like to point out that implementation in the area you have mentioned , external aid , has significantly improved over the last two years .
Last year , in 2001 , nearly all available payment appropriations were implemented .
This is really a major change compared with previous years .
This is an area where reforms and above all the measures taken by my colleagues Chris Patten and Poul Nielson are really having a positive effect .
In response to the second part of your question , the Member States are certainly interested in seeing Structural Fund monies spent as well now .
So you are quite right , on the one hand the Finance Ministers are of course pleased if money flows back into their coffers in any given budget year , but on the other hand it is those very same Finance Ministers who prepare forecasts about how much is drawn down from the structural funds in any year .
So on the one hand we have forecasts and the enormous discrepancy between those forecasts and final out-turns , and on the other hand the fact that it is very much welcome when funds flow back .
At present we are considering how we can use instruments to make the forecasts on which we base our proposals more specific and perhaps also more binding .
I would like to point out that , in the case of measures to promote the development of rural areas , if the Member States ' forecasts of their requirements deviate by a certain percentage from what prove to be their actual requirements , then that is deducted the following year as a kind of penalty .
This is a very draconian arrangement , but it has been shown to work .
My colleague Commissioner Barnier has also been working on how we can improve the discrepancy currently existing in the Structural Funds .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am not going to talk to you about the huge numbers that you deal with .
We all know that , of the 1.27 % , 1.14 % is committed and approximately 1 % is spent .
But we always blame the Member States for this and say that they commit more than they are then able to spend .
I am going to ask you a very specific question about a programme that falls within the sole and exclusive competence of the Commission , which is the LIFE programme .
The LIFE programme , which was allocated around EUR 100 million last year , committed EUR 20 million of its funds , despite having more than enough projects , which had been carefully evaluated and classified , for the programme to have been able to commit all EUR 100 million .
This year , in which you will be assessing this programme - if you have not already done so , because it was due to be assessed any time now - is the Commission going to do the same ?
What are you going to do to ensure that the Commission allocates 100 % of its appropriations and that , furthermore , it keeps some projects in reserve , since these programmes reached the normal level of implementation that you mentioned , of 70 % or 80 % , which is then spent within the Commission ?
Commissioner , the Commission alone is responsible for this , not the Members States .
. ( DE ) Mrs Redondo Jiménez , you are quite right in saying that with the Structural Funds we virtually end up refunding the Member States ' expenditure .
That means that if no invoices are available , no payments can be made , whereas the LIFE programme works through direct implementation .
Last year there was some delay with certain invitations to tender .
Unfortunately , I am not in a position to tell you what the actual implementation rate was .
I will be very happy to let you have specific figures - very precise and detailed figures - in writing .
Thank you very much , Mrs Schreyer .
Questions to Commissioner Busquin
Question No 32 by Bart Staes ( H-0266 / 02 ) :
Subject : The European budget and support for the arms industry
According to the Institute for Security Studies , in 1999 the EU spent between EUR 1.5 and 2 billion on items relating in one way or another to armaments .
Most of the money is channelled through the Structural Funds and the research and technology budget of the Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development .
Can the Commission confirm this assertion ?
To what extent are EU funds used directly or indirectly to support the arms industry ? How much does the EU spend on measures to convert production away from armaments ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the two chapters of the Community budget mentioned by Mr Staes as a source of credit to support the arms industry , the Commission would like to make the following clarifications .
In the case of the Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , the Commission points out that the text of the decision on the Fifth Framework Programme , which is currently underway , having been adopted by joint decision of Parliament and of the Council , stipulates that funding under this programme must be granted to projects with civil objectives .
In practical terms , this means that specific support for the arms industry is not possible through the research framework programme .
As concerns the Structural Funds , the Commission launched a programme in 1993 , in the context of a crisis in the defence industry , called ' Konver ' . This was an aid programme to convert the labour market areas most affected by the reduction in armament activities or the closure of military sites .
The aim of the Community initiatives was to support the diversification of sectors heavily dependent on defence by converting production away from areas related to defence and developing the activities of industrial sectors other than the military sector .
The multiannual Konver programme , which ran from 1994 to 1999 , financed measures such as the acquisition of new civil qualifications by staff , the diversification of the economic structure of companies , aid for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises , the reallocation of military sites to new civil sectors and the rehabilitation of the environment .
With regard to the budget , the funding allocated to these Structural Funds is EUR 739 million at 1996 prices , which is an average of EUR 125 million per year .
During the 2000-2006 programme period , Konver was abolished as a separate initiative , but actions financed by Konver are still possible within the context of programmes relating to objectives 1 and 2 .
Thank you , Mr President , thank you , Commissioner Busquin , for the reply .
I would like you to explain something in more detail .
You spelled out that the framework programme can only be used for civilian purposes , not for military purposes .
At least , this is how I understood it .
Of course , we also have a number of dual-use products , products that can be deployed both in the civilian and military sector .
Can the Commissioner confirm , or give us the assurance , that the money from the framework programme will not be used for these dual-use products ?
Secondly , the Commissioner stated that for the period 2000-2006 , the ' Konver ' programme no longer exists per se , but that actions are still possible and that applications can be submitted .
Would he be able to inform us whether there are any projects ongoing in the spirit of the previous ' Konver ' programme ?
I thank him for his response .
I would like to respond to Mr Staes on two accounts .
First of all , with regard to the research programme , the Treaty and the texts relating to the Fifth Framework Programme are clear : the Commission has no legal competence in the field of specific military research as this field falls within the scope of intergovernmental cooperation and of the WEU .
I am talking about Article 17 of the Treaty .
The decision on the Fifth Framework Programme stipulates that the financial aid granted by the Community to research projects within the context of the Framework Programme will be used exclusively for civil purposes .
It does not , therefore , authorise specific aid for research that is both military and civil in nature .
The same is true of the proposal concerning the Sixth Framework Programme .
It is also very clear that it is not , of course , always easy to assess the proportion of civil research that might be applied in the military sector .
There are , for example , information technology research programmes which , although set up for civil purposes , could at some point have a military use . We are , however , only carrying out research programmes with civil objectives .
That takes care of the research programme .
With regard to Konver , I have said that the actions financed by Konver are still possible within the context of programmes relating to Objectives 1 and 2 , which are the responsibility of my colleague , Mr Barnier .
I have no other information so I cannot tell you the proportion of actions currently financed by Konver under Objectives 1 and 2 .
I will say , however , that the aim of the Konver programmes is to convert the labour market sectors most affected by the reduction in armament activities or the closure of military sites .
For that reason , the aim of these programmes is a socio-economic aim , which I believe is along the lines you advocate .
Question No 33 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0326 / 02 ) :
Subject : Member State constitutions and the Sixth Framework Programme
In view of the Commission 's unsatisfactory answer to my question H-0167 / 02
The Commission is aware that human embryo research is subject to the ethical choices and the regulations which differ from one country to another .
As far as the ethical framework of the Sixth Framework Programme is concerned , the rules proposed by the Commission are in line with Parliament 's amendment made at first reading on the Sixth Framework Programme as well as with the opinion of the European Group on Ethics .
These are also based on the rules of the Fifth Framework Programme for Research .
The Commission 's position was reiterated in a statement made when the Council approved the common position on the Sixth Framework Programme for Research .
It implies that those participating in Community research programmes must strictly observe national legislation and codes of ethics .
The local ethics committees or the appropriate national authorities must be consulted and give a favourable opinion or their agreement before research is undertaken .
As we have already stated in our previous answer , in areas in which the Community has formal competence , which is the case in the area of research , national legislation should not prevent a specific Community-level action , which would have been adopted under the co-decision procedure involving the Council and Parliament .
In this context , the Commission believes that the use of funds for research activities of the Sixth Framework Programme must be made whilst strictly observing decisions which will be taken under co-decision by the Council and Parliament .
The Commission is also well aware that the respect of the various cultures and ethical approaches in Europe does not justify a laissez-faire attitude .
As in the past , the Commission will submit any proposal relating to ethical issues to an ethical investigation assisted by external experts .
Mr President , this is not a simple ethical issue .
It is about the taking of human lives for research purposes .
That is why I would like to put a very precise question to the Commissioner : can you guarantee that no European taxpayers could find themselves paying , through their taxes , for research that would be subject to legal penalties if it were being carried out in their own Member State ?
It is obvious that , in each Member State , the legislation of that Member State must of course be respected .
This is absolutely essential .
We said that a research programme is a Community proposal which was adopted under co-decision between the Council and Parliament .
We will obviously ensure , therefore , that the ethics committees which study each proposal take into account all the specific characteristics of both the scientific community and the local legislation .
Can I ask the Commissioner : if this morning 's debate is anything to go by , Parliament will probably accept the common position subject to the en bloc agreed amendments .
But I am slightly at a loss to know exactly what that will mean in this particular area .
So perhaps the Commissioner could clarify , for example : if an application for embryonic stem cell research came from the UK , or from Italy , or from Germany , would there be EU funding in each of those cases ?
I should like to re-read the statement I made at this debate this morning .
The Commission has included the following statement in the Council 's Minutes : ' In accordance with the opinion of the European Parliament concerning the proposal on the Sixth Framework Programme and taking into account the opinion of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies , the Commission believes that research in the following areas must not be financed by the framework programme : research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes , research activity resulting in the modification of the genetic heritage of human beings , which could make such changes hereditary , research activity to create embryos solely for research purposes or to supply stem cells , including somatic cell nuclear transfer ' and , of course , an article on animal experiments which must be replaced .
This is the approach that we are taking .
As I said , however , each programme , each project in these areas can - and , in fact , must - be examined by an ad hoc ethics committee .
It is not possible therefore to think too far ahead on this type of proposal which could be made at European level .
In each Member State , research can of course be carried out in accordance with the legislation of each Member State .
But at European level , this is the approach which seems to be most acceptable to everyone , or at least by a majority of MEPs and certainly by a majority of Council members .
It is very important .
The Commissioner seemed in the interpretation to say that embryonic stem cell research would not be allowed to receive funding at all .
That is not my understanding of the situation .
I can read out to you again the exact text on the issue of embryos : This includes ' research activity to create embryos solely for research purposes or to supply stem cells , including somatic cell nuclear transfer ' .
It is therefore clear that this research will not be financed .
I want to put this follow-up question to Commissioner Bosquin : how does the Commissioner believe that people 's confidence in the European Union and the EU 's common research programme will be affected in the various Member States , especially in the four countries which have legislated to ban the use of embryo stem cells ?
Is it not an important issue concerning confidence in the EU and the common research policy if the European Union itself carries out research programmes in areas in which these countries have taken political steps to ban research ?
Should EU research not be concerned with areas about which there is consensus instead of areas that are controversial ?
Of course , Community research aims , as far as possible , to have common objectives .
We have already debated this subject at great length , however .
Each Member State and national parliament has different ideas and approaches .
What we want to do , therefore , is , of course , to respect the role of each national parliament , of each Member State , but we cannot impose a national position on the whole of Europe either , because positions throughout Europe vary considerably .
As the honourable Members know , these debates are very interesting , but only two supplementary questions can be taken , as the Rules of Procedure state .
Question No 34 by Phillip Whitehead ( H-0330 / 02 ) :
Subject : Work of the European Group on Ethics
Will the Commission guarantee that in the new Action Plan on life sciences , the ethical implications of biotechnology and genetic research will remain under consideration without delaying potentially beneficial technologies such as genetic testing and pharmacogenomics and if so , how ?
Mr President , Mr Whitehead , the Commission has indeed acknowledged , in the action plan on life sciences and biotechnology published on 23 January 2002 , that this area requires us to take into account both ethical and economic , even industrial considerations .
The Commission is convinced that we can and must reconcile these two dimensions , including in the area of genetic and pharmacogenomic testing .
In practice , this involves , first and foremost , identifying and analysing the ethical , legal and social implications as early as possible in the development phases and before the technologies are widely applied .
It is important to encourage ethics experts , lawyers and sociologists to work closely with scientists and manufacturers , in order to encourage their mutual education and a dialogue involving the main players , including patients , political decision-makers and the public in the widest sense .
These initiatives will be included in the objectives of the Sixth Framework Programme for research , particularly under the first priority thematic area of ' Genomics and biotechnology for health ' .
Secondly , we wish to continue to stimulate research into ethics in order to increase knowledge and further understanding of the various approaches at European level .
Thirdly , we want to develop a legal and regulatory framework for biotechnology , concerning , in particular , genetic tests , which is based on a broad social consensus which can only be achieved through open , two-way communication .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he will personally be involved in the drawing up and implementation of the work plan which is being produced by the European Group on Ethics ?
If he is , will he take into account the fact that these debates involve matters of urgency as well as fundamental principle ?
Mr Whitehead , I would ask you to repeat the last part of your question , which was not very clear .
Does the Commissioner acknowledge that there are questions of urgency in some of the research involved , as well as the fundamental debate on first principles and that this should not be an area in which there is unnecessary filibustering by any ethical committee or group ?
We of course want these questions to be the subject of a broad debate .
These are problems for society .
However , I do not believe that this debate will delay the adoption of a framework programme for research , which is much wider .
We must not focus the problems on this aspect alone .
On the basis of the discussions on the last two questions and the fact we are approving the research programme tomorrow - hopefully - I would like to ask the Commissioner a direct question .
It is quite clear that the Group on Ethics is going to be increasingly important , so are you not a little concerned that there is no clear work plan for it ?
Are you not a little concerned that there is no chairman at the moment ?
And can you guarantee us personally , that you are going to ensure that the questions that myself and other colleagues wanted to ask you today about the work of this group and the appointment of a new chairman are going to be answered quickly and correctly , in an open and transparent way ?
I hope that you can give us some quick and clear promises about this because we are very concerned that this is done quickly .
Mr Bowe , as far as the science / society aspect of the new framework programme is concerned , we have drawn up an action plan which is designed to establish contacts and widen the debate with the citizens on these issues . This aspect is particularly important to Parliament , which is illustrated , for example , by the fact that it has allocated a more substantial budget for science / society problems .
Ethical questions occupy an important place in the science / society action plan .
In the next framework programme , we must clearly increase the financial resources at European level in order to launch a dialogue that is as useful as possible on these issues .
Since you , Commissioner , will evidently be using the European Group on Ethics as an instrument for conducting the framework programme on research , can you let us know to what extent you will inform Parliament about the advice given to you by that group , about the composition of the group and indeed the discussions that you have with the group and with its Chair - when that person arrives ?
Mrs McNally , as you know , the European Group on Ethics was set up some years ago now .
It was chaired by Mrs Lenoir and acquired , I believe , a certain reputation , a reputation as a result of its opinions . These are moderate opinions , which are generally accepted and are , of course , communicated to Parliament .
I believe that you had invited Mrs Lenoir to come before the House .
I now understand that Mrs Lenoir has resigned from her position as chair for personal reasons , meaning that the European Group on Ethics , whose members had recently been appointed , will have to elect a new president , most likely in the next few months .
Whatever happens , the Commission President , Mr Prodi , is following events closely .
I believe that , up to now , the ethics group issued opinions - which were , of course , only opinions - and these were prepared in a pluralist manner .
In other words , scientists , lawyers and sociologists all contributed - and it is important that this is the case for contributions to an open debate on these issues , which are , of course , fundamental but also delicate .
The European Group on Ethics has so far produced some extremely valuable work and I hope that it will continue to do so in the future .
Thank you , Mr Busquin .
Questions to Commissioner Verheugen
Question No 35 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0264 / 02 ) :
Subject : Protection of Roma from racial discrimination in Europe
A Council of Europe report entitled ' Extremist Threats to Democracy ' reveals that there has been a surge in racist attacks on Roma in many of the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe .
The report goes on to express fears that Roma are also subjected to discrimination of a clearly xenophobic and racist nature in the Member States , for which political forces participating in the governments of those States are partly responsible .
Since this report reaches different conclusions from the optimistic reports produced by EU observers on the applicant countries ' progress towards accession , will the Commission say what measures the applicant countries are taking to ensure a high level of protection for Roma from racial and ethnic discrimination ?
Will the Commission also provide information on the situation in the Member States ?
Mr President , Mr Papayannakis , there is no doubt that discrimination against Roma is still prevalent in many candidate countries and that living conditions for Roma are still very difficult .
The Commission has repeatedly mentioned this and other deficiencies in its regular reports .
Further efforts are needed , combined with appropriate financial support , to ensure that the various programmes are implemented in the candidate countries in a lasting way .
I do not therefore share Mr Papayannakis 's opinion that the Commission 's conclusions in this area are too optimistic .
I would be very happy to make the relevant extracts from the Commission 's statements and reports available to you again .
The Commission has constantly touched on this subject in the pre-accession strategy , and also regularly monitors developments .
However , the issue of discrimination against Roma is a long-standing one of a very complex nature and we have to accept that extensive improvements will only be possible in the medium and long term .
The Commission has demanded that all candidate countries with a significant Roma population should implement national action plans to combat discrimination , and that has indeed taken place .
Various EU programmes have made an important contribution towards this .
However , I also have to make it very clear that our political message to the candidate countries is that they are responsible for improving the position of Roma .
We should not let these countries wriggle out of their responsibility for this problem .
In July 2000 , the European Union adopted binding legislation banning racial and ethnic discrimination at the workplace , in education , in the social field , etc .
A second directive bans discrimination at the workplace on grounds of religion and faith , disability , age and sexual orientation .
The Member States have to transpose these directives into national law by 2003 , that is to say that the future new Member States must implement these directives before they join the European Union .
The legal framework goes hand in hand with an action programme with a budget of EUR 100 million which should increase our ability to combat racism and all other forms of discrimination .
Furthermore , in November 2001 the Commission presented a proposal for a Council framework decision with a view to creating a legal instrument in the field of criminal law .
The aim of this legal instrument is to ensure that racist and xenophobic behaviour in all Member States attracts the same sentences for the same offences .
The second objective is to ensure that judicial cooperation in this area is enhanced and promoted .
Mr President , I have one comment and one question .
My intention was not to accuse the Commission of rampant optimism , I was merely comparing what the Commission says with the Council of Europe report entitled " Extremist threat to democracy " and I used that as the basis for my judgment .
The question , Commissioner , is this : we are calling for everyone else to do a whole host of things .
But what are we doing ?
I do not mean programmes and money , I mean something else .
You know that , because they have no country of their own to look after them , no place to call home , the Roma , of whom there are some 7 or 8 million , need to find a different mode of expression .
They have set up a council , they have made a number of requests , they have asked for a pan-European forum , they have asked for special relations with institutions of the European Union , some sort of recognition because , as they have no country to recognise them and kick up a fuss about the holocaust , the horrendous holocaust which they suffered half a century ago , someone has to speak for them .
We cannot speak for them .
Do you intend to submit a proposal for us to recognise some sort of special representation of the Roma to the European Union ?
. ( DE ) No , Mr Papayannakis , the Commission does not have any such proposals and I must make it quite clear that I would have great concerns about agreeing to the idea that the Roma issue should be ' Europeanised ' by treating Roma as a transnational European minority with their own European minority status .
No , I believe that what we need to do here is to urge the Member States and future Member States , using all the means at our disposal , to vigorously combat the problem of discrimination , and by means of Community programmes we can help to support that fight , which is just what we are doing .
Question No 36 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0280 / 02 ) :
Subject : Cyprus
What plans does the Commission have to lift or ease the trade and economic embargo on Northern Cyprus , within the limits of European and international law , in order to help alleviate the present isolation of the Turkish Cypriot people and assist in the progress towards a political settlement on the island with a view to EU accession ?
. ( DE ) Baroness Ludford , in accordance with the judgment of the European Court of Justice of 5 July 1994 on the Anastasiou case , Cypriot goods have privileged access to the EU market if accompanied by a certificate of origin issued by the relevant authorities in the Republic of Cyprus .
At present , Turkish Cypriot exporters based in Northern Cyprus are required to use the stamp of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus .
This Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is not recognised under international law by any state in the entire world except Turkey .
That is why this stamp cannot be used as proof of the Cypriot origin of goods in accordance with the regulations .
On 5 August 1994 Cyprus 's President Klerides formally notified the Secretary-General of the United Nations in writing that if the procedures laid down under national , European and international law were adhered to , Turkish Cypriots could export their goods in accordance with the same conditions as the population of the remainder of Cyprus .
This letter accordingly gave a clear political undertaking on the part of the Republic of Cyprus to issue certificates of origin at the request of Turkish Cypriot exporters .
It is therefore up to the Cypriots to reach agreement on how Turkish Cypriots are in practice to obtain certificates of origin issued by the Republic of Cyprus .
Baroness Ludford , I am sure that we both agree with all the Members of this House that it will only be possible to find a solution to this incredibly difficult problem as part of the solution to the Cyprus question as a whole .
That is why it is one of our objectives to solve this problem , which is also very unfortunate for Turkish Cypriots , so that the Cyprus question can be resolved this year before we take decisions on accession .
Commissioner , would you not agree that trade is a wonderful way of breaking through political quarrels ?
Surely it is not necessary to recognise the TRNC for a kilo of tomatoes grown in the north to be sold across the Green Line .
I simply cannot see that our refusal to trade with the northern Cypriots squares with our express desire to see the complete island - north and south - fully integrated into the European Union .
. ( DE ) Mr Duff , we are not refusing to trade with the Turkish Cypriots .
I very much agree with you that from the Commission 's point of view the increased involvement of the northern part of Cyprus in trade is if anything highly desirable , because it is a very regrettable situation that the Greek part of the island is developing positively and rapidly whilst the Turkish part is sinking ever deeper into poverty .
We are not refusing to trade .
The problem is that the Turkish Cypriots are being prevented by their own ' authorities ' , and please note the quotation marks , from fulfilling the necessary requirements , by which I mean the certificates of origin that cannot be issued by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus but only by the Republic of Cyprus , which is recognised under international law .
There is nothing the Commission can do to change this perfectly clear legal situation .
We would undoubtedly be breaking the law if we were to behave any differently in this case .
Question No 37 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0324 / 02 ) :
Subject : Prospects of a settlement in Cyprus and accession negotiations
In the Commission 's view , what are the prospects of reaching a settlement in Cyprus by June 2002 and to what extent does it consider that the Turkish Cypriots can finally be involved in the accession process ?
Will the Commission point out to Mr Denktash that obstructing dialogue and attempting to give the impression that the Cyprus question can be resolved on the very eve of closing negotiations for the accession of the applicant countries , or after that point , will not prevent the accession of the Republic of Cyprus but , on the contrary , will harm the vital interests of the Turkish Cypriots ?
.
( DE ) Mr Hatzidakis , I quite agree with you . At present it is impossible to judge if the direct discussions in Cyprus about the resolution of the conflict will have the desired outcome .
The Commission fully supports the direct discussions between the leaders of the two communities and their declared intention of finding a solution by the end of June 2002 .
The Turkish Cypriots have been invited to take part in the accession negotiations as part of the Cypriot delegation .
This invitation has been on the table since 1998 , but the Turkish Cypriots have so far unfortunately not accepted it .
The present situation in Cyprus in no way alters the planned timetable for expansion .
The Helsinki Strategy remains equally valid .
The desired outcome is to solve the conflict , but that is not a prerequisite for Cyprus 's accession .
The Council will make the final decision taking account of all relevant factors .
The Commission does not intend to send a note to the leader of the Turkish Cypriots , Rauf Denktash .
However , the Commission is willing to continue the dialogue with Mr Denktash .
I myself have had three detailed discussions with Mr Denktash during my period of office .
These discussions covered all the key political issues around Cyprus 's accession to the EU and the resolution of the conflict .
Commissioner , that you are fully acquainted with the Cyprus issue I do not doubt .
But my question was more specific than your reply .
You have reiterated what was said in Helsinki and of course I have a great deal of respect for that , but what I am referring to are the negotiations taking place between the two sides .
These negotiations may finish in June .
On the other hand , they may not . Does the Commission intend to make it clear to the Turkish Cypriots that if , for any reason , they obstruct the negotiations or give us to understand that they will probably agree next year , Cyprus will still accede to the Union ?
As you know , this is a scenario which is currently being discussed .
We may have a situation where Cyprus does not accede to the European Union due to obstruction on the part of the Turkish Cypriots , who give us reason to believe they will agree later , with the result that we delay Cyprus 's accession to the European Union .
That was my specific question .
. ( DE ) Mr Hatzidakis , I have already answered your question and I repeat what I said .
Every word I used was important .
The present situation in Cyprus in no way alters the planned timetable for expansion .
That means that the decision on accessions will be taken in Copenhagen at the end of this year , as planned .
As I can safely assume that the negotiations with Cyprus will have been concluded by then , and , as you know the negotiations with Cyprus are going extremely well , the decision about Cyprus will of course also be taken at the end of this year .
One of most important political messages I had to send during my most recent visit to Cyprus and also during my most recent visits to Turkey and Greece was that the timetable for expansion would be respected regardless of the situation in Cyprus .
Question No 38 by Michl Ebner , which has been taken over by Mr Posselt ( H-0295 / 02 ) :
Subject : Benes Decree of 19 May 1945
With regard to the Decree of the President of the Republic of Czechoslovakia of 19 May 1945 ' concerning the invalidity of transactions involving property rights from the time of the oppression and concerning the national administration of property assets of Germans , Magyars , traitors and collaborationists and of certain organisations and associations ' ( Benes Decree ) , will the Commission say whether that decree is still in force and whether any census has been conducted in the Czech Republic since 8 May 1946 ?
. ( DE ) Mr Posselt , as far as the Commission is aware , Decree No 5 of 19 May 1945 has not been formally rescinded .
That decree is one of a number of decrees that has not had any fresh impact for a considerable time now .
The Commission regards it as being obsolete .
Censuses have been held in Czechoslovakia on the following dates since 8 May 1946 : 1 March 1950 , 1 March 1961 , 1 December 1970 , 1 November 1980 and 3 March 1991 .
A census was also held on 1 March 2001 in the Czech Republic founded in 1993 .
Commissioner , this decree seems particularly important to me , because it also touches on a non-material but vital issue , that is to say ' National Reliability ' , which collectively takes away the rights of entire ethnic groups that following 1929 did something perfectly legal , by which I mean identifying with a defined language group .
Just a few months ago , at the German-Czech Coordination Council in Berlin a representative of the Czech ODS party denied that representatives of the German minority who were present were loyal to the Czech state .
So this is a very topical subject and I would like to ask you a very specific question : has the Czech Republic officially informed you that this decree is no longer in force ?
. ( DE ) Mr Posselt , you know as well as I do that when it comes to decrees concerned with expropriation and with nationality issues , there has been a whole series of declarations and decisions both by the Czech Constitutional Court and the Czech Parliament unanimously saying that these decrees no longer have any current effect .
The Czech parliament chose an expression which is translated into English as ' extinct ' , but the Commission prefers the term ' obsolete ' here .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 39 to 88 will be answered in writing .
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on two reports on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , by Mr Trentin and Mr Marinos .


Mr President , to understand the debate we are holding on the two magnificent reports presented by Mr Trentin and Mr Marinos , we should remember that Maastricht was not just another European Council ; it was to all intents and purposes a Council at which two dogmas were enshrined : the dogma of price stability and that of budgetary balance .
Lisbon and Barcelona have added a new dogma , a clarification of the doctrine , and point to reform as the only path to salvation , with salvation meaning closing the gap that separates us from the United States .
The task of defending the dogma is entrusted to the European Central Bank - the defender of the faith on issues of monetary policy - although , in the fields of budgetary and macroeconomic policy , where the risk of dispersal is greater , it is difficult to know exactly who should play this role .
We are currently witnessing a resurrection of misguided and perverse behaviour , and , what is even worse , the emergence of doctrines that seek to justify this kind of perversion ; few in the field of monetary policy , but more in the fields of budgetary and macroeconomic policy .
Document after document reaffirming these dogmas appear , but they lack coordination and strength .
At a time when we are tackling the reform of the Treaties , and now that the Convention is up and running , I would , therefore , say the same thing about these economic guidelines as about the employment guidelines : they should serve to share diagnoses , to establish clear codes of conduct and mechanisms for sanctions or penalties where misguided behaviour occurs .
I would also like - and Mrs Randzio-Plath will probably explain this to you - the Commission to continue to be the driving force , to continue to hold the monopoly of initiative and for the principle of qualified majority to be extended , together with that of codecision , to cover most macroeconomic areas .
Mr Solbes is no mere altar boy ; he is a high priest , and has a fundamental role - that of spearhead , like Saint Vicente Ferrer - in this process of reform .
Mr President , the interdependence between macropolicy and full employment is evident .
If we are to achieve full employment and raise the employment rate to the level of other regions of the world , we need growth over and above growth in productivity .
We also need full employment to step up internal demand and to achieve gross income from the EU Member States .
This is a prerequisite if we are to achieve sustainable growth at a high level over a substantial period , and a prerequisite that needs to be expressed more clearly in the broad guidelines for economic policies and which needs to be made clearer in the guidelines for Member States .
The present guidelines are still too much geared towards structural reforms .
But such reforms have only limited scope for acting as an engine for growth and employment .
No doubt the implementation of the financial action plan will partly close the gap in productivity between the EU and the USA , but only partly .
That is why we need to aim for a higher level of investment .
Increases in investment of 4 % were possible in the USA during the 1990s , with a significant impact on growth and employment .
So why not in the EU ?
There is not enough emphasis in the broad guidelines for economic policies on investment .
I am not denying that it represents progress that all the EU Member States intend to invest 3 % of their GDP in research and development , and that they also intend to invest more in human resources .
After all , human resources are Europe 's raw material .
However , more needs to be invested in education and training if the knowledge-based society is to become a reality in Europe .
Investment would need to rise from 21 % to 25 % .
This applies primarily to private investment needed to create production capacity and jobs which would make this sustainable growth possible in the longer term , but which would also promote technological progress and thus contribute in turn to increased demand .
But public-sector investment also needs to increase .
In this field we chiefly need investment in infrastructure , which was particularly hit because of the consolidation process in 2001 , with a level of 2.3 % of GDP .
A target of 3 % needs to be introduced for stability programmes here .
I think that is worth considering .
By way of conclusion I would like to mention that the Commission is quite right to touch on the need for the coordination of fiscal policies .
We know that companies are now critical of the fact that there is no scope for planning in the EU in relation to taxation and above all in relation to cross-border economic activity , something we would like to see .
As much provision as possible should therefore be made in the broad guidelines for economic policies to ensure coordination where there are disruptions in the functioning of the internal market .
The good doctor Duisenberg has been telling us for several months that economic recovery is underway .
Disciples of the other good doctor - Doctor Coué - have been saying the same thing .
They see the signs of recovery almost everywhere , in the same way that a fortune-teller can predict happiness by looking at tea leaves .
What we should actually be asking ourselves is whether or not we have gone into recession .
Faced with this reality , the liberal ideas governing the European Union 's economic policy would seem to be rather harmful .
The so-called Stability and Growth Pact and the independence of the European Central Bank are starving the authorities of the resources to cope with the crisis .
In light of this situation , the infamous Lisbon declaration has more to do with some magical formula than with politics , and the Commission recommendation for the 2002 Broad Guidelines of the Economic Policy of the Member States and the Community makes use of the same hocus-pocus .
When the invisible hand of the market works , everything works , more or less .
I say more or less , because we must acknowledge that , in spite of everything , the gap between the rich and poor continues to grow inexorably .
This is happening throughout the world as well as in Europe , with tragic consequences , and we see , to take the example of the Republic of France , that those politicians who appeal to the masses are waiting in the wings to take advantage of the situation .
Incidentally , I would like to congratulate the handful of Members who recently organised the Europe of the Poor Summit in conjunction with the Fourth World Movement NGO .
Seventeen per cent of the population today make up this Europe : in other words , there are 60 million people who survive on less than 60 % of the average income .
Allow me to return to the idea of the invisible hand , if I may .
When the hand suffers from pins and needles , tingling and rheumatism , which appears to be the case at the moment , everything stops working .
It will be increasingly difficult for the Member States to respect the liberal restrictions , such as the infamous 3 % threshold .
And what can I say about the budgetary balance for 2004 ?
Several States are experiencing difficulties : Germany , for example , is currently in this situation , and , as you know , Germany has the strongest economy of the Fifteen .
Berlin only has to sneeze and Europe catches a cold .
Take the example of our trans-Atlantic neighbours : with their usual pragmatism , the United States of North America , who extol the virtues of liberalism , have just proven once again that anti-liberal measures must occasionally be used .
We would do well to draw some inspiration from that side of the Atlantic .
Tentatively , rather too tentatively in fact - and I am about to finish , Mr President - the rapporteur is introducing some homeopathic amendments using the liberal credo of the Commission .
I have considerable regard for Bruno Trentin but ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
In contrast to the Council and the Commission which represent the governments , the European Parliament is supposed to be the democratic expression of the entire population .
The Trentin report , however , shows that although Parliament is elected by the people , it represents the interests of employers alone , instead of the interests of the working classes of the European Union .
The modifications requested by Parliament 's rapporteur all have the same goal , namely to make employees ' conditions worse .
The aim of the report is to achieve job flexibility .
It recommends what it has the cheek to call active ageing , in other words to make people work longer and to push back the age of retirement .
The only reason that social policy is mentioned is to affirm with brutal cynicism that this must be a productive factor .
For example , although it promotes a policy of lifelong learning , this is so that employers will have a mobile and qualified workforce to meet their needs .
Regarding what it calls restructuring processes - which , in actual fact , means collective redundancies - it limits itself to promoting preventative consultation of workers .
The only social measure in this report is , therefore , that workers must be warned when they will be made redundant .
We shall vote against this text which is designed for employers .
Mr President , I refer mainly to Mr Marinos ' report , which I certainly welcome for it has succeeded in taking into account all the major economic issues that are relevant to modern , well-equipped companies .
Capital transfers , migrations flows , the labour market and pension systems have been analysed with synthetic proposals for solutions .
The central panel of the European economic horizon is still , however , the Stability and Growth Pact , which has emerged victorious from the economic storm of recent months .
After September 11 , there were really very few of us who believed that the parameters established by the Pact could be respected .
Now , however , the sceptics - or many of them , at least - acknowledge their mistake and have changed their views .
The States which have erred in any way , particularly Germany and Portugal , have set themselves with a will to removing the uncertainties and realigning any parameters which were likely to require attention .
With great skill , the rapporteur covers all the economic issues and major summits , from Lisbon to Barcelona , focusing on the major challenges represented by the ever-increasing number of elderly people and by economic refugees and their families , who represent an uncertain variable for the host State because of their tendency to work illegally .
I know paragraph 20 of the report contains a reference to the labour market , but the issue calls for greater , more thorough analysis .
The profit-sharing system and the profit-related pay system , which benefits 20 % of the workforce in employment in the United Kingdom , are models which must be further explored and applied to good effect .
The efforts to find the best , most productive labour processes must be matched by endeavours to improve the quality of jobs .
Jobs must be developed to incorporate more creativity , to provide a better response to social requirements and to promote human dignity .
An increase in professional skill is necessary for reorganisation of the production system to take place but professional skill will also be enhanced as a result of the process .
The level of culture will increase and the creative abilities of employees will be enhanced .
We have a constitutional and moral responsibility to provide jobs for all our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to restrict my comments to the report by Mr Bruno Trentin . First of all , I would like to thank him unreservedly for the excellent contribution that the European Parliament will make , through this report , to the broad economic policy guidelines .
I shall make two points .
My first point is that , like the Commission and the Council , the European Parliament attaches great importance to the drafting of the broad economic policy guidelines .
To put it simply , if this is to remain a purely academic exercise , we are wasting our time .
The broad economic policy guidelines will only be meaningful if the national parliaments can be involved from the outset ; so that , when drawing up the budgets of the Member States , they can bear the broad guidelines in mind .
They will only be meaningful if , from the outset , the governments - particularly those of the eurozone - agree to increase coordination of their economic policies , whether this is in terms of the budget , taxation or in the area of structural policies .
Otherwise , what we are doing is pointless .
And we realise this when it is almost too late , when the Commission is forced to put in place early warning systems .
We have a useful tool , we must use it to improve coordination .
In the same spirit , my second point relates to the contribution that the European Parliament can make to the broad economic policy guidelines .
We hope that , through the Convention perhaps , but also by using a specific method , the amendments that Parliament has drawn up are taken into greater account when the broad economic policy guidelines are finalised .
And in this respect , I would like to highlight three of the amendments which have been proposed to you by your committee .
The first is Amendment No 6 which relates to the role of social partners and macro-economic dialogue in order to promote an employment policy .
I believe that it is absolutely essential .
The second is Amendment No 7 , and I urge some Member States to examine this closely when they come to cut taxes , as we can only contemplate reducing taxes if there is a harmonious balance involving the lowering of debt and re-balancing in favour of public investment .
The third amendment will come as no surprise to you . It in fact relates to two amendments , Amendments Nos 16 and 18 , which quite rightly stress the importance that we must give to services of general interest , in terms of their contribution to social and territorial cohesion of the Union , and their ability to create jobs .
Mr President , I shall try to reply and make some comments on both reports , as well as the speeches we have heard today in Parliament .
I shall start with a comment on Mr Trentin 's report .
Firstly , I would like to highlight its innovative approach .
For the first time , a report has been presented that is not purely of a general nature , but which employs the technique of tabling amendments to the Commission 's recommendation .
This appears to follow the line suggested by Mrs Berès .
All the same , it is clear that the work we are currently doing has no bearing on the legislation currently in force , but it could be of enormous use in future developments in our debating system .
I would like to highlight a series of specific points from the Trentin report that I consider to be important .
As an initial comment with regard to this issue , I agree with the rapporteur 's call for a global approach , which includes economic , social and environmental aspects amongst others , and , whilst we are on this subject , I would also like to refer to Mr Blokland 's speech , in which he emphasised the need to devote more attention to environmental issues , when these are in fact fairly clearly defined in the conclusions adopted at the time on these points .
There are two points I would like to highlight from Mr Trentin 's report - investment , and social and economic cohesion .
There have been various references made all day with regard to investment which I should like to discuss .
In our view , the most important factor in investment working - and this is included in the broad economic policy guidelines - is a sound macroeconomic policy .
This means price stability , reduction of risk premiums , reduction of interest rates , fully operative automatic stabilisers and , in short , better investment opportunities in terms of investor confidence .
However , the broad economic policy guidelines include some more specific aspects that can be relevant from this point of view : to improve the quality of public finances , with accumulation of physical and human capital referred to in the document .
We also talk about the further development of integrated networks and how they can be used efficiently .
I shall make another comment on Mr Goebbels ' suggestions on energy , transport and communications later .
We also favour the promotion of investment in knowledge , in line with what was laid down in Lisbon and Barcelona , and we believe that we should not only invest in people , in education , in professional training and in apprenticeships , but also that we should propose a specific objective for research and development of up to 3 % of GDP , a figure that should be reached by 2010 .
I also said that when we analyse the broad economic policy guidelines , we can see some specific references to investments in large networks and the possibility of more efficient functioning , for example .
Whilst we are on this subject , and with regard to energy networks and infrastructure , I should point out that in December the Commission proposed to improve the European Investment Bank cofinancing systems and also the possibility of eliminating some of the bottlenecks in service transfers from one country to another , in both electricity and gas , which will allow us to improve interconnections and , in short , to reach our objective to improve our competitiveness in the energy sector for the year 2005 .
We are doing something very similar with regard to the interoperability of railways , with the objective - as I said before - of improving the efficiency of our system .
Therefore , it is highly important - and Mr Goebbels made a reference to this point - that investments should be sound and should not cause problems related to the poor use of public money .
Mrs Randzio-Plath also referred to the problem of investment , suggesting the idea , which to me seems ambitious , to try to achieve an EU public investment level of 3 % , the same as the United States , according to her .
This is a point that we as the Commission , however , do not see in quantitative , but in qualitative terms , and we focus on our broad economic policy guidelines to highlight the importance of these issues .
In his report , Mr Marinos emphasises the importance of the Stability and Growth Pact more directly and , throughout the debate this morning and afternoon , there have been some proposals that seem important .
Mr Marinos focuses - and I can only thank him for this - on the importance of maintaining the Stability and Growth Pact in its present form .
He mentioned not making political concessions , particularly to large Member States .
This has never been the Commission 's vision , which is , in fact , that we should give equal treatment to all Member States , and we have always acted with this in mind .
Our actions have even included the use of certain instruments that have sparked a certain amount of public debate . I am , of course , referring to the early warning system applied in Germany and Portugal , where I feel that , although we are not happy with the procedure - and as a member of the Commission I have stated this on more than one occasion - we are satisfied with the proposed objective .
A second issue raised by Mr Marinos , which was also highlighted by some other speakers , is whether the broad economic policy guidelines and the Stability and Growth Pact are complementary or , to some extent , contradictory instruments .
From the Commission 's point of view , the broad economic policy guidelines are the general framework and the Stability and Growth Pact the instrument we have with which to implement coordination in the specific field of budget deficit .
These are very important for us to be able to achieve our two objectives through the coordination of economic policy : that fiscal policy should not hinder monetary policy and cause no externalities or spin off effects that would have negative effects on other countries .
In our opinion , it is vital that we should maintain the Stability and Growth Pact in its current form and we believe that deficits are growth 's worst enemy , as experience has taught us over the last few years .
Therefore , we must have sound macroeconomic policies to be able to increase growth and , consequently , to increase employment .
This means that the Stability Pact should not be so rigid that it cannot be adapted to match new situations .
We believe that the experience gained over the past two years , clearly set out in our proposals , proves that the Stability Pact can also function in situations of economic slowdown .
Mr Jonckheer expressed this concern this morning .
I would say that the pact has worked well , that the automatic stabilisers have allowed us to adopt an expansionary fiscal stance .
It is true that this has not been a discretionary policy , but we believe that the Pact has been as important - in relative terms and given the importance of automatic stabilisers - in Europe , as certain discretionary policies may have been in the United States .
We believe that the advantage of our proposed system is not only its automatic operation , but also its capacity to avoid potential problems in future , especially when we have to deal with new situations of economic recovery in which we start from relatively comfortable positions in terms of budgetary balance .
Some other issues were raised this morning and this afternoon .
Mr García-Margallo y Marfil this evening referred , in terms possibly close to his and my own , to the situation of dogmas and ecclesiastic definitions of the guardian of the dogma .
Obviously , no one is claiming to be the guardian of any dogma , but it is clear that , as the Commission , we have the role of guardian of the Treaties , which means that we are obliged to apply the commitments as proposed .
In this regard , we think that it is vitally important that the Stability Pact continues to be applied to all countries under the same conditions it has been applied up to now .
I have two further comments on what was said this morning .
The issue of enlargement , as some of you have suggested , is not the objective of the broad economic policy guidelines .
There are specific documents that deal with this issue and we are working on a system that allows us gradually to come closer to the broad guidelines so that we can apply them after enlargement has taken place .
My second comment is directed to Mrs Berès .
I have noted with great interest the references to the proposals for specific amendments and we will gratefully pass these on to the Council , which is now responsible for taking decisions on broad economic policy guidelines , given that this function is now out of the Commission 's hands .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on the Trentin report will be taken on Thursday and the vote on the Marinos report will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the joint debate on three reports :
A5-0129 / 2002 by Horst Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the hygiene of foodstuffs ( COM ( 2000 ) 438 - C5-0376 / 2000 - 2000 / 0178 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0131 / 2002 by Horst Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin ( COM ( 2000 ) 438 - C5-0377 / 2000 - 2000 / 0179 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0452 / 2001 by Heinz Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down the animal-health rules governing the production , placing on the market and importation of products of animal origin intended for human consumption ( COM ( 2000 ) 438 - C5-0382 / 2000 - 2000 / 181 ( CNS ) ) .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Commission and my fellow Members here in Parliament very sincerely for their highly constructive and expert cooperation .
The reports before us reflect that cooperation , and they represent part of the framework needed for safe food production , especially in health terms .
While we are sitting here today at this hour discussing measures for greater food safety , people throughout the European Union are sitting in restaurants or at home and enjoying their food , and are unlikely to be asking if their food is safe .
In fact our food is safe , safer than in many other places in the world .
The Commissioner has seized the opportunity given to us by the crises we have experienced recently - and we have indeed been through a great deal over the last few years - to develop a new strategy .
Quite rightly so , but these crises alone should not be the reason for us to adopt new food legislation , because they are history now and virtually no one is writing about them any more .
What is far more important is that changes in food production and also changes in consumer behaviour are forcing us to consider how we can make food production safer , as the public has different requirements and increasing demands are being made for greater safety .
In spite of the many rules already in place , it has to be said that there are many shortcomings in the way the Community has shaped food law up to now .
The individual rules are each limited to a specific sector , but there is no overall plan .
Community food law is especially notable for its significant deficiencies as regards coherence and legal certainty .
These deficiencies are not just a matter of drafting , they are really substantial and they put at risk the efficiency and implementation of food law .
That is all the more reason for welcoming the radical new concept proposed by the Commission in its White Paper , which on closer inspection turns out to be not so much a new safety concept as a new legislative concept .
For the first time , general food law is being proposed at Community level , with uniform definitions and principles and without any ifs and buts .
This food law is based on a comprehensive and uniform concept ranging from the producer to the consumer and it creates a coherent and transparent set of food law provisions .
The consolidation process has also been used to make fundamental improvements in the quality of a great deal of the legislation up to now .
I regard this consolidation of the hitherto incoherent body of rules and regulations to create consistent food law as being essential .
In the context of food hygiene , we need legal bases that can easily be applied by food business operators , that permit an exchange of information between individual production levels , that correspond to the conditions of the internal market , and which are accordingly valid in all Member States , which increase the responsibility of food business operators , and which facilitate the official control activities of the authorities and guarantee the implementation of administrative measures .
The regulation reforming the law is essential to achieve all this .
Parliament will not agree to any change here .
Encompassing the existing 17 directives in just four regulations will result in a sharper definition of the borders between food hygiene , animal health law , official food controls and thus user-friendly legal bases .
This also reflects the views of the overwhelming majority of the economic sectors affected .
Most producers nowadays operate on an international basis .
A regulation provides a uniform framework for action with the same provisions governing all the EU Member States and accordingly , more than a directive can do , establishes fair conditions throughout the European internal market .
The new food law can only take account of special national and regional situations in exceptional cases , which is something I would particularly like to emphasise .
The Regulation on the hygiene of foodstuffs was significantly modified by the committee , with almost 200 amendments , and I believe that this regulation now provides a better legal basis .
Many of the amendments are based on the text of the Regulation laying down general principles on food hygiene which has already been adopted , and were accordingly chiefly amendments needed for drafting reasons .
There is a common thread running through all the proposals for regulations , and that is the emphasis on the primary responsibility of food producers for the safety of the foodstuffs they place on the market .
The BSE crisis in particular did a great deal to demonstrate that we have failed to impose the same responsibility on those involved in primary agricultural production that we have long since expected of food producers elsewhere in the production chain .
I believe that the HACCP principle is also relevant here .
I am of course aware that the HACCP principle can only be applied to primary production in a few areas .
However , in farms with significant numbers of animals it is possible to identify the critical points that need constant monitoring .
If we apply the ' from farm to table ' principle , we would also ensure that the scope for self-regulation is also fully used in primary production .
The Commission 's proposals suggest that HACCP should not be applied to primary production , whereas the regulations before us contain general provisions on hygiene for primary production .
This implies a totally new chapter in the legislation on food hygiene .
For example , if a farmer has to keep a record of measures for containing risks , that amounts in certain areas to the first step towards the application of the HACCP principle .
Despite the high level of safety standards and seamless controls , production errors cannot be totally avoided .
If the causes are to be established , the traceability of products must be guaranteed .
The committee considers that additional labelling such as that proposed in the Commission proposal is not necessary .
Although systems of labelling for traceability may vary from one EU Member State to another , they all guarantee a seamless picture of the production chain .
I gathered from Commissioner Byrne 's statement on Monday that product labelling is to be simplified , which suggests that the committee 's proposal is actually to be adopted .
In order to support production processes , the regulation provides for guidelines for good practice .
As a rule these will be sectoral and national guidelines which are to be drawn up by many interested parties .
The application of these guidelines is of course voluntary , and this House supports that .
However , if European guidelines are drawn up for a specific sector or a specific area of production , then those guidelines would have to emerge from a general consensus and would have to reflect best available practice in Europe .
That is why sectoral , national or regional guidelines should be replaced by European guidelines , because in that way we can compel food producers to apply precisely this best practice and to introduce these methods .
Food production in Europe is very diverse , and it is therefore necessary for the regulations to permit a certain degree of flexibility .
That is why it would be possible for there to be exceptions from the provisions of these regulations .
Parliament wishes to limit these exceptions to regions with geographically difficult situations and to regions with supply difficulties , and also to traditional production methods and to supplies for local markets .
The procedure for approving exceptions should be a simple one .
However , Parliament cannot agree to uncontrollably broad powers for the Commission to amend the appendices of this regulation on food hygiene which define the basic framework of hygiene conditions by following the comitology route .
In theory it would possible be to amend the appendices again only one day after the regulations were adopted .
An arrangement of this kind would certainly not be in the spirit of good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
However , the procedure needs to be different for the regulation on specific hygiene rules .
These annexes cover detailed issues regarding hygienic trade in food , and in this case rapid implementation has to be achieved by means of amendment through the committee procedure .
We have therefore taken various areas - definitions , approval of plants , labelling and so on - out of the annexes and incorporated them into the articles of the regulation , so that if any amendments are needed this can only be done by means of legislation .
But I am content for other rules to be dealt with through the committee procedure .
One of the main points with regard to the regulation on specific hygiene rules is the chapter on hunting .
The debate on this in Parliament was very lively .
We have now presented a proposal that the Commission also finds acceptable .
We must of course accept that there are national peculiarities regarding the development of hunting traditions , and these have now been included in the proposals , so that we can work on the assumption that we can still guarantee game meat to be safe in health terms .
This means in particular that existing traditions should be maintained .
I believe that with these proposals , and with the proposed regulation on animal-health rules governing the production , placing on the market and importation of products of animal origin , we have created an important basis for improving rules governing foodstuffs .
I specially want to thank Mr Kindermann for having produced such an excellent report .
The provisions regarding the importation of foodstuffs are so well presented in his report that I do not need to explain any further .
I consider that the regulations before us provide a good basis for extending the Regulation on official controls of foodstuffs .
I am very anxious to see that because we want to deal with it as quickly as possible .
. ( DE ) Mr President , the package of proposals for regulations we have before us aims to reformulate and simplify the entire body of EU food law .
The draft regulation for which I am rapporteur lays down specific animal-health rules governing the production , placing on the market and importation from third countries of products of animal origin , with the objective of preventing the spread of animal diseases in connection with the marketing of these products .
At present , this area is governed by seven different directives .
The proposal for a regulation under consideration is intended to make the animal-health rules more transparent and encompass the existing directives within a single text .
I particularly welcome the fact that the Commission has deliberately chosen a regulation as the legal instrument so as to ensure that the rules will in future be enforced in the same way in the EU as a whole and in third countries .
Overall , I support the proposal , even if I have one fundamental criticism of it .
In many places the Commission has used the procedure referred to in Article 11 , that is to say the committee procedure .
This is neither unusual nor anything special .
Particularly in the field of animal disease prevention it is right and important for the Commission to be able to react more quickly and effectively to new scientific developments and unforeseen situations , without having to embark on a cumbersome legislative procedure every time .
However , in this case I believe that rather too much use is made of the committee procedure .
In some places I have therefore introduced either additions or refinements to the text of the regulation establishing certain criteria .
The first of these is that exceptions should only be granted if the animal disease situation does not prevent it and if it would in no way adversely affect the level of protection against animal diseases .
Secondly , unannounced checks should be carried out at irregular intervals .
Thirdly , when lists of third countries are being drawn up , all additional factors such as the adequacy of staffing levels in the control authorities and the reliability of the information provided by authorities in third countries must be taken into account .
In addition , I have included two new proposals in my report .
Member States and the authorities of third countries shall , where so requested , submit a report to the Commission on the controls carried out , specifying in particular the frequency of controls , the nature of the failings and infringements found to exist , and the nature of the steps taken by the competent authorities to punish them .
We all know that the effectiveness of the legal framework depends to a large extent on controls carried out , and detailed control reports of this kind are essential if the effective application of controls in Member States is to be guaranteed .
They also allow the Commission to react immediately to any weak points identified .
The Commission should also draw up a list of categories of possible infringements of this regulation , its implementing rules or safeguard measures and should determine in each instance whether the infringements are punishable by the competent national authorities under criminal or administrative law .
If the provisions of the regulation are infringed , uniform sanctions should as far as possible be established for all Member States .
It is not acceptable for the same act to have different consequences in Member State No 1 as compared with Member State No 2 .
This problem , which is certainly even more urgent in other areas than in the case before us today , needs to be fundamentally addressed .
It was my intention to make a start here with my proposal , even if the Commission has indicated to the committee that this kind of approach may not be practicable at the moment for legal reasons .
Nevertheless , I am convinced of the need for this and my fellow members of the committee supported me in this .
I would lastly like to thank the Commission for its constructive cooperation and I hope that will continue .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I should like to congratulate both Mr Schnellhardt and Mr Kindermann for their work .
The opinion from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Schnellhardt report , for which I was the draftsperson , focuses in particular on the need for consistency between food safety practices , which are deemed essential for the domestic sale or supply of foodstuffs , and those practices which cover the sale of such foodstuffs internationally .
The committee has therefore sought to make it explicit that the scope of any regulation needs to apply equally to exports , as well as to domestic sale and consumption .
We also wanted to broaden the membership of the proposed standing committee for foodstuffs to include experts representing public authorities and consumer groups .
It is quite wrong that the Commission Decision of 18 May 2000 , which defines the composition of standing committees , specifically exempts consumer groups from representation on these committees .
It is clearly of great importance that such committees gain the trust of consumers and are genuinely stakeholder committees .
It therefore seems quite essential that consumer groups be represented on them .
With respect to the specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy wanted to build in greater flexibility , particularly with regard to slaughterhouses .
We therefore proposed that measures should be introduced to allow flexibility in application of the so-called HACCP system to regional slaughterhouses which are in peripheral or remote regions .
Strict rules in the past have caused unnecessary difficulties to slaughterhouses in the more remote areas of the EU , often because geographical restraints can lead to unfair competitive conditions which tend to favour larger enterprises .
Yet , as we begin to learn the lessons of , say , the foot-and-mouth epidemic in the UK , it is quite clear that one of the reasons that disease spread so far and so fast was precisely because of the closure of local slaughterhouses .
We must not induce , however unintentionally , any more closures in that vital area .
Finally , on a personal note , an existing concern I have with this whole regulation is that it is insufficiently flexible for the small enterprise in particular .
We must be mindful of the extra burden which can be placed on small enterprises and ensure that we are not adopting any sort of regulation which risks undermining their livelihoods .
Mr President , my task is the ordinarily rather boring one of reporting that the Legal Affairs Committee considered this matter and found it not to be wanting .
In fact , here we have a proposal under Article 37 which is fully justified as a common agricultural policy issue , and , therefore , the procedures are appropriate .
Of course , it is important that we should check that there is an adequate legal base .
We are now discussing in the Convention and elsewhere , the question of holding the Community organs to their proper competences and I am delighted that this regulation passes muster in that respect .
It is also , as Mr Kindermann has said , a good thing to take this complex body of law and consolidate it into a single regulation that will give us a community of approach throughout the Community .
I am not sure if I would have felt that I was justified in taking up the time of the House , had that been all that there was to the matter , but I want to add to the point we are discussing today .
The importation of animal products for human consumption is intimately connected , as Mrs Lucas has just said , with the disastrous outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease that we suffered in the United Kingdom .
In my own constituency , Dumfries and Galloway , we were as you know particularly afflicted in that case .
If we were to move more and more strongly towards local production for local consumption , just as Mrs Lucas said a moment ago , we would avoid some of these dangers .
It is vitally important that , in introducing these very necessary laws , we are careful to ensure that we do not create circumstances which themselves increase the pressure for excessive animal movement .
I hope that will be taken into account .
If I have strayed beyond the limits of the Legal Affairs Committee , at least I have not strayed beyond my time .
With regard to the Kindermann report , we believe that it is vitally important and a matter of regret that this regulation is not included , like the four other proposals by the Commission , within the co-decision framework .
The proposal for a regulation is based on Article 37 , relating to the common agricultural policy and aims to put in place more rational legislation to avoid the contamination of farm animals by products of animal origin containing pathogenic agents .
We all remember the food-and-mouth epidemic which recently struck Europe and the ensuing crisis within the agricultural industry , primarily in the United Kingdom .
Initial enquiries confirm that the contamination was caused by food of animal origin from third countries , which was used for pig feed .
As far as animal-health conditions governing the production and sale of Community products are concerned , we must carry out careful and regular monitoring of the health state of producing regions .
Official controls and Community inspections must be carried out without prior warning .
So that we have the resources required , we must consider - as Mr Kindermann said - how many vets are needed in the Member States , as well as at the European Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin .
In addition , our legal mechanism must take into account the candidate countries and we must make penalties uniform .
As regards imports from third countries , we must have the same provisions as for Member States .
However , overly strict hygiene measures must not be perceived as barriers to trade .
If that is the case , we should make adjustments but continue to bear in mind the original aim of the regulation .
We support Mr Kindermann 's report , which provides the necessary clarifications to the Commission proposal .
Mr President , I think it would be unfair not to praise the work carried out by the Commission to comply with the objective of the White Paper to simplify and clarify legislation , eliminating all of the disadvantages of legislation which is spread out over seventeen directives .
Additionally , the proposals that have been put forward are reasonably good and very detailed , and I believe that all sectors involved have recognised this .
I would also like to highlight the work carried out by the two rapporteurs , because the food chain is long and consequently the subject area is very large and complex and they had to study and come to an agreement on many amendments which - I am sure - will improve the project .
These legislative requirements are based on the control of food safety from farm to table in order to provide the best possible guarantees to consumers .
I support everything that the two rapporteurs have said .
One of the key points of future legislation is the mandatory application of HACCP in all food companies including those in the primary sector .
The analysis of risk and the control of critical points were formulated to be applied in the food industry and have , without doubt , represented a great step forward in the area of food hygiene .
However , in reality , many small companies have still not been able to put this into practice .
Precisely because it is not yet being applied throughout the processing sector , and because this system has been designed solely for industry , it should not be extended to the primary sector just yet .
The primary sector is already obliged to respect the ' good practice guides ' , a set of rules with similar aims to the HACCP but better adapted to the characteristics of this particular economic sector .
If there have been problems , these have not been due to the lack of standards , but to the lack of compliance with these standards .
I am not saying that in future the primary sector should be required to meet HACCP standards , rather that these should be adapted to the real requirements of agriculture and livestock farming .
The application of these standards should be considered to be an essential food safety practice , but it should never replace controls .
I believe we should concentrate on these and that they should be standardised for all countries .
Economic agents must take responsibility for the safety of food products , guarantee their viability and that of their ingredients and establish product withdrawal procedures in the event of an emergency .
Lastly , I would like to point out that exports , and , more importantly , imports must meet hygiene standards , because , otherwise , problems could creep up on us from abroad , whilst our companies will become less competitive compared with those that do not fulfil the same requirements .
Mr President , I salute the rapporteurs , who have done a very good job : skilled , knowledgeable and well thought through .
I am very pleased that primary production has been included and that we now finally cover the whole of the food chain .
I am also very pleased that individual producer liability has been specified again in the food legislation .
We shall not get anywhere merely with ' policing ' power if people themselves do not take responsibility for their companies , work and own actions .

I personally am incredibly pleased about Mr Schnellhardt 's willingness to compromise , so that we now have Article 4.4 ( Amendment No 31 ) through which Europe 's endlessly rich and varied stock of traditional food can remain on the market without individual Member States thereby being given the opportunity to ignore the regulations and label all their products as traditional .
By means of this wording , we have also ensured that we are not concerned here only with small-scale production .
Some of Europe 's most important food exports in fact consist of traditional cheeses and hams and so on which require special production methods without , however , being hazardous as a result .
I am very pleased that we have got this section through , for it would have been terrible if we had obtained food legislation in Europe which only suited Nestlé and McDonald 's .
Finally , I want to point out that I too am very pleased that we have arrived at sensible and sustainable compromises where hunting is concerned .
I live in the middle of the forest in Sweden and should scarcely dare come home at all if some elk hunter had got the idea that I had banned elk hunting .
That is an extremely emotive issue , and I think we have arrived at a good compromise which both pheasant and elk hunters will be able to live with .
Mr President , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , for his work on an incredibly wide-ranging and complicated area .
The large number of amendments also show , of course , that the final product will look different to what the Commission had initially proposed .
In one area - namely , that of the way in which game is dealt with - the Commission 's proposal would have created major problems if had been put into effect .
The Commission 's proposal was in danger of having an extremely negative effect upon hunting and the sale of game in shops .
I believe that , by means of the amendments now adopted by the committees , we have avoided the risks that existed .
It is also important to see that a variety of national supervision models can be used to achieve the common objective of good food hygiene .
I am therefore especially grateful that account has been taken of the fact that game can be monitored in different ways , that we have different climatic conditions and therefore need different refrigeration periods and that we can also organise training in different ways .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in order to reform Community legislation on food hygiene rules - which involves 17 directives - the Commission is applying the principle of the liability of food operators .
I fully support the idea that this principle should apply to the food industry , which supplies food to millions of consumers .
But the directive attacks every aspect of primary production - in other words , products of the soil , of stockfarming , of hunting and of fisheries - upon which it is seeking to impose a restrictive traceability system .
How can we hold individuals personally liable for a mushroom picked in a forest or for a fish caught from a river ?
This seems utterly unrealistic .
The first article , or the ' Scope ' , of the regulation specifies that these provisions shall not apply to the primary production of food for private domestic use or the domestic preparation of foodstuffs for private consumption .
We must extend this measure to include the supply of local markets and to the sale of natural products from primary production .
Local produce , such as berries and mushrooms , can contribute to a region 's trademark image , strengthen its identity , its gastronomic reputation and encourage green tourism , which is essential to the rural economy .
Jobs and traditional methods are at stake .
As for game and game meat , delivered directly by the hunter to the consumer or retailer , these must be considered as traditional food products , which must benefit from specific marketing methods .
We believe that Amendment No 92 relating to Spiralis goes too far , since freezing or cooking at temperatures of above 65 ° will destroy any parasites .
The relevant authorities of each Member State are the best placed to weigh up the situation and to draw up guidelines which will provide the consumer with adequate protection .
We must see reason , by attaching priority to flexibility , given the diversity of geographic and climatic situations , rather than encasing ourselves in rigid regulations , which can only result in a dead-end situation and considerable dissatisfaction .
Mr President , food safety scandals have , in recent years , pointed up all too clearly the shortcomings related to the lack of defined responsibility .
That is why it is important to reintroduce clear , precise rules in this area , as well as to simplify the texts . Simplifying the texts does not mean , however , that we can relax requirements .
Very much the opposite in fact .
We must , therefore , define the responsibilities to be shouldered by manufacturers , such as the respect for rules , product traceability and the prior analysis of risks .
Manufacturers are the guarantors of high-quality food , in which consumers can have confidence .
Yes , the requirements are considerable , but these requirements can only help to improve the image of their products .
Consumers must also shoulder some responsibility : they must be able to have the freedom of choice , hence the important role of information and consumers ' associations in this respect .
In addition to these texts which are before us , I would sincerely hope that the European Union decides to launch an information campaign to spread awareness regarding the essential hygiene measures that must be observed in the home .
These are the little things that we can do on an ongoing basis to help reduce the risks , such as the importance , for example , of cleaning the refrigerator , of storing products properly and at the appropriate temperature .
The authorities are also responsible for putting in place rigorous controls during manufacturing , production and sale , and for imposing effective sanctions , in the event of these controls being flouted , not only on the parties concerned , but also on the Member States which do not respect Community legislation .
In other words , we must be seen to be very firm .
Lastly , we have had numerous discussions concerning game meat .
We must , of course , ensure the quality of this product and we know that procedures vary from one Member State to another .
We must place our trust in the professionals , in other words , the hunting community , who are perfectly capable of judging the state of hunted game .
I shall sum up , Mr President , by saying that we must reiterate that Europe has one of the safest food chains in the world and that we must quite simply respond to the expectations of our fellow citizens .
Mr President , I want to deal briefly with a number of amendments about which concern has been raised .
Amendment No 31 deals with products using traditional methods or sited in remote locations .
All of us have some examples of this kind .
I have seen this in the UK , with people trying to operate our beef assurance scheme .
We should defend this amendment because it specifically states that such products should have no demonstrable adverse effect on food hygiene .
Similarly the references to HACCP in Amendment No 9 are permissive and not mandatory , and the small business sector can live with that .
I now turn to the Goodwill / Bernier Amendment No 18 , as Mr Goodwill would expect me to , exempting hunters from these regulations .
We accept this for the individual hunter consuming or passing on the game he has shot or caught .
But there is a difference between the noble Nordic hunter scaling the utmost peak in pursuit of an individual elk , the picture that Mr Sjöstedt would commend to us , and the syndicates of flabby businessmen turning out on English landed estates , as they turn in a large quota of inexpertly shot birds and animals for the market .
In these circumstances , I believe that , if such products go to a retail outlet or a restaurant , there is a difference .
The great wit , Oscar Wilde , described the English hunting fraternity as the ' unspeakable in pursuit of the uneatable ' .
I do not mind that but when the ' unspeakable ' begin to peddle the ' eatable ' , they should be open to the hygiene rules , as set down in this regulation .
I see no reason whatsoever why we should make an exemption where , what starts off as a little outlet doing no harm , a brace or two of birds here or there , ends up as another supply route .
We should protect the hunter 's right to hunt but we should not guarantee him an unprotected route into retail outlets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to briefly address the issue of hunting .
My view is that in certain Member States hunting brings an important extra source of food to the dining table .
For example , in my country two million small and 100 000 large wild game animals are hunted every year and there are 300 000 hunters . It is therefore important .
Game animals are naturally also for sale on shop shelves or they are given or sold to neighbours and relatives .
Now the issue is whether it is reasonable for the EU to start regulating this sort of activity , which is often based on trust and close acquaintanceship .
It is as if social control were a guarantee of quality when a local shopkeeper buys meet from a hunter to sell .
A sense of moderation should be kept in these matters .
I am also wholeheartedly in favour of accepting Amendment No 82 in this report by Mr Schnellhardt .
Mr President , I believe that the proposal we have before us for a Council regulation in which animal-health rules are to be made more transparent and the existing directives brought together in a single text represents a further step towards simplifying agriculture policy in this area and above all towards creating a legal basis for controls on various activities .
I certainly hope it will work out that way .
However , I would also like to make a special plea for scientific research into products of animal origin to be continued on living animals in the case of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease for example , and that this should then be applied in an affordable way .
High new technical and organisational standards need to be practical , and by that I also mean affordable .
I also particularly have in mind food imports from third countries .
At the same time - and I am just finishing now - we need to provide sufficiently serious support for the many consumer protection organisations .
Mr President , though a flabby pinstriped businessman who enjoys shooting driven game , I want to concentrate on the aspect that we have 17 hygiene directives here being deregulated into one .
This regulation goes way beyond the directives that it replaces .
In particular , it extends Article 3 of Directive 93 / 43 which introduces what are know as the HACCP principles .
The hazard analysis and critical control points were developed in the 1960s for NASA to guarantee high purity food for astronauts .
Uncontrolled bodily functions in a space suit can be rather inconvenient !
But HACCP is a food safety management system devised for highly sophisticated food-processing operations .
This space-age system is to be made compulsory throughout the EU .
In the UK alone it is going to effect 300 000 businesses , costing an estimated GBP 2 billion a year for SMEs alone .
Something that has been developed for a sophisticated technology-based organisation is not appropriate for Joe 's Cafe in Lewisham High Street or Jean Dupont 's bistro in the rue de la Révolution in Marseilles .
Earlier this year , in the very shadow of this building , I toured the local food markets with a food safety expert .
I found dozens of basic food hygiene failings .
There , and everywhere else , the basic provisions of Directive 93 / 43 have yet to be complied with .
So why is the Commission creating even more laws ?
These technocrats are totally out of touch with reality .
They have gone into orbit and landed on another planet like the astronauts for which the HACCP system was devised .
For this reason alone the Commission should not be putting forward more law .
We do not need more complexity .
If Parliament endorses it , it proves that it too is living on another planet .
Mr President , I fully support the Commission 's endeavours to simplify the legislative framework from 17 directives to a single regulation .
However , Commissioner , precisely because this is a regulation , you know better than I do that prudence must be exercised , for the regulation will be implemented immediately and , by its nature , harmonises , or rather , I would say , as good as standardises all the procedures throughout the vast area of the Union in the food and gastronomy sector , which , we must never forget , is a major part of the culture and civilisation of our continent .
I therefore agree that there is a need for harmonisation , but we must remember to exercise caution .
I would like to focus on three points , in particular .
The first , which has been fully addressed in the report and by the rapporteur , is the question of traditional products , products which have a history not just as products but in terms of their production processes too .
Restricting these products to geographical areas or local markets is not enough : they are genuine products which need to be dealt with separately .
Secondly , the question of the primary sector , which is certainly not fully covered by the regulation but which is regulated to some extent .
The situation is different for the primary sector , particularly where small and medium-sized businesses are concerned .
I have tabled an amendment which I urge you to support , which seeks , at least , to reduce the bureaucratic , administrative impact as regards keeping documents - it makes no sense for records relating to vegetables to have to be kept for five years .
Thirdly - apart from the question of game , which I will mention briefly in passing , with regard to which a balanced solution appears to have been found - there is training .
It is right to ensure that our food chain operators are always trained .
With regard to this aspect too , we must avoid enlarging the scope of the debate to include quality , which is a separate issue : there must be training on hygiene and hygiene alone .
Mr President , it would , to say the least , be naïve to maintain that the food industry is in a parlous state due to a lack of updated directives , given that what directives exist are blatantly disregarded .
Before any legislative intervention or questions of a technical nature , we need to identify why not just food products but the entire food chain has been downgraded , distorted and adulterated .
It is mainly because the food chain is managed solely on the basis of the laws of profit and speculation that the quality of food is so poor .
The more intensively we farm , the more the food chain is run and controlled by the huge multinationals in the industry , which decide the method of production and the quality of our food , the less chance we have of any effective consumer health guarantees .
This problem is first and foremost a political problem .
Only by wiping out capitalist profit as the ultimate purpose of the production process will we be able to stop illegal and dangerous production , processing and marketing methods .
Otherwise , we shall strain at a gnat and swallow a camel and public health will suffer as a result .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Schnellhardt has presented two expert and in-depth reports which clearly improve the Commission 's proposals on food hygiene .
In future , food producers and processors will have to document all steps in the production and processing chain .
This obligation also extends to the feedstuffs used and the state of health of animals .
This means that in future consumers in the EU will be able to trace food and food ingredients from the shop counter back to the producer .
A transparent production chain will thus be guaranteed both for major companies and for SMEs .
At this point I would like to make a particular point about SMEs in the meat processing business .
In the European Union , there are around 150 000 small-scale butchery workshops with a total of over 1 million employees and an annual turnover of around EUR 60 billion .
It is these small workshops that ensure local supplies and maintain a variety of products in rural areas .
They use their special skills to produce local specialities and make an important contribution to Europe 's delicatessens .
The close contact between them and the consumer creates confidence in the quality and safety of their products .
That is why we need to pay special attention to the needs of small businesses and to come up with suitable and practical legal arrangements for these companies , which offer people in Europe so many jobs and training opportunities .
I have tabled an amendment jointly with the rapporteur which relates specially to single-place slaughter in butcher 's workshops because in addition to rules governing slaughter lines in large slaughterhouses we also need to take account of the conditions that prevail in small-scale slaughter operations .
If sufficient care and expertise is applied , single-place slaughter can be carried out in perfectly hygienic conditions .
That is why I urge you to support Amendment No 133 .
Mr President , I am an elk hunter in Lapland in northern Sweden .
If we do not hunt elk every year , the elk population grows rapidly , the number of people killed in road accidents rises and there is a considerable increase in damage to the forests .
When , in September , we begin hunting in the morning , it is often freezing , and the climate at that time of the year corresponds to the temperature in a refrigerator . Sometimes , it even corresponds to the temperature in a freezer .
In my part of the country , there is , from the environmental point of view , no better refrigerator for the hunter than nature 's own cold-storage room .
The bigger the EU becomes , the more difficult it becomes to regulate in detail using EU provisions .
The EU directives must hold good in all parts of the EU .
They must provide scope for adjusting the provisions according to different circumstances .
Member States with up-and-running procedures governing the inspection of game before it is released onto the market must be able to retain their rules .
In Sweden , politicians who want to influence opinion against European cooperation have exploited this proposal for a directive to cast suspicion on the EU as a threat to traditional hunting .
It is important to emphasise that they are mistaken , for the EU has no legal powers to regulate hunting for household requirements and the use of game for private consumption .
This also emphasises the need for general provisions governing hunting to be decided upon in accordance with the subsidiarity principle .
Through Mr Schnellhardt 's efforts , the section on game in this directive has become really commendable .
Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament will deliver its opinion tomorrow on a package of regulations that aim to guarantee the hygiene of foodstuffs in general and to establish specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin in particular .
This new legislation is based on the fundamental need to guarantee food safety from farm to table , along the lines of the initiatives that have been adopted over the past months in order to provide the consumer with the best possible guarantees .
At this point , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who has made a great effort in trying to achieve consensus between all the groups . I think he has written an excellent report .
I should also like to congratulate the Commission on having also presented a reasonably well-balanced proposal .
One of the key points of the future regulation , however , is the mandatory application of the HACCP ( Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points ) for all food establishments .
The application of the HACCP standard should , however , be considered as an additional safety measure , which cannot replace official controls .
The HACCP system cannot be extended , for the moment , to the primary sector , given that this system has been designed exclusively for industry .
The primary sector is already obliged to respect the ' good practice guides ' , a set of rules with similar aims to the HACCP but better adapted to the characteristics of this particular economic sector , and which we should not aim to duplicate .
The various food crises that have taken place make it necessary to strengthen hygiene regulations in order to regain consumer confidence , an objective that the European Commission has duly included in its proposal and which will no doubt be improved by the European Parliament with the approval of its amendments on the basis of traditional products , game , and so on , listed by the Members of this House who have spoken before me .
Economic agents must continue to shoulder responsibility for food safety , ensure traceability of food and food ingredients and must put in place product withdrawal procedures in case of food emergencies .
Codes of good practice should be established by the various food sectors in order to give guidance to food business operators on food safety .
Also , imports from and imports to third countries must comply with Community hygiene standards .
( The President cut the speaker off )
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
A5-0119 / 2002 by Marit Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents , amending Council Decision 90 / 424 / EEC and repealing Council Directive 92 / 117 / EEC ( COM ( 2001 ) 452 - C5-0372 / 2001 - 2001 / 0176 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0120 / 2002 by Marit Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the control of salmonella and other food-borne zoonotic agents and amending Council Directives 64 / 432 / EEC , 72 / 462 / EEC and 90 / 539 / EEC ( COM ( 2001 ) 452 - C5-0373 / 2001 - 2001 / 0177 ( COD ) ) .
. ( SV ) Mr President , I wish first of all to thank the shadow rapporteurs and others in the informal food safety group in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for cooperating so well .
Naturally , the Commission 's initiative in both reports was also welcome .
I shall talk first of all about the monitoring directive .
It is necessary to obtain a clear and unambiguous picture of the zoonoses situation in Europe .
Of course , we are talking about the food scandals that have affected us , most recently an acrylamide alert in Sweden .
We must remember , however , that , even if all these warning reports are serious in themselves , they are in actual fact more serious from a psychological than from a public health point of view .
The big threat for the future is the old familiar one which people have lived with for millions of years and which the developing world still lives with .
Even in our own time , the most common causes of mortality among infants are in actual fact infectious illnesses and diarrhoea .
For us in the rich part of the world , it is resistance to antibiotics which will be the big problem .
More and more of our simple infections are tending to become serious again .
We should have put the brakes on twenty years ago , so it is already late and perhaps even too late , but there is a danger that , if we cannot radically and quickly reduce the number of infections and antibiotic treatments , we shall soon be back to where we were in our great-grandmothers ' time when almost every woman had to give birth to four children if two were to reach adulthood .
The problem is greatest for children and young people .
I am therefore very grateful that we are now to chart antibiotic resistance to the zoonoses we discover in Europe .
Statistics now indicate that salmonella infection and other animal food-borne infections are tending to decline slowly , while vegetable-borne infection is on the increase .
I am therefore very concerned that vegetable food be included in investigations for the purpose of , for example , tracing outbreaks .
The most important thing of all about the monitoring directive is that we should obtain common standards so that the information collected is comparable between the different countries .
We must have a standardisation of sampling , reporting and the way in which these matters are dealt with .
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that new technology should actually make good reporting simpler and quicker so that we do not have to wait two and a half years to be clear about the situation .
Greater speed is often required so that it will be possible to inform authorities , producers and citizens at a relatively early stage .
That is probably the most important feature of the monitoring directive .
The control regulation is perhaps more controversial .
The Commission 's proposal was very cautious and restrained and seemed to take account of the fact that certain Member States imagine that salmonella is in something like the same category as a mild cold .
That is the kind of attitude that exists .
There are also Member States affected by salmonella panic of the kind that exists in my own country .
There is nothing strange about such panic .
Approximately 50 years ago , we were hit by the world 's biggest salmonella disaster ever , or at least the biggest for which statistics were kept .
Subsequently , Sweden began to try to do something about the problem , as naturally happens as a consequence of disasters .
It took our country 25-30 years to put in place a system that worked .
Matters have proceeded more quickly for Norway and Finland , which have been able to copy the Swedish model .
The Swedish model provides us with experience but is presumably too distinctive and not applicable everywhere .
Sweden is a small , sparsely populated and open country , which perhaps made it simpler for us to attend to the problems .
I think that the proposal is extremely cautious .
There is a sense of ' pussyfooting ' around the problem . I had expected the Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection to be tougher in this case .
First of all , not all forms of salmonella of significance to public health are included .
It is strange that , in certain places , only two kinds are included , even though it is precisely these that account for 80 % of illnesses among people today .
Or , more precisely , did account for that figure in the past .
What is happening with the remaining 20 % ?
Why not include all illnesses that affect , or are dangerous to , public health when efforts are being made to control salmonella ?
How can the Commission know what type of salmonella will explode onto the scene tomorrow ?
Will it be St. Paul , Hadar or some other form ?
We have a vast number of invasive forms of salmonella affecting people 's health .
I am therefore keen that the wording , ' of significance for public health ' should be included , and account taken of all forms of salmonella .
Species of animal are also missing from the Commission 's proposal .
I am conscious of the fact that , for safety 's sake , I have included all types of animal , but I shall continue to fight on behalf of intensively reared pigs and veal calves , because we all know that the quantity of antibiotics used is very dangerous .
We also know that the feed concerned contains both zoonotic and other bacteria that are wholly resistant to antibiotics .
There are , moreover so many simple and practical circumstances that are of relevance that , even if we can ensure that the breeding animals and stalls are kept clean , that does not help one iota if the food is not clean .
We know , for example , that a very great source of infection with salmonella aruba is Brazilian soya .
We know the story about salmonella normally being killed off at 67 degrees .
For ten years , however , aruba has succeeded in surviving at 68 degrees .
We should probably not imagine that we shall one day become completely free from risk or that this battle will have been won once and for all .
It is , after all , life with which we are concerned here , life which is in some ways as intelligent as ourselves , even if the intelligence concerned is not perhaps to be found in the same place or does not express itself in the same way .
I would therefore appeal to the House to support my two reports , just as they were adopted by a broad majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the Commission on their balanced proposal , both in the directive and in the regulation on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents , which we will be voting on in Parliament tomorrow .
These are matters of great importance for all EU States .
For some EU States these are not only matters of great importance , but of the utmost importance .
I would like to express my great concern at the result of the vote on the report presented in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , given that , in my opinion , it takes our concern for consumers ' health to irrational extremes .
We are all worried about the health implications of salmonella - as Mrs Paulsen has just pointed out - even more so in countries such as Spain , Greece , Italy , Portugal and France , that are particularly exposed to this danger due to the volume of livestock susceptible to infection as a result of average temperatures that favour its propagation and of another set of circumstances that are not worth going into now .
However , I do not understand that , on the pretext of protecting consumers ' interests , some EU countries support the extension of control and surveillance measures to agents that cannot be transmitted to humans , in other words , non-zoonotic agents that do not fall within the scope of these regulations .
The only types of salmonella that affect humans are salmonella enteritiris and salmonella tifimurium , and to extend Community regulation to other types , more than twelve , in fact , will only , in my opinion , cause serious commercial consequences that would penalise the aforementioned EU countries and small producers .
Producers in northern Europe , where the incidence of salmonella is virtually zero due to the climatic conditions there , would not be affected by this move .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore call on you to support the amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which includes the sentiments of many countries that have expressed their concern in this regard in all the debates that have been held , both in Council of Ministers and Commission 's working groups .
This amendment guarantees consumer safety , given that it includes all the improvements proposed by the European Commission , yet penalises no one .
I regret that the report approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Heath and Consumer Policy has not taken the main countries affected into consideration and I hope that this situation will be resolved , if not in tomorrow 's plenary , then in the negotiations in the next Progress Council and in the negotiations that will have to be undertaken as part of the codecision procedure , given that these measures will be hard to achieve .
I also regret that there are a series of gaps that have not been sufficiently analysed in Parliament , such as , for example , the loophole mentioned in Article 9 of the Regulation , which anticipates the paralysis of trade in those countries whose national control programmes are not approved .
This initiative could give rise to a situation of clear commercial discrimination .
The report approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , in my opinion , has not been sufficiently tailored to the needs of each country and also falls into this trap .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , first of all , I would like to address my thanks to our rapporteur and congratulate her on the significance and the high quality of her work .
The two proposals take up some of the commitments given in the White Paper on Food Safety .
They aim to improve protection of European consumers against microbiological risks from food products .
We cannot underestimate the extent to which successive food crises , including those linked to salmonella , have undermined consumer confidence regarding food safety .
We can , therefore , only support the approval of the two texts which have been submitted to us today .
We must strengthen the monitoring and control system of zoonotic agents of animal origin in order to reduce their prevalence , whilst stressing that the effectiveness of the texts that are currently in force has been restricted by the fact that some Member States are failing to apply these texts properly .
Overall , the Commission 's proposals are balanced .
It might have been better , however , to go further on certain points and consequently I , like the rapporteur , believe that it would be worthwhile providing for control programmes for all the salmonella serotypes that present a risk to public health .
I also wish to stress the need for strict coordination between the work of the European Food Authority and the work of the national authorities so that the early warning system functions effectively .
Regarding resistance to antibiotics , I believe , like the rapporteur , that we must treat this worrying phenomenon with due attention .
Careful use of antibiotics must be encouraged and the necessary studies on resistance to antibiotics must be carried out .
My group also supports the amendment seeking to allow the Member States that have achieved a high level of protection to prevent , for a limited period , the placing on the market of products imported from Member States which do not yet have an approved control programme within the stipulated timeframe .
This measure will act as a considerable incentive to introduce harmonisation of security levels within the internal market .
I welcome the fact that the applicable control measures are based on objectives that are set every three years .
This will enable us to set ambitious but realistic constraints .
We must ensure that we do not go too far and impose timetables on Member States that they will be unable to apply .
The Commission has , in this area , striven to achieve a balance .
Like the rapporteur I believe it is important for the monitoring of zoonoses and their agents to apply to all levels of the food chain , including animal foodstuffs .
My group also supports the principle of including vegetables within the scope of the directive .
Lastly , we must work to ensure that these provisions are swiftly adopted and implemented , which will , I am sure , contribute to restoring European consumer confidence in food .
Mr President , following the demise of Edwina Currie , the British health minister , who in 1988 said that most of the UK 's egg production was infected with salmonella , it is a brave British politician who makes a speech on this subject .
Following that bombshell , egg consumption in the UK fell by 60 % and the government embarked on what can only be described as knee-jerk reaction , when they slaughtered 2 million chickens .
Although some progress has been made in combating salmonella in the UK , there is still much work to be done .
There are still 15,000 or 16,000 cases per year of salmonella food poisoning in the UK , half the previous levels .
Of course , this is not just a problem in Europe .
In the United States in 1994 , there was a case connected with contaminated ice cream where nearly a quarter of a million people became ill .
Sweden , as Mrs Paulsen has said , has led the way but there they have looked at , for example , heat treatment of feed rather than just looking at the blunt tool of slaughter of flocks .
Of course , we hear stories now of Swedes going to Spain on holiday and falling like flies from salmonella food poisoning because they are not used to the constant exposure .
It is certainly true that Member States need to make progress to establish more effective national control programmes and at the same time , we need to ensure that imported products meet our own high standards .
We must also concentrate on where the problem is , and that is poultry , and in particular eggs which are eaten raw .
Pork is less of a problem and , anyway , my grandmother would say that anyone eating raw pork deserves to be ill .
Infection in cattle and sheep is negligible so we can continue to eat our rare steak .
On the issue of antibiotic resistance , there is resistance building up .
However , we should not rush to ban prophylactic antibiotic use , as we could then see an explosion of disease prompting high levels of the resultant therapeutic use that could exacerbate the situation .
Lastly , on the issue of plant-based infection , maybe that has something to do with the increase in organic food consumption where I understand you are 30 times more likely to get e-coli infection .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Paulsen , my colleague on many food safety deliberations , for the work she has done on these complex regulations .
It is absolutely crucial that having set out the broad principles of a European food law and a food safety authority to act as the overall scrutineer of such proposals , the details are dealt with effectively and accurately .
The zoonoses regulations to which Mrs Paulsen has devoted so much time are in a way the building blocks of the provision of an effective and precautionary food law for the future .
It may seem rather over-elaborate to talk of them as building blocks , but they are an appropriate way to move forward .
Some of us have reservations , perhaps , about the extension of these provisions , as they stand , to products of plant origin . An appropriate way to deal with them is through the hygiene regulations per se and not in these additional monitoring provisions .
There only I dissent slightly from what Mrs Patrie has said .
Otherwise , I applaud her remarks also .
I feel that , on the general detection and prevention of salmonella , the rapporteur is right to take us down this road as long as it can be implemented the length and breadth of the European Union .
It is as necessary for food producers as for the general public .
Without the restored confidence of the latter , there cannot be a secure future for the former .
We want to have the increasing antibiotic resistance , which is being demonstrated at the moment in zoonotic organisms , accurately mapped .
I do not agree with Mr Goodwill that there may be more harm than good in that .
It is not a question of preventive medicine - it is of the other applications to which antibiotics are put , and wrongly , in my view .
Mr President , I am delighted to respond to this debate on the two reports concerning zoonoses .
This is an example of the implementation of the farm-to-fork approach highlighted in the White Paper on Food Safety .
Our proposals are much more ambitious than the current directive .
To ensure their successful implementation we need to allow sufficient time for Member States to meet these objectives .
This dossier has progressed quickly .
First , may I offer my thanks to all those Members who have driven this dossier forward - in particular Mrs Paulsen and the Members of the Committee on the Environment , who have made such valuable contributions .
Public interest in food safety is immense , as we know .
Protection against zoonoses , disease transmission between animals and humans , is a growing concern not only in the European Union , but throughout the world .
The first proposal , on the monitoring of zoonotic agents , is the basis for improving knowledge of the sources and trends of these pathogens , supporting microbiological risk assessments , and adopting risk management measures .
The European Food Safety Authority will obviously play a key role in this exercise .
The second proposal , on the control of salmonella , aims to reduce the public health burden caused by this agent .
Over 150 000 human cases of salmonella are reported every year in the European Union .
The regulation will apply to primary production - a major source of contamination .
While some Member States have seen a reduction in human cases following stringent control measures , the situation varies considerably .
The Commission therefore favoured a progressive approach to reducing salmonella occurrence .
But the strategy is clear : to ensure high standards of food safety to European consumers , the prevalence of these pathogens must be reduced .
The primary target is salmonella , an important pathogen for which we know efficient control measures can be taken , starting at primary production .
Other pathogens may be added in the future , if measures in animal populations can be shown to be efficient in reducing human cases .
Many amendments were discussed in the Committee on the Environment , and I am grateful for the quality of the result , which is excellent .
The majority of the amendments are technical and improve the proposals .
I welcome these amendments , which represent important and rational suggestions .
Mr President , instead of dwelling on all the amendments that I am happy to accept , I will instead concentrate on those that cause the Commission some difficulty .
I will start with the first of Mrs Paulsen 's reports , dealing with the directive on the monitoring of zoonotic agents .
I can accept most of the amendments on this proposal .
I will start with comitology .
I welcome the acceptance of our proposal on the adoption of implementing measures .
I can accept that , in addition to the Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health , the Commission may be assisted , where appropriate , by the Committee on the Human Communicable Diseases Network .
This may , however , lead to some delays in adopting implementing decisions .
I can also accept that certain basic criteria be transferred from the annexes to the articles .
However , I do not accept that systematic prior consultation with the European Food Safety Authority is required for any transitional measure or before amending the annexes .
Certain actions are administrative and do not require scientific expertise .
I cannot therefore accept Amendment No 22 .
Shortening the deadline for Member States to report on their monitoring activities from five months to three months is overly ambitious , considering the time needed to collect and compile data .
Experience with the current reporting system shows that five months is already optimistic .
I therefore reject the relevant part of Amendment No 20 .
Systematic microbiological studies during investigation of food-borne outbreaks may not always be possible if the suspected food is no longer available .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 18 .
I can support Amendments Nos 28 to 33 , which enlarge the scope of the monitoring of anti-microbial resistance , and supersede Amendments Nos 15 and 21 .
The other amendments are either wholly or partly acceptable , subject to editorial amendments .
I come now to the regulation on the control of salmonella and other zoonotic agents .
For the same reasons as on the proposed directive , I reject Amendment No 10 that shortens the deadline for Member States to report on the implementation of their control programmes .
I also reject Amendment No 27 that requires consultation of the European Food Safety Authority systematically before taking transitional or implementing measures or amending the annexes .
An overriding long-term objective to avoid completely the presence of zoonotic agents in the feed and food chain is unrealistic .
All reasonable efforts must be made to reduce the risk from zoonotic agents to a very low level .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 7 .
Amendments Nos 1 and 16 would introduce food of plant origin into this control regulation , but this should be tackled under the food hygiene package , as Mr Whitehead said .
I therefore reject Amendment Nos 1 and 16 .
I would note that as I can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 6 and 12 on the proposed directive the monitoring of zoonoses in products of plant origin would be covered .
Amendments Nos 2 and 22 provide for additional guarantees not only for salmonella , but possibly for other zoonotic agents .
Although additional guarantees may constitute an incentive for Member States , extending them to zoonotic agents other than salmonella would create additional barriers to trade .
Moreover , additional guarantees for food should be tackled under the food hygiene package .
I therefore reject Amendments Nos 2 and 22 .
I come now to Amendment No 24 , and the sanctions to be applied to Member States .
Sanctions are a horizontal issue , not only for zoonoses .
The Commission is finalising a draft regulation on official feed and food controls , in which the issue of sanctions will be tackled .
I therefore cannot accept Amendment No 24 for that reason .
An amendment to Article 8 on the prohibition on the use of antibiotics for preventive or growth promotion purposes was rejected in the Committee on the Environment , but not the recital to the same effect .
Amendment No 37 would restrict the use of antibiotics to therapeutic purposes only .
The Commission has already announced the total phasing-out of anti-microbials used for growth promotion .
The Commission will ask for a scientific opinion on the risks and benefits of the use of antibiotics in medicines to control salmonella .
For these reasons , and for consistency , I reject Amendments Nos 3 and 37 .
Amendments Nos 36 and 38 and the relevant parts of Amendments Nos 29 and 32 , on the targets and measures for laying hens and slaughter pigs are acceptable , subject to review of the sampling for pigs and , possibly , setting a different timetable for breeding pigs and for slaughter pigs .
We need a scientific opinion before setting additional targets for calves , other cattle and sheep .
Moreover , adding targets should be considered on the basis of the experience with the implementation of the new regulation .
I therefore reject the relevant parts of Amendments Nos 29 and 32 .
On Amendment No 35 on targets , it is evident that these are needed for those zoonotic serotypes with public health significance .
However , this amendment goes much further , and it is not practicable .
I therefore reject the relevant part of Amendment No 35 .
Amendment No 33 would require the eradication in poultry breeding flocks of all salmonella serotypes with public health significance , instead of just two serotypes .
Given the difficult experience with the current zoonoses directive , this objective is overly ambitious .
It would also contradict the principle of flexibility for Member States to set the necessary control measures .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 33 .
Shortening the deadline for laboratories to apply international standards for quality assurance schemes seems unrealistic , considering the time needed to prepare and reach accreditation .
I therefore reject that part of Amendment No 26 .
Amendment No 25 requires the European Food Safety Authority and the Food and Veterinary Office to be closely involved in monitoring that equivalent control programmes exist in third countries .
Control programmes are essentially a management issue and do not fall within the remit of the EFSA .
I therefore reject that part of Amendment No 25 .
The other amendments are either wholly or partly acceptable , subject to editorial amendments .
I hope that Parliament understands the reasoning behind the decisions to reject or accept in part some of the amendments put forward .
A full listing of the Commission 's position on each of the amendments is being provided to Parliament .
I trust that this will be included in the Minutes of this session .
Finally , may I repeat my sincere thanks to all those who have participated in this huge effort .
Along with the food hygiene package , the zoonoses proposals mark another important step in our review of food legislation , in pursuit of our objective to ensure that European consumers have access to the safest possible food supply in the world .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0121 / 2002 ) by Alexander de Roo , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise ( PE-CONS 3611 / 2002 - C5-0098 / 2002 - 2000 / 0194 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , except that the ladies and gentlemen have all gone home , which is unfortunate as this is an important topic .
I should in any case like to thank the fellow MEPs of the other groups who have seen this issue through over the past two years : Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on behalf of the Christian-Democrats , Mr Maaten on behalf of the Liberals and Mrs Scheele on behalf of the Socialists .
I should also like to thank Mr Provan who chaired the delegation in the conciliation committee .
In addition , I should like to express thanks to the Commission for its fruitful cooperation , at first reading and second reading and during most of the conciliation phase .
Finally , also a word of thanks to the Spanish Presidency .
They were very constructive and have finished where the Belgian Presidency left off .
During the conciliation phase , there were , in fact , three important points on the agenda , which I will outline below .
Parliament has also asked for slightly lower noise levels , to be measured .
This is important , for experience has taught my country that if only the high , and highest levels , are measured , lower noise levels spread over much larger areas .
Parliament has achieved more or less half of what we set out to achieve : straightforward success .
My second point concerns the objective , which has been tightened up considerably .
The Council of Ministers only talks about controlling the adverse effects .
In plain terms , this translates into noise barriers along motorways .
However , experience , has taught us that this must be approached in a much more structured way .
Noise itself has to be tackled by means of low-noise tyres or road surfaces , for example .
Far greater progress can be made with these .
I am pleased that the Council has finally agreed that the objective should be to reduce noise and not only to control and reduce the negative effects .
I should like to finish off with the most important , and at the same time most controversial , point , namely the obligation to lay down directives concerning the most important sources of noise .
This particularly concerns road traffic , which is the most significant source of noise anyway , aircraft noise and noise generated by trains , but also noise from outdoor machinery and noise from machinery in factories that penetrates into the outside world .
Parliament - and it really was the whole of Parliament - has asked for directives to tackle these sources , and not only to measure them .
This was by no means an absurd request .
As early as in 1992 , the Fifth Environmental Action Programme , written by Laurens Jan Brinkhorst as the highest environmental official at the time , stated that the Commission would present a proposal for measuring noise in 1994 - the proposal did not actually appear until 2000 - and that the Commission would present the directives in 1995 .
Maybe the Commission could explain why , for some reason , these proposals never saw the light of day .
The only pledge Parliament has now made , and the Council has fortunately seconded this , is that the Commission will be proposing this daughter directive by no later than 2006 , in other words eleven years later than it had announced itself .
In view of the importance of the topic of noise , which affects one third of European citizens in a very negative way , I will not make an issue of this , but I hope that the Commission , as we have agreed , will in fact be presenting a kind of Green Paper in eighteen months ' time about the direction to take regarding these daughter directives .
I hope at any rate that in a number of areas , for example with regard to tyres , we will not need to wait for four years before the Commission presents new proposals .
This is where I shall leave my contribution , as time is getting on .
Mr President , I am very pleased that the Environmental Noise Directive , which the Commission proposed in July 2000 , is now entering the final stage of its adoption .
Noise is an important environmental problem which we know concerns millions of EU citizens .
Thus the Commission is glad that this new legislation will soon enter into force and allow better protection of people exposed to environmental noise in Europe .
There is already a set of existing EU legislation relating to noise sources such as motor vehicles , aircraft , equipment used outdoors and so on .
I should like to express my gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr de Roo , as well as to all the members of the parliamentary delegation and the Conciliation Committee .
I appreciate the commitment that Mr de Roo has shown to this issue .
In particular , the Commission takes due note of the strong interest expressed by your institution for legislation relating to sources of noise .
However , while the Commission welcomes the agreement on a joint text , which was reached on 8 April 2002 by the Conciliation Committee , we have serious concerns with regard to the provisions of modified Article 1 of this directive .
For this reason the Commission has decided to make the following declaration :
The Commission takes note of the text agreed for Article 1 of the Environmental Noise Directive by the Members of the Conciliation Committee for the European Parliament and the Council .
The Commission considers that legislative proposals to reduce noise emissions from all major sources should be made on the basis of robust evidence supporting such proposals .
This is in line with the knowledge-based approach for policy making as proposed in the Sixth Environmental Action Programme and approved by the European Parliament and the Council .
In this regard the reports required for Member States under the directive , on the basis of harmonised noise indicators , will be an essential element .
The provision of such data across the Community will allow the impact and benefits of possible measures to be properly assessed prior to presenting Community legislative proposals .
Therefore , and in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community , the Commission will evaluate the need to come forward with new legislative proposals , reserving its right to decide as and when it would be appropriate to present any such proposals .
This is consistent with the Commission 's right of initiative as laid out in the Treaty , while the requirements of Article 1 ( 2 ) relating to the submission of new proposals within a fixed timeframe appear to be prejudicial to this right .
That is the statement the Commission wishes to make .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in June 1999 the first Summit of Heads of State and Government between the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean took place in Río de Janeiro on the initiative of France and Spain .
During this Summit , Spain offered to host a second one which was agreed at the time , and which furthermore would coincide with the Spanish Presidency of the European Union .
Therefore , as planned , the Summit will take place in Madrid on the 17th and 18th of this month , that is , on Friday and Saturday of this week .
The profound changes which took place in European and in the Americas during the 90s and the mutual desire to establish a general framework for bi-regional relations were the prime motives for staging the Río Summit .
At the end of that Summit , the Heads of State and Government adopted two important documents : the Río Declaration , which established the general principles to be applied to relations between Europe , Latin America and the Caribbean and a second document , designated as an Action Plan , which identified the 55 priority areas in the political , economic , cultural , educational and social fields , amongst others , which should form the basis for a strategic bi-regional partnership between the two sides of the Atlantic .
Through this Madrid Summit , the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean are committing themselves to deepening this partnership so that both regions can together confront the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities offered by the new 21st Century .
In Madrid , the Heads of State and Government propose to adopt three documents : an evaluation report recording what has been achieved since the Rio Summit , a document presenting the increasingly numerous common positions and values we share , and , finally , a political declaration which , as well as announcing the consolidation of our strategic bi-regional partnership , will list the firm commitments made at the highest level by both regions in the political , economic and cooperation fields and which go further than the measures adopted at the first Summit .
Until 1999 , relations between the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean had been based on a mainly sub-regional approach .
Political dialogue and cooperation were designed for the various sub-regional realities , in other words , dialogue was subdivided .
We established the San José dialogue for Central America , the dialogue with the Andean Community , Mercosur , Icaricom , and apart from certain exceptions , such as Mexico and Chile , which had a particular specific relationship , practically all the dialogue centred on differing sub-regional units .
The Rio Summit had the merit of introducing this new bi-regional approach , which has undoubtedly added weight to relations between the European Union and the sub-regions and individual countries .
With a view to this second Summit , the Spanish Presidency has worked intensively to make substantial progress on the three strategic dimensions I have mentioned .
Furthermore , we must stress that we have wanted this strategic relationship between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean from now on to be the framework or benchmark on which the European Union 's relations with each of the subregional areas or individual countries of Latin America and the Caribbean will be built .
From the point of view of political dialogue , the European Union 's priorities in relation to Latin America and the Caribbean , during the short period between the Rio Summit and today , have essentially been the strengthening of democracy and the Rule of Law , the defence of human rights , the fight against drug-trafficking , as well as the promotion of regional integration and coordination between the different positions of both regions in relation to the international agenda within the framework of international organisations and conferences .
At the Madrid Summit , both regions wish to take a further step , in not only a quantitative but also a qualitative sense , which would consist of a better structuring of political dialogue and a broader range of issues for discussion , which would also cover those not relating to regional problems .
We hope that this step forward will lead to the development of a common approach to world issues .
From an economic point of view we should begin by stressing that the European Union is very different from Latin America and the Caribbean in economic and social terms .
The population of Latin America and the Caribbean is greater than that of the Europe of the Fifteen - I am not talking about the enlarged Europe , since that will clearly have a larger population - and on the whole it is very young , that is to say it comprises very low age ranges .
Average per capita income in Latin America and the Caribbean is little over EUR 3 000 per year , while the average in the Union is seven times greater .
The bi-regional market continues to offer many opportunities for trade .
Between 1990 and 2000 European exports have increased from approximately EUR 17 billion to EUR 54 billion , in other words they have almost trebled .
European imports from Latin American and Caribbean countries during that same period have increased from approximately EUR 27 billion to EUR 58 billion .
In other words , they have doubled .
Despite this spectacular increase in volume , imports originating from Latin America and the Caribbean have gone from 24 % of the total in 1990 to just 12 % of the total in 2000 .
In relative terms , trade between the two sides of the Atlantic is decreasing , but it is increasing within the American continent .
There has also been a considerable increase in direct European investment in Latin America and the Caribbean .
The European Union is currently the biggest investor in the region .
Investments have risen from EUR 66 billion in 1997 to EUR 122 billion in 1999 , which represents almost 11 % of all European foreign investment and almost two-thirds of European investments in non-OECD countries .
This investment , Mr President , is a great reflection of the European Union 's confidence in and commitment to the whole Latin American and Caribbean region and without doubt makes a great contribution to the growth of economic activity and the creation of employment in that region .
Furthermore , and above all , the Europe of the Fifteen shares deep historical , political and cultural roots with Latin America and the Caribbean , which help in the development of a genuine identity and a genuine strategic partnership .
These common positions and values are creating important ties in terms of identity and solidarity and are encouraging both regions to exchange more and more of their own experiences and to combine their resources in order to resolve common problems .
Amongst the challenges which the European Union and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean must face is the need to modernise education systems , to create an economic and social climate favourable to sustainable development and to establish mechanisms for good governance .
The promotion of a strategic partnership cannot be based purely on a common identity , whether this be historical , cultural or political , but must be the result of a shared interest in order to turn principles , values and objectives into practical mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation , so that the two regions can confront all the great challenges of this new millennium in a united fashion .
On the 17th and 18th in Madrid , the Heads of State and Government of the 48 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union who will attend the Summit - let us remember that this Summit of Heads of State and Government is the largest and broadest to be held in the Union , since we are talking about 48 Heads of State and Government - are going to try to give significant impetus to the strategic bi-regional partnership , which , as I said earlier , began in Río de Janeiro in 1999 .
In each of the strategic pillars on which this partnership is based , the political , the economic and cooperation in the social , educational and cultural fields , both regions have wanted to take a significant step forward .
I would like to make a special mention of the joint fight against terrorism , through compliance with all the international conventions in this field , as well as the application of all the relevant United Nations resolutions .
Efforts will continue to strengthen democratic institutions and the Rule of Law , paying particular attention to human rights and the strengthening of judicial systems , with a view to guaranteeing the equal treatment of all people before the law .
Equally , account will be taken of the entry into force of the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court which , as the honourable Members are aware , has been ratified by many Latin American and Caribbean countries .
The intention is to strengthen political dialogue and consultation within the United Nations system , as well as other international fora , on the most important issues on the international agenda .
In terms of economic and commercial issues we must stress that on 25 April we were able to successfully complete the process of negotiating an association agreement between the European Union and Chile .
This is a free trade agreement between the two parties .
It is truly innovative in economic terms , unquestionably the most advanced of all those reached between the European Union and other third countries and there has been no hesitation in describing it as a fourth-generation agreement .
It is perhaps the free trade agreement that has dealt with the highest number of issues and included the highest number of considerations and there is no doubt that this opens the way for other agreements of this type , both in that region and in other parts of the world . We should remember , however , that in that region we are trying to establish a free trade agreement between two regions of economic integration - the European Union and Mercosur - and therefore the agreement reached with Chile sets a precedent for something truly historic ; the establishment of a free trade agreement between two common markets or between two regions of economic integration .
Since it is relevant here , I would also like to mention the recent approval by the General Affairs Council of a proposal for future European Union relations with the Andean Community and with Central America which opens the way for the consideration of the creation of free trade areas between the European Union and both regions and in order to intensify not only cooperation but also political dialogue , which is an added value which did not exist previously in the agreements with these countries .
We all know that the difficult internal situation being experienced by certain South American countries is hindering the complex negotiations for a partnership agreement between the European Union and Mercosur which I referred to earlier .
The truth is that the Summit wishes to acknowledge the results of the negotiation , in which the political , institutional and cooperation chapters have been completed and the small amount of progress which has been made in the fields of commerce and the measures for facilitating commerce so that we do not abandon this important project of a future free trade agreement between Mercosur and the European Union .
Both regions - I am referring to the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean in general - have committed themselves to working together to ensure the success of the World Conference on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg in August , as well as adopting a mutual commitment to succeed in something very important on which the Latin American countries have a great deal to say , that is the Millennium Round , with the commercial issues recently launched in Doha .
Education , culture and access to knowledge are undoubtedly important keys to success in the 21st Century .
I would like to highlight the launch of the @ lis Programme for cooperation with Latin America in relation to the information society , recently approved at the meeting of science and technology Ministers in Seville and the ALCUE programme in the field of scientific and technological cooperation and a new programme of post-graduate grants intended to help 4 000 students from the other side of the Atlantic to benefit from the advantages of studying at European universities .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to repeat that at this Madrid Summit , which , as I have said , we expect to be attended by 48 Heads of State and Government , a bi-regional process based on a strategic partnership will be consolidated .
I am convinced that at the end of the Summit we will be able to celebrate the progress made on a process which begun just three years ago .
Mr President , the day after tomorrow , as the presidency has just pointed out , the second Summit between the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean will take place in Madrid .
The fundamental aims of this Summit are : to reinforce the bi-regional strategic partnership that was launched nearly three years ago at the first Summit in Río de Janeiro , and to set out new objectives for the next two years .
I will not repeat all the reasons for the importance of this relationship , which was set out so cogently by the presidency - economic , political and cultural - but we all know how important it is .
Rather than repeat what has been said so eloquently already , I would like to address two main questions regarding the Summit .
Firstly , what has the Commission done to ensure the success of Madrid ?
And secondly , what results do we expect from the Summit ?
It goes without saying that the Commission is strongly committed to ensuring the success of the meeting in Madrid .
And , we are equally committed to ensuring that the bi-regional process initiated at Rio succeeds .
Indeed , what is at stake in Madrid is the fundamental credibility of this whole process .
As Parliament knows , public opinion has been increasingly critical of summits in recent years .
We look back to the controversy surrounding the G8 meetings last year .
These summits are frequently derided as high-level talking shops that too often produce little more than hot air .
The summits ' grandiloquent final declarations are frequently , and perhaps rather embarrassingly , contrasted with the paucity of the results they actually achieved .
As the Commission has repeatedly emphasised , we are determined that Madrid will not just be a talking shop like that .
It has to be credible , and in order for it to be so , we need to demonstrate clearly that the ambitious objectives defined at Rio have been achieved .
I do not want to launch into a long-winded overview of everything that has stemmed from Rio .
Nor am I the right person to outline everything that others have achieved since then .
Instead , I shall concentrate on the Commission 's accomplishments in the priority areas of cooperation that it committed itself to work on .
I firmly believe that we have fulfilled our part of the bargain and we can go to Madrid with our heads held high .
Firstly , the Commission has launched several programmes aimed at supporting and strengthening those institutions that explicitly defend human rights .
These include a regional programme in support of ombudsmen in Latin America and two multi-annual programmes on democracy and human rights .
In addition , the Commission has co-financed a bi-regional conference on the work and cooperation of ombudsmen and national human rights institutions , as well as an inter-continental conference on human rights protection .
Moving on to information society , which the presidency referred to , our most notable achievement has been the adoption of the @ LIS programme .
Aimed at reinforcing cooperation between the European Union and Latin America , it was officially launched at the EU-Latin America and Caribbean ministerial meeting in Seville a few weeks ago .
In the social sphere , the Commission also goes to Madrid with a positive balance sheet .
We have promoted the participation of different civil society groups and have financed a series of meetings that will submit their conclusions to the Summit .
We have co-financed an academic seminar on social equity , an NGOs forum as well as a civil society meeting .
This is on top of the recent business forum held last month in Mexico .
As evidence of our ongoing commitment in this area , it is worth noting that in programming cooperation for the period 2000-2006 the Commission has allocated a substantial part of its existing financial resources to the social area .
In addition , the Commission is currently working on all initiatives aimed at increasing public administration capacity in social policies , through exchanges of experience , best practice and know-how .
Finally , in the field of education , the Commission has approved an ambitious scholarship programme under the name of ALBAN .
Over a period of nine years , 4 000 scholarships will be awarded to Latin American graduates wishing to complete their studies at European universities .
I want to emphasise to Parliament how much importance I personally attach to this programme .
As we all know , too often Latin American students feel that they have no choice other than to head directly north to continue their studies .
We have to give them another option : the option of coming to study at European universities .
That would be good for us , and I hope it would be good for the next generation of leaders in Latin America .
These are scholarships which will be generous - worth about EUR 19 000 each year .
They will be managed by , I hope , a network of higher education institutions .
If we can make a success of this scholarship scheme , we can look at developing similar schemes in other areas , because I believe profoundly - a point made by Mr Iglesias on a number of occasions - that one of the most important ways in which we can help our partners around the world is by opening our own universities to as many of them as possible .
Let me move on to my second main question : what does the Commission expect from the Summit ?
First of all , Madrid should be an opportunity to enhance the political dimension of our bi-regional strategic partnership .
This partnership is about more than just developing cooperation projects : indeed , 48 heads of state and government have not come together simply to endorse a new list of projects .
I am convinced that what is really important is the opportunity that Madrid presents us with to give political weight to fresh and bold initiatives .
In particular , we need to bring our political dialogue into sharper focus .
By doing so , we will come closer together on issues of common concern , such as climate change , the development agenda agreed at Doha , the International Criminal Court and human rights .
We must also commit ourselves increasingly to assert these convergent positions in international fora .
This will result in the strengthening of the multilateral system .
Europe has a particular responsibility , through our actions and cooperation with others , to make it clear that , in our judgment , the only way in which we can tackle international problems is through international cooperation .
We should look in particular for partners in making multilateralism work in Latin America and the Caribbean .
Secondly , the Commission expects the Summit to address what is one of the most important questions for the people of Latin America and the Caribbean : the fight against social inequities and the search for social cohesion .
We know - some of the figures were given by the presidency - that Latin America faces a potential problem of political instability because of social inequity .
This issue needs to be addressed , and the Summit should concentrate on the search for solutions to this problem .
Lastly , we expect Madrid to represent a milestone in a number of sub-regional negotiation processes - again , as the presidency pointed out .
Perhaps most significantly , the Summit will mark the conclusions of our negotiations with Chile .
This is indeed a considerable achievement .
It constitutes a major strengthening of bilateral relations and I endorse everything that the presidency said about the extraordinary depth and breadth of the agreement we have concluded with Chile .
It is one of the most important agreements we have ever concluded with any country .
Elsewhere , the Summit should welcome the fact that the negotiation of the political , institutional and cooperation chapters with Mercosur is practically finished .
I hope it also encourages the efforts being made to conclude the outstanding negotiations in due course .
With regard to Central America and the Andean Community , the European Union has been particularly sensitive to the requests of these two regions significantly to enhance their relations with us .
The General Affairs Council conclusions of 15 April have paved the way for the negotiation of a political dialogue and cooperation agreement with both regions .
These negotiated agreements will seek to enhance our trade and investment relations and prepare the ground for still closer cooperation in the future .
By doing this , the European Union has satisfactorily responded to the legitimate aspirations of these countries , and I hope the Madrid Summit will wholeheartedly support this move .
Before concluding , I would like to extend my congratulations to the Spanish presidency for the excellent work it has carried out regarding the preparation of the Summit .
I would also like to pay tribute to the European Parliament 's extraordinary commitment to the future of our relations with Latin America , and to one or two individual Members who have played a particularly constructive role , one of whom is going to speak as soon as I have sat down .
I should like to congratulate Parliament in particular on the ambitious and far-reaching initiatives contained in the resolution of 15 November 2001 .
We in the Commission have been working hard with the Spanish government and others to make this Summit a success .
We have been working for almost 18 months with that objective in mind .
We have been able , not without some difficulty , to bring to fruition schemes like the scholarship programme and the programme on the information society .
We have concluded negotiations with Chile on an extremely wide-ranging agreement , as we said , which many faint hearts thought impossible .
We have made more progress with Mercosur than most would have predicted .
Now we want to raise the level of our relations with the other subregional groupings as well .
This provides the basis for a good Summit , which will further strengthen our bi-regional relationship and prepare us to take things forward even further when we next meet - probably in two years ' time - almost certainly with a larger European Union .
Mr President , by including this item on the agenda within a very difficult international context and coinciding with the visit of President Fox and a large delegation of Mexican parliamentarians , we have wanted to stress this Parliament 's interest in relations with the countries of Latin America on the eve of the Summit .
I agree with Mr Patten 's view that this type of meeting has been criticised because the great declarations they lead to are often not turned into concrete objectives , and I believe that in reality summits should be the ritualistic embodiment of an underlying political will which will generate the political energy necessary for the machinery to function .
Our task now is to give substance to this ambitious objective of the strategic and regional partnership which the Heads of State and Government drew up in Río de Janeiro .
And I agree with Mr Patten that the European Union is approaching this Summit with a series of very positive messages .
Firstly - and I believe this does credit to all the political groups in this Parliament - it has a clear and ambitious report aimed at the constitution of a bi-regional partnership which attempts to create a common European Union strategy for Latin America .
Secondly , it has a will which is reflected in budgetary terms , which will allow the European Union to go to Madrid with respectable sums within the 2002 budget .
And thirdly , the EU has an ambitious association agreement , negotiated with Chile - for which we must thank the European Commission for its negotiation efforts and the Presidency-in-Office for its support - and is holding negotiations with Mercosur which must also be given new impetus , because it is at moments of crisis that this type of agreement can be more necessary than ever . The European Community must also present , through the Commission , guidelines for negotiation , for new agreements with the Andean Community and Central America which , in the opinion of this House , must provide - I am not saying at this moment - the prospect of a partnership , as the President of the European Parliament has said in a recent letter to the President of the Commission ; and also an ambitious Commission programme which includes a whole series of initiatives which , although they do not imply a single euro more , are very important in relation to the creation of this bi-regional association .
Amongst all this praise , Commissioner , please allow me to make a small critical point : you will understand that we consider the reduction of EUR 30 million which the Commission has proposed in its preliminary draft budget for 2003 not to be the best calling card to present to the Summit at the moment .
Having said this , I believe it is important that the Summit should take account of the fact that the great and profound social inequalities in Latin America may jeopardise the progress made through so much effort in the fields of co-existence and democratisation and that therefore we must send a very clear message of support for normalisation and democratic consolidation in countries such as Venezuela and Argentina , the inclusion of FARC and the LN on the list of terrorist organisations , also the will to normalise relations with Cuba , on the basis of the principles of the democratic clause , and its gradual incorporation into the Cotonou Agreement .
And I believe it is essential for the European Union enthusiastically to create an ambitious global relationship with Latin America so that the United States is not the only protagonist , since they do not ask too many questions about the degree of regional integration in Latin America .
Therefore , Mr President , I hope that this Summit will send a clear message , at a clearly-defined level , that we want to create a common area which will take the form of a great transatlantic axis to provide a direction for relations between the European Union and Latin America for the coming millennium .
Mr President , Madrid is a summit of Heads of State and Government .
But may I take this opportunity to point out in all modesty that the European Parliament has cultivated very close relations with Latin American parliamentarians for years now ; in fact , the longest-standing relations between the European Parliament and other parliaments are with Latin America and date back to the early 1970s .
How Latin America develops over the coming years and decades will also depend to a very considerable degree on its relations with Europe .
I think that we underestimate our potential .
I should like to make the point here that relations with Latin America must , above all , include a scientific and technical dimension , an industrial dimension , as we have with the United States -why not with Latin America as well ?
May I remind you that Europe 's two biggest scientific institutes are in Latin America : the ESO or European Southern Observatory in Chile , which has done a great deal for astrophysics in Chile , and our space centre in Kourou , because French Guyana is also on Latin American soil .
I also advocate intensive dialogue involving industry in Europe and Latin America .
Something along these lines began with Mercosur and could be extended to the whole of Latin America .
Mr Patten rightly referred to Kyoto and climate policy .
If I had the time , I could work out what emissions trading might mean in the future for Latin America .
The President has signalled to me that I do not have the time .
If I did , I would work it out for you and you would be astounded at the possibilities it encompasses .
In short , we have a great many opportunities for relations with Latin America .
We must use them , not just talk about them !
Mr President , we must remember that the world is in disarray , and not only as a result of globalisation or the new international situation following 11 September , but also as a result of exclusion , privilege , corruption and favouritism .
This situation affects Europe , Latin America and the Caribbean .
We must therefore take advantage of this Summit in Madrid to consider the situation frankly and achieve pragmatic conclusions and convince ourselves of the need amongst all of us to ensure that the whole of society functions correctly and its quality of life is improved , and we must seek a road towards peace and stability on the planet , particularly in these two geographical blocks - the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean - which are united by history .
In this regard , respect for human rights and the rejection of political impunity and intolerance , as well as the strengthening of democracy and the incorporation of civil society into political decision making must be the key priorities of our future joint action , within the framework of respect for the sovereignty and independence of peoples .
In Madrid we must , therefore , strengthen interinstitutional political dialogue in order to ensure a climate of trust and achieve suitable relations .
Mr President , the first Summit in Río de Janeiro in June 1999 ended with the decision to establish a strategic bi-regional partnership , but the 54 priorities of the action plan decided on at the end of the Summit have largely not been complied with yet .
Moving beyond words , for us the challenge of the Madrid Summit and the initiative of a global strategic partnership consists of offering an option which is fundamentally different to that of the United States .
I believe we will have been too unambitious if all we do is repeat that our priority is the establishment of free trade areas in countries such as Mexico or Chile .
Or if we say how good the policies of the International Monetary Fund in Argentina are , while ignoring the data indicating that 41 % if the population in Latin America is still living in poverty , that 56 % of the income they derive from exports is used to pay debts , and that in countries with which Europe has agreements that are seen as models - such as Mexico -extremely serious violations of human rights are still taking place .
We will also have been too unambitious if we allow our multinationals to treat their workers in a way which would be considered unacceptable in Europe , as is the case with the German company Continental Tyres in Mexico , or if we intend to intervene in the Colombian conflict simply by producing prescription lists to try to define who is a terrorist and who is not .
Finally , Mr President , we do not want to forget that the Spanish Presidency was very careful about accepting the attempted coup d 'état in Venezuela - I do not know how else to describe this acceptance - and that this had a very negative effect in Latin America , whose governments , in contrast , recognised the democratic value of the Chávez Government .
With regard to the resolution , we ask - and I will end here , Mr President - that we stick to the compromise agreed by the groups and that we do not vote for an amendment which could seriously complicate the situation of the hostages in Colombia , by introducing the idea that we have to close the door to all types of dialogue .
We therefore sincerely hope that this House will not approve the amendment proposed by the European People 's Party .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr de Miguel and Commissioner Patten for their speeches , which have been very illuminating , but I believe we are missing the opportunity to analyse what is happening in Latin America and the role Europe can play .
It is essential that we see the FTAA project as a counter-offensive by the United States to reduce the European Union 's influence - which , although in principle it is contradictory , can also be described as beneficial - in relation to Latin America .
I believe that is the most important issue which should be dealt with at the European Union / Latin American Summit of Heads of State .
And we are therefore obliged to analyse the consequences of both the FTAA project and of 11 September and the change that has taken place throughout Latin America .
We must take into account the violations of human rights in Guatemala and the impunity relating to them .
We must consider the breakdown of negotiations in Colombia , which have failed , and we , who are committed to promoting dialogue and negotiation , should insist on this policy of dialogue and negotiation in order to restore common sense .
We cannot pursue the aggressive militarist policy of the United States because that would cause us to lose all credibility in the eyes of the world and of Latin America .
The same can be said with regard to Venezuela , Argentina and Brazil , where , incredibly , democratic candidates from the Workers ' Party and trade unionists are being eliminated before the elections , and all with the usual impunity .
Therefore , our influence in Latin America , in view of the Summit , should be decisive , in order - just as Mr de Miguel and Commissioner Patten have said - to strengthen human rights , peaceful co-existence and democracy through the influence which the European Union can exert and which the United States is failing to exert .
I therefore believe that it is worth taking full advantage of this opportunity and that we must not turn our backs on the situation .
Mr President , with the second summit between the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean taking place in Madrid this weekend , it is quite right that the European Parliament should today be reviewing its position on relations with these two regions .
Latin America indeed continues to face political , economic and social challenges that require Europe and Latin America to work together with mutual respect .
The summit is , therefore , an excellent opportunity for defining the strategic framework needed by the European Union to develop a foreign policy involving more balanced association and cooperation with the countries of that area .
Seen in that light , a common EU vision of South America is not just strategically important , it also needs to be encouraged at the political level .
The starting point for this common strategy and for EU policy on Latin America should be the principle of association , and it needs to enjoy the support of both sides . Implementing this strategy involves adopting an overall approach so as to encourage relations between the various parties in a consistent and organised way .
This does not mean that the European Union should not encourage ever closer cooperation with the individual countries in that part of the American continent , especially given that some of them , such as Argentina and Venezuela , are for various reasons passing through a particularly difficult period .
In this context we think there are many advantages to bilateral partnerships between either the European Union or its Member States and various Latin American countries .
These bilateral cooperation arrangements are the precursor of the successful application of the common European strategy .
The objective of sharing prosperity by creating a free trade area by 2010 is very important and must not fail to take account of the differing weight of the various partners .
In the context of this bi-regional political dialogue , both the European Union and the countries of Latin America need to marshal their forces so as to identify specific initiatives and actions that will provide their relations with a strategic framework which is both authentic and well structured .
For example , we need to define a global plan for combating drug trafficking , and also to strengthen agreements on security , which have become increasingly urgent since the terrorist attacks of 11 September .
It is also essential to step up trade and to encourage investment in both regions , which implies support from private initiatives in the countries of Latin America as a key aspect of this mutual development strategy .
Lastly , we should not lose sight of the need to defend and strengthen human rights and to promote democracy in all the countries of the region , without exception .
I therefore support the proposal for a joint resolution whilst recognising that compromise texts like the one we are debating sometimes lack in clarity what they may gain in parliamentary support .
Mr President , one of my ancestors was the captain of a ship sailing between Scotland and Valparaiso , Chile .
Sadly , he drowned on one of those hazardous journeys .
So trade with Latin America is long established between my country and this great continent .
It therefore gave me great pleasure to attend the EU-Latin American Parliamentary Conference in the same city last April .
I am hopeful that Chile will shortly become the most recent signatory to a wide-ranging cooperation agreement with the EU , as Mexico - whose President Fox is visiting us here in this House today - did following the first summit meeting in Rio in 1999 .
Recently , Latin America has been very much in the news .
We have had President Carter 's reconciliation visit this week to Cuba , the sole remaining communist dictatorship ; the farcical short-lived coup in Venezuela against the maverick President Chávez ; the sad economic meltdown that we now see in once prosperous Argentina ; as well as the ongoing tragedy of Colombia , racked by guerrilla war , political assassinations and illegal drug trafficking .
Nevertheless , in spite of these problems , I retain a degree of optimism that Latin American countries will eventually realise that to reach western-style prosperity and security they will have to put aside their petty divisions - which are small compared to the linguistic and cultural differences that we face here in the EU - and unite in developing strong and stable functioning market economies , based on the Rule of Law , good governance , democracy and human rights .
Initially the EU will have to negotiate bilateral treaties , but I am convinced that in the longer run a Latin American free-trade area drawing on the lessons of the Mercosur and Andean Pact countries ' experience will emerge over the next decade .
This will itself be subsumed eventually into the free trade area of the Americas , as agreed by the USA and the Latin American heads of state and government in Quebec last year .
It also established for the first time embryonic clauses on human rights and democracy to which all the states signed up except , shamefully , Venezuela .
I therefore welcome the second summit of the heads of state and government of Latin America , the Caribbean and the EU in Madrid on 17 May .
I wish it well in its challenging project of bringing about much closer cooperation between these two great regions of the world .
Mr President , I am not going to talk about the good news in relation to the Madrid Summit .
I agree with the words of many of my fellow Members , but I believe that one of our obligations is to point out the possible problems and as far in advance as possible .
There is good news about Mexico - today we are going to have the honour of receiving President Fox - about Chile and about other things .
But I would like to draw the attention of the Council and the Commission to the poorest region of the American continent , that is , Central America .
From 1984 , the European Union played a very positive role in the development of the peace processes in the region .
We are seeing political changes which have meant peace and the installation of democratic governments , but also a situation in which the difficulties of economic and social change are being combined with natural disasters and continuing inequality and poverty of staggering proportions .
I believe that the conclusion of a peace agreement should always be viewed as a starting point rather than a point of arrival .
And it would be a mistake to be content with the management of the past and not appreciate that there is a risk in the region , and in the whole of Latin America , of a lack of prospects which leads to the most disastrous thing in political and social terms , which is stagnation , not conflict , but a total lack of prospects , the development of stagnant situations .
This problem is particularly serious in Central America and I believe that the Union has an essential role to play in supporting the regional development of the area in the medium and long term .
To be absolutely frank , I believe there is increasing frustration in Central America in relation to the Madrid Summit , and I would ask the Council and the Commission to do everything possible to prevent this , or at least to alleviate it , by offering prospects for the immediate future .
Mr President , Commissioner Patten hit the nail on the head when he said that the danger of these Summits is that they might turn into talking shops .
We hope that the Summit will achieve real results , but I agree with Mr Salafranca that the presentation by the Commission of a budget in which the contribution to that region is reduced by EUR 30 million is not the best message to send at this point .
However , I would like to refer to another issue : the issue raised by Mrs Frassoni , who has asked us , on behalf of her group , not to include an amendment condemning terrorism .
I believe that this could prejudice the hostages of terrorists and that is a mistake from the methodological point of view .
We cannot become hostages to terrorism , because if we give in at this point , then we are actually inciting terrorists to kidnap our nationals and our representatives .
The Spanish police have just countered a terrorist operation which was apparently aimed at overshadowing the Madrid Summit .
I believe that this should reinforce our desire to combat terrorism both on this side of the Atlantic and on the other , and to cooperate with the democratic governments of Latin America in order to consolidate the democratic options .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to the Commission 's speech , which I believe was very correct .
I would like to state publicly that the Presidency of the Council has had invaluable assistance from the European Commission in relation to fulfilling our desire to give this Summit substance .
It is not my job to pass judgement on budgetary issues which , furthermore , I have no information about , but I can say that the Commission will take account of what the honourable Members have said , although this does not fall within the competence of the Commissioner responsible for external relations .
However , both this Commissioner and the Commissioner responsible for trade , Mr Lamy , have made a huge effort to give substance to this Summit , which - we all agree - must not merely be a talking shop .
The Commission , together with the Member States , has made a great contribution to this .
The panorama we are facing in relation to Latin America is surely one of the most difficult we have seen in recent years .
Following the so-called ' lost decade ' , everything seemed to indicate , during the 1990s , that the Latin American continent was moving forwards , that democratic systems were being consolidated and that great progress was being made in the social field , which is extremely important , because the great problems of Latin America stem from the huge differences between classes , with a very high percentage of people living in a dispossessed class and living without hope .
Just when we thought that , by means of our fora for dialogue - whether at sub-regional or at other levels - such as the Rio Group , the San José dialogue , the Andean dialogue , Mercosur , etc . , we were beginning to find a way to improve the region , it turns out that we are now facing a very serious situation .
The truly dramatic situation of Argentina has been mentioned .
There has also been mention of the situation of Venezuela , of Central America ? it is not just one country but a whole range of countries which are not in a position to progress , and - as Mr Obiols i Germà said - they have practically been forgotten .
It appears that the rest of the international community has turned its attention entirely away from Central America .
These are the realities we must confront in a context in which the European Union is fully aware of its historical commitment to the other side of the Atlantic .
There is absolutely no doubt that transatlantic relations are an essential part of Union 's foreign policy as a whole .
America as a whole , from Canada to the Magellan Strait , is a continent in which European culture , history and life have had a great influence .
The result of this influence has been hybrid societies , differing societies , which are not European but whose value systems are based on everything they have inherited from centuries of our presence throughout that enormous continent .
The European Union 's desire is to value the idiosyncrasies and independence of all those countries while at the same time strengthening all those purely European values which are still alive in those societies and which we are obliged to maintain through our policies .
We naturally have to do more than that and that is why we are so involved in the issue of economic development .
We also know , however , that solutions are always long-term , because there are regions , such as Central America or the Andean area , and even the most developed regions , the Southern Cone , which , because of their circumstances , will in reality be very seriously in debt over the coming years , with social consequences which may be extremely dangerous for the future of those countries .
I therefore believe that the examples that have been provided , such as the free trade agreement with Mexico and the one we are now going to sign with Chile , offer a means for fairer and more intense exchanges at the highest level .
The Union has only reached free trade agreements with one Latin American country , Mexico , and now it is going to sign one with another , Chile , but with the rest of world we have no free trade agreements .
This indicates that we must move towards a shared and fairer commercial system , but , at the same time we must not forget that , together with those two countries , which are the exceptions , there are other countries which have very serious problems , which are not going to be resolved purely by free trade agreements , since , as Mrs Frassoni said , trade is not everything , and we must also act on other levels .
This will enable us to take a clear initiative with regard to the policy of the United States which actually is restricted to a great free trade agreement , the FTAA , and offers nothing else .
The added value of our European culture and our historic link to that continent must be that " something more " that we must offer , firstly , through the elimination of differences in wealth and the creation of a more balanced and just society , and , above all , through the promotion of good governance , respect for the Rule of Law and respect for human rights .
These must be the messages and I believe that the Latin American countries are hearing them .
Mr Fox will hear them today - because today we are going to hold a meeting with him - and I believe that all the Heads of State and Government will also hear them within the framework of the dialogue with Europe .
Therefore , the Presidency takes good note of the fact that the European Parliament 's sentiment is precisely that : we must go further than the commercial field , without ignoring it , in order to increase the quality of our relations with Latin America through dialogue between closely-related countries , because we share a culture , language , history and values - above all values - and because the values which have made European society what it is must also make Latin American society more prosperous , more egalitarian , more just and more protective of human rights .
It is in this spirit that the Presidency will approach the Summit and furthermore it now has the support of this Parliament in order to move in the direction we consider to be appropriate .
Thank you , President-in-Office .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I rise to introduce my report on transatlantic relations .
It is a timely debate with the rapidly changing transatlantic relationship today .
As many will know , I have always been a strong supporter of closer transatlantic relations .
It is logical , in an area of globalisation , for Europe and America to think of a strengthened transatlantic partnership based on shared values and common interests .
But logic is not necessarily sufficient .
There are real grounds for concern , the traditional transatlantic ties are now weakening , without new bridges being built ; increasing numbers feel that NATO may not exist in five years ' time ; and certainly the NATO-Russia Council , as we see published today , is fundamentally changing our whole security relationship .
I would like to examine why this is happening , what the concerns are and what we should do about it .
NATO inevitably is changing , no longer is it a defensive organisation against a country which no longer exists .
It is becoming more political , more international .
After 11 September quite clearly one partner , America , feels that it is a nation under attack .
We in Europe do not have that feeling .
It gives a much clearer focus on what should be done in military matters .
Finally , America perhaps is a country which is certainly not used to , and may not wish to , share sovereignty and multinational institutions , as we have become more used to in Europe .
It therefore sees things in a very different light when participating in international institutions , even if it is aware that for market access global rules of governance are needed .
What then are the concerns ?
My report is very clear on this .
A number of different concerns have been raised by colleagues , of a political nature : the lack of US participation in the Kyoto Protocol , the biodiversity convention , the Ottawa Convention on land mines and , recently , the refusal to sign the treaty establishing the International Criminal Court .
Secondly , economic concerns .
We have seen two recent instances of American action on steel and now American action to increase agricultural subsidies .
In many ways , these show that they are living in a world of their own , detached from reality outside .
Finally on foreign policy , where the US seems to wish to continue its ideas for action against Iraq , this is seen by many as not perhaps the best way to deal with that problem .
What then should we do ?
The report I am submitting to the House , together with my colleague , Mrs Mann , shows that we have many good ideas , but we have perhaps not paid sufficient attention to what we should be doing .
The key element of the report is that we need to continue to update NATO , update the new transatlantic agenda to develop a sustained and strengthened transatlantic partnership based on a new confidence pact and concept of mutual recognition in which our respective roles can be clearly defined .
There are a lot of examples , but I will give a few here to the House .
NATO remains not only the fundamental guarantee of Euro-Atlantic stability and security , it is the essential framework for coalition operations .
NATO needs to respond to new global challenges , realising the form of political and military structures is shifting from collective defence to collective security .
It is essential for adequate defence budgets to be combined with courageous steps towards coordination and greater rationalisation of defence procurement .
Modernisation instead of marginalisation of partnership requires the US to open its defence markets and us , in Europe , to coordinate where possible .
We need to develop a common and comprehensive definition and concept of security and risks to security .
We also need to understand that NATO and the EU need to work closer together , by bringing together the non-military tools at the EU 's disposal , combined with the decisive military capabilities available to NATO .
We need a reinforced political dialogue .
My colleague Mrs Mann will deal with the economic aspects , on which there are several excellent proposals .
We need to engage the US in constructive multilateral dialogue and to strengthen parliamentary involvement in this whole dialogue .
What does this mean ?
We have made one or two small steps at the EU-US summit on this positive agenda , but there is one major element missing and that is the strategic view of the long-term destination of this transatlantic partnership on which we have no real ideas .
We in this House have always supported a longer-term , deeper transatlantic partnership , that is why we are calling on the Commission to produce a report .
Its own communication is lacking in strategic thinking , and we need to make great progress on that issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , my colleague 's closing comments make an excellent introduction to my intervention .
It is true , we need more strategic thinking and vision .
This is a very , very difficult situation to deal with .
Only if we try and put transatlantic relations on a new footing and make the quantum leap to strategic thinking will there be any permanent rapprochement between us in the long term .
I have focussed , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Relations , Research and Energy , on investigating the economic implications .
I came to the following conclusion , which my fellow Members supported and which I should like to thank James Elles for including in his report .
Basically , we started from the premise that the transatlantic market already exists ; you can see that for yourselves in several sectors .
However , this has consequences because politicians and the public barely even notice this .
We basically start from the premise that we are competitors .
We are , however , also well aware of the fact that there is a closeness between us and that we are partners .
But this very often finds relatively little expression in political action .
So we need to take more note of economic realities and translate them into political thinking .
That should also give us food for thought for strategic planning .
The consequences are considerable .
We have found evidence of increasingly frequent frustration between us and of alienation setting in .
We have found evidence of segregation and of harping back to national policies - mainly on the American side but , to be fair , we are not completely innocent of this - and an upswing in so-called American and European values .
This leads to more and more trade disputes , which feed on these problems .
The question is : what can we do ?
As James Elles rightly says , we need to update the new transatlantic agenda and transatlantic economic partnership .
How can we do that ?
I think we need a radical paradigm shift .
We need to move away from mutual observation .
We can achieve this paradigm shift in three ways : first , through a sectoral analysis of economic interdependence , secondly , by strengthening bilateral methods upstream of the WTO dispute settlement procedure and early warning system and , thirdly , through greater rapprochement .
The Commission already set this out at the summit in the form of a positive agenda which the Council confirmed .
And we shall welcome it on Parliament 's part .
I do not intend to go into any further detail right now .
The details are there in the report and I trust that the Commission and the Council will support it .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to Mr Elles ' presentation of his report and also to Mrs Mann 's speech .
In my view , their assessment of the current state of our relationship with the United States and in particular of the Transatlantic Agenda and the future of our relationship merit careful study by the Commission and the Council .
As Mr Elles stated , in recent years circumstances have arisen resulting in changes in our relationship with the United States .
Clearly too , the United States has adopted attitudes which are at variance with a number of common principles we felt had been accepted in the context of the Transatlantic Agenda .
Nonetheless , I believe these are mere blips in what is essentially a strong relationship we trust will prove very significant .
In fact , relations with the United States are already established and important , regardless of whether it is incumbent on us to reflect on strengthening them .
Of all the Union 's external relationships , the transatlantic relationship is surely the closest one between the European Union and a third country .
The European Union / United States Summit was held in Washington barely two weeks ago .
There can be no reservations in declaring that its outcome was excellent . Both parties maintained a commendable constructive spirit across the whole range of issues discussed .
This exemplifies what I stated earlier . It shows that regardless of some frustration on our side because of our aim of maintaining a more intense relationship with the United States , the fact is that due to the intensity and closeness of the transatlantic relationship the United States is currently one of the Union 's very special partners .
We are working together in a number of areas such as the war on terrorism and the joint effort to resolve regional conflicts , notably in the Middle East . The significance of the fact that a meeting of the so-called Quartet was held immediately after the summit should be noted .
We are also engaged in drawing up and debating a positive agenda on issues related to trade .
It is therefore appropriate to focus on the more important aspects of our mutual understanding rather than keep highlighting those areas where we disagree .
The latter mainly involve minor trading issues and , incidentally , amount to less than 5 % of the volume of trade between the United States and Europe . There are therefore many good examples of this transatlantic relationship based on common values and on the close cooperation President Bush himself deems to be unique and important .
From a global perspective and as stated in the press conference following the Summit , a number of conclusions may be drawn from this event .
I should like to mention the main ones as I feel they encapsulate the current state of our relationship with the United States . In the first place , there is a clear recognition of the density and significance of the relationship between the European Union and the United States in economic terms .
After all , together we account for almost half of the world 's economy , 40 % to be precise .
Only 5 % of this is giving rise to dispute , as I stated earlier .
This represents the greatest bilateral relationship in the contemporary world in terms of trade and investment .
There is also recognition of the importance of this relationship in political terms with the renewed joint impetus in the fight against terrorism .
Secondly , the existence of common strategies and challenges was again highlighted .
This means the European Union and the United States are strategic partners .
Terrorism is the main case in point .
Negotiations opened on agreements for extradition and legal aid in criminal cases . The Justice and Home Affairs Council adopted the relevant mandate on 25 April .
Cooperation regarding freezing the assets of terrorist organisations and non-proliferation was strengthened . The updated list of organisations of this nature was finalised on the eve of the meeting to bear witness to our commitment and keep alive the struggle against such organisations .
Thirdly , concerning foreign policy , the close cooperation and concerted action on regional conflicts and reconstruction processes was highlighted .
Examples of these are the agreement on security in the Middle East on the principles of the end to violence , recognition of states and recognition of the Palestinian Authority as a legitimate participant along with support for the Mitchell and Tenet plans . The improvement in the situation in the Balkans was also noted .
Cooperation between the United States and Europe in areas such as Macedonia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Serbia and Montenegro was cited . Mention was also made of the close cooperation in the reconstruction of Afghanistan and of the political solution achieved in the framework of the Bonn conference .
Fourthly , both parties stated their position regarding the World Trade Organisation 's regulations on all trade issues . They endorsed the principle underlying the positive agenda and the qualitative leap involved in identifying areas suitable for cooperation in future .
Fifthly , and still in the same vein , the wish to cooperate in other fora and international processes was declared .
Specific reference was made to the Doha Agenda and the run-up to Johannesburg , that is , the Conference on Sustainable Development .
Finally , it was noted that internal changes within the Union had made themselves felt in all these spheres of cooperation . Two such changes are the enlargement process and the establishment of a common foreign security and defence policy , the consequences of which have been felt in a strengthening of the relationship with the United States .
These , Mr President , are the main conclusions to be drawn from this meeting .
As is usual practice , the meeting began with a closed session .
This was followed by a plenary session devoted to the more political issues . This was in turn followed by a lunch at which the trade issues were dealt with .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will now allow me to present a detailed analysis of the specific content of the negotiations on each of the agenda items , whilst still bearing in mind the ideas I just outlined .
The war on terrorism comes first .
As stated on previous occasions , both parties believe it is a key issue and a priority , especially following the events of 11 September .
In this connection , the draft agreement on extradition and legal aid in criminal cases was considered . As already mentioned , this followed the approval of the mandate by the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 25 April and was welcomed by the United States .
Efforts to cut off sources of funding for terrorism come second .
This led to a reference to the point concerning extending the lists of terrorist organisations in order to bring the European Union 's in line with the United States ' .
There was also discussion on updating the Union 's measures with a view to applying United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373 .
Parliament is doubtless aware that the Presidency made a considerable effort over this item , to the extent of calling several Clearing House meetings and an extraordinary Coreper to deal exclusively with this issue .
The extended European Union list was eventually formally adopted on the very day of the Summit . As expected , the United States welcomed this further effort .
Nonetheless , a degree of disappointment at the omission of Hamas and Hezbollah from the list was expressed . Both sides undertook to make a greater effort to come up with more consistent lists in anticipation of future amendments .
Lastly , there is the question of non-proliferation .
In this connection , the United States focused mainly on what is known as the ' ten plus ten over ten ' programme . This is a ten-year scheme aimed at reducing the amount of radioactive and chemical material in Russia .
The estimated cost is USD 10 billion . The United States emphasised the importance of the role the European Union can play in this regard , given its relationship with third countries such as Iran .
The European Union undertook to include non-proliferation as one of the issues to be dealt with in the political dialogue within the framework of the negotiating mandate for the free trade and cooperation agreement the Union hopes to adopt with Iran .
Furthermore , the European Union took advantage of the opportunity to announce measures aimed at strengthening multilateral instruments .
I should now like to move on to comment on the various issues of mutual interest in the field of regional cooperation dealt with at the Summit .
I refer to the Middle East , the Balkans , Russia and Afghanistan .
As regards the Middle East , Prime Minister Aznar recalled the need for urgent action not only to achieve a cease-fire but also to give a political dimension to efforts to find a solution .
For the United States , President Bush and Secretary of State Powell recalled that the message of the President 's speech on 4 April remained valid . The need to take account of the constructive spirit currently displayed by Saudi Arabia , Jordan and by other moderate Arab states was recognised , however .
The High Representative , Mr Solana , and Commissioner Patten reiterated the need to rebuild Palestinian infrastructure .
They also recalled the conclusions of the ad hoc Contact Group in Oslo concerning the need to avoid a security vacuum in the Palestinian Territories .
It should also be mentioned that Mr Solana drew attention to the unfairness of the accusations of anti-Semitism levelled against Europeans by American public opinion .
President Bush admitted these accusations were unfair .
It is also worth noting that the Quartet , as mentioned earlier , met on the fringes of the Summit , and that the United States felt it was a landmark meeting . The value of concerted international action in achieving a negotiated solution to this particular conflict was therefore recognised .
Basic agreement was reached on the need to develop the political , economic and security dimensions in parallel . Furthermore , both sides expressed their determination to maintain pressure on both the parties concerned .
The United States expressed its appreciation of the efforts made by the European Union in this field and stated that it would always invoke the precautionary principle to avoid compromising American credibility in the area .
To sum up , the Washington Declaration strengthens and reiterates the Madrid Declaration of 10 April .
Concerning the Balkans , the European Union placed particular emphasis on the importance of the association and stabilisation strategy , and also on the common interest in the deployment of the APTF police mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina from January 2003 . The Union reiterated its willingness to take charge of operation Amber Fox in the Republic of Macedonia .
The United States praised the joint initiatives in the area . In addition , the United States declared its willingness to bring pressure to bear on Serbia to ensure the latter cooperated with the Tribunal at The Hague .
The exchange of views on Russia took place in anticipation of the United States / Russia Summit of 24 to 26 May , the NATO / Russia Summit on 28 May and the European Union / Russia Summit on 29 May . The European Union highlighted the positive elements of the political dialogue with Russia .
Nonetheless , it also referred to politically sensitive issues such as Belarus and Moldova , and expressed its concern over the situation regarding human rights in Chechnya .
The United States welcomed the way concerted action is developing in the area , as this represents tangible evidence of President Putin 's Western leanings .
In addition , the United States declared its commitment to reach an agreement with Russia on the reduction of nuclear weapons prior to the next summit . It was reported in yesterday 's news that such an agreement has been achieved .
The European Union added a reference to the economic dimension and to the steps Russia is taking with a view to achieving full market economy status .
The latter is a requirement for Russia to join the World Trade Organisation . It is not , however , envisaged that it will become a member before 2004 .
The consensual position adopted by both partners over Afghanistan was again much in evidence .
The need for bilateral cooperation in the task of rebuilding the country was emphasised . The United States also recognised the European Union 's significant financial contribution for that very purpose .
Turning to matters relating to economics and trade , the principle of avoiding further discussion on ongoing contentious issues was retained . Revisiting such issues often only results in overshadowing the significance of the strong economic links between the European Union and the United States .
We dealt first with the Doha Agenda , then with the Monterrey Summit and finally with the forthcoming Johannesburg Summit .
This item was raised briefly to restate both parties ' wish to achieve a consensual position within the multilateral framework of the Monetary Fund , in line with the Presidency 's approach .
The Nepad initiative was raised as an item to be dealt with within the framework of the forthcoming G8 summit at Kananaskis . There was also reference to the scope provided at Johannesburg for the development of joint cooperation programmes regarding agriculture and drinking water for example .
More specifically , as regards trade disputes , the exchange revealed the United States ' willingness to negotiate . This was evidenced by its commitment to abide by World Trade Organisation rules , in particular regarding the contentious issues involving the Foreign Sales Corporation and restrictions on the import of clementines .
Concerning steel , as is already known , the United States envisages the possibility of reaching a negotiated solution to the issue of compensation in the medium term , without prejudice to the complaint the European Union is to lodge with the World Trade Organisation .
Each party presented a clear statement of its position . However , both sides reiterated their intention of complying with the World Trade Organisation 's regulations .
Nonetheless , the European Union continued to argue in defence of its intention to pursue compensation further as the key to protecting its rights .
The item on the Foreign Sales Corporation was dealt with in a positive way , thanks to the favourable climate generated by postponing the panel 's decision until June . President Bush undertook to adjust internal fiscal legislation in the United States to bring it into line with the World Trade Organisation .
The issue of clementines was dealt with in the same spirit . The United States maintained its commitment to speed up procedures so as to avoid damaging consequences for the coming harvest .
Clearly , this all dates back to before the advent of the new law adopted recently .
The latter increases aid to American growers . This move could prove to be another bone of contention between the United States and Europe .
It does seem that the United States is failing to send out a positive signal at the very time when we are all jointly committed to reducing agricultural subsidies with an eye to the Doha negotiations . I do however feel that we must draw our own conclusion on this matter , with a view to our negotiating position at the Doha round .
In the positive agenda we have brought together under this heading all those issues on which agreement is likely to be reached in the medium term , and for which the basis of agreement by both parties already exists .
In principle , the following items are to be included : reciprocal access to trading on the stock market , the approximation of regulations for organic farming and its monitoring plus the development of a joint prototype for electronic customs inspections .
Mr President , I must again emphasise the Presidency 's positive assessment of the Summit between the European Union and the United States in Washington on 2 May . The Summit 's effects will be far-reaching .
In conclusion , the transatlantic relationship is important and we are indeed concerned about it . Nonetheless , the fact remains that it is a cornerstone in the structure of the Union 's external relations , and will , I believe , remain as such .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank both the two previous speakers and the two rapporteurs for their work .
I wish to thank them because transatlantic relations are currently going through a very difficult phase .
We must admit that this community of values has been the most successful alliance in the history of mankind ; it has brought prosperity , democracy and human rights not just to Europe and North America , but to many other parts of the world too and it has brought about much that is good in this world .
We must also admit , however , that a great deal has gone wrong since this triumph .
There is an excess of unilateralism causing difficulties on the one side and there are weaknesses on the other side , namely our side - mainly our inability to make a military contribution - which generate the difficulties we see on a daily basis , some of which have already been mentioned .
The International Criminal Court , Kyoto , trade issues or the fact that the fight against the fallout from 11 September is making NATO look like it no longer has any teeth ; all this gives us great cause for concern and , although it is true that progress is being made in the Middle East , we still have no joint presence in Jerusalem or Ramallah and I think that this is where the starting point must be .
I think that there is no point in starting with individual problems , such as the question of hushkits or bananas , because this is a race you can never win . Just as you think you have got one problem sorted , another two spring up .
So this starting point alone gets us nowhere , which is why I am so grateful to the rapporteur for including mainly structural improvements in his proposals , for suggesting that we move the discussion in a new direction , that we develop structural relations with the United States over and above NATO , which was one of the intentions of the transatlantic agenda in the early and mid-1990s .
The question is : can we find solutions using bilateral trade dispute settlement mechanisms without disturbing multilateralism , do we discuss these issues in connection with the transatlantic market place or do we conclude an agreement between the United States and the European Union , a master agreement as to how relations can be improved here , because this sort of agreement has the incalculable advantage of involving the American Congress .
The European Union has agreements with almost every country on earth except our closest allies , the United States of America .
We run from administration to administration , knowing full well that it is only ever half the game and that the American Congress is immensely important in this game . That is why we need to find a framework which allows American politics as a whole to be involved , a structural reference framework , and I hope that the Council and Commission will adopt more intensive initiatives here than has perhaps recently been the case .
Mr President , in general , following the terrible events of 11 September , Europe has surreptitiously moved the more controversial issues down the Transatlantic Agenda . I was mistaken , as were others .
The laws of physics do not normally apply to politics , with the possible exception of the Archimedes principle .
I do not think I would be dramatising the present situation in saying that disagreements between the European Union and the United States are both new and alarming . So too is the tone of the disagreement between the European Union and the United States , by which I mean the present government of the United States .
We all , or nearly all , bemoan the American unilateral attitude . We do not however accept that this is due to Europe failing to assume its global responsibilities in full .
I agree with Commissioner Patten that we do not need new ideas .
We must , however , give up the old ones , including the notion that Member States , or certain Member States , can play a leading role in world affairs .
It is not just desirable but essential to promote a return to the old multilateral attitude adopted by the United States in the forties and fifties . This can best be achieved by the European Union 's adoption of a single common foreign policy .
The latter would help to restore the political balance of the Transatlantic Agenda .
Such a new relationship cannot depend on readjusting military capabilities .
This issue still poses a challenge for Europe , however .
We do not have to restrict ourselves to exercising our enormous so-called ' soft power ' is we do not wish to do so .
Europe can also have a genuine common defence policy .
This would not , in the first instance , involve a budget increase .
Instead , it would require the forging of a single policy , and a great deal of work remains to be done in this regard .
Mr President , since 11 September , we have all said that Europe and the USA must stand shoulder to shoulder because we share common values .
We must support our ally in its time of need in the same way as America came to Europe 's aid twice in the darkest hours of the last century .
Yet , this support need not be uncritical .
True friends and allies must talk to each other and , more importantly , listen to each other .
Sadly , as the Commissioner has said , there have been too many examples recently of poor communication and the turning of deaf ears in transatlantic relations .
As the Commissioner demonstrated admirably to Mr Elles , candour is sometimes an obligation of friendship .
We must say candidly that on some issues Europe believes the US has got it wrong .
Claims that the International Criminal Court would have untrammelled power to prosecute members of the US military are simply not true .
To disown the body will not prevent it from going ahead , the US will simply lose all influence over the way the rules develop .
American arguments at the UN summit on children against safeguards - because they would prevent judicial execution of minors in Texas - offend the European concept of justice , just as US treatment of Taliban prisoners in the Shibarghan camp in northern Afghanistan seems to us to violate the Geneva Convention .
Staying out of the Kyoto agreement on climate change means that the US is free-riding on the efforts of others to tackle global warming .
How can we expect the developing world to make its industries environmentally sustainable when the world 's leading economy passes the buck so shamelessly ?
On steel tariffs also , US policy is misguided .
Rather than re-structure its steel industry , the US risks losing the moral high ground in the global campaign for free trade .
However , the breakdown in communication across the Atlantic is due not only to errors of judgment on the US side .
It does not help that the European Union is at sixes and sevens .
Mr Prodi and Mr Aznar looked distinctly uncomfortable with each other at the summit .
The failure of Member States to back the Commission in its response to the steel tariffs dispute undermines the credibility of the Union and weakens our negotiating hand .
The Union 's failure to speak with one voice , from Iraq to India , makes it mighty difficult for the US to know where we stand .
For the Union to have a credible foreign policy we need a common security policy .
It is no use establishing a 60 000 strong rapid reaction force if we cannot get it up and running in practice or reach agreement on a common arms procurement policy .
In other areas too , from policing on the ground to a single European sky , we will not be taken seriously by the Americans until we get our own act together .
Finally , the Union could take a leaf out of the US book in its policy towards China over Taiwan .
It is disgraceful that Taiwan , a fully-fledged democracy since 1987 , is made a pariah by EU governments which claim to represent democratic values .
It is high time that Member States stood together behind the EU flag to open normal relations with Taiwan and take a stand at the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva against the PRC 's human rights abuses .
In conclusion , the European Union would be better placed to engage in a real dialogue of equals with the US , if we displayed more unity and demonstrated more backbone .
Liberal Democrats look to the Convention on the future of Europe to deliver a federal European Union with a real common foreign and security policy , so that Europe can use active diplomacy to strive for a new approach to global development and convince our American friends to follow .
Mr President , the relationship between the United States and the EU is not one of equals .
I am not referring to political , economic or military power ; I mean that the EU and the United States are not equal .
They do not have the same level of awareness , they do not have the same definition of security and of their role in the world .
Do not get me wrong , I welcome this difference .
The world does not need two United States , the original and a copy .
The European Union differs , deviates and should continue to do so .
Needless to say , there are common values , common roots and common goals , but there is also a difference in terms of insight into how these goals can best be achieved .
In this area , a European model of some kind is certainly taking shape .
Let me spell it out quite clearly : there is no room for a sense of moral superiority .
The EU is not always right , and the United States does not always come up with the worst response .
Despite this , the EU would do well to highlight this response , this difference , with confidence and force in a discussion , a debate with the United States .
Also because the United States is no monolith .
Debate is most definitely taking place in the United States , and Europe can influence this debate .
What does this mean in concrete terms ?
In my view , this specifically means three things .
One : the EU must consistently adhere to multilateral agreements in the area of security , the environment and international criminal law .
This is different from multilateralism à la carte , as is sometimes displayed by the United States , for example their behaviour in NATO .
Two : the EU should further develop its strong points in areas where it has been successful in the past .
As I have already said , these include talking , diplomacy , mediating , conflict prevention and , once conflicts have arisen , tackling reconstruction .
This is not a poor apology , this is increasingly the real thing in international relations .
Third point : the EU must - more so than in the past - be able to solve the problems in its own region , using military means if necessary .
But this does not mean , and I am particularly addressing the rapporteur here , that the EU should spend more on defence , but that it should spend more efficiently .
I often get impatient when I see the silly mistakes the United States is making , for example in Iraq or Iran .
I also get impatient , however , when I notice that the EU is unable to come up with alternatives .
It manages to do so occasionally , for example in the Balkans .
Let us continue along this path , with growing confidence , criticising the United States if necessary .
If this could be done , I am hopeful of a better future for the world .
Mr President , I too wish to concentrate on the relationship between the EU and what Mr Patten calls the ' super-duper power ? , namely the United States .
As far as I am concerned , there is no doubt that the United States is aiming to achieve total global military dominance - something which it probably already possesses .
The question , then , is what role the EU is to play in relation to the United States .
Are we to be the United States 's puppy or a group of fully paid-up yes-men who cheer the US on whenever it wants us to ?
The second possibility is that we tag along as competitors , and that is what we shall do if we launch ourselves into an arms race or suddenly embark upon an attempt to match the United States 's military capacity .
The third possibility is for us to choose a quite different role , namely that of being the civilian and global power that can intervene before crises arise and before weapons become necessary .
What we see as primary in the case of the United States is the capacity and need to solve conflicts with the aid of military power .
They have this capacity and need because , in my view , they are quite unable to conduct a proper foreign policy , that is to say a sustainable foreign policy capable of forestalling crises and preventing war .
The EU , on the other hand , has demonstrated an ability to maintain multilateral contacts and so also has the ability to lay the foundation for a more sustainable foreign policy .
That is the best prerequisite for a civil security policy , and we are therefore better placed than anyone to become that particular civil and global factor .
Mr Elles ' report does not make for encouraging reading , and I understand that the Commission gave it a mixed reception , but I do not understand the desire to throw all but the first of the EU 's options overboard and turn the EU into the United States 's puppy .
The ties between Europe and America are old and deep , comparable to a friendship between two school friends that goes back many years .
Despite this , the school friends seem to be growing apart a little .
There has been growing irritation over the past few years .
Disagreements between the US and EU are on the increase .
The European Parliament plays a modest role in the transatlantic relationship , but that does not stop the House from holding strong views .
The criticism levelled at the United States for adopting a unilateralist , hegemonic attitude is widespread and is also included quite expressively in Mr Elles ' resolution .
It is true that the behaviour of our partners on the other side of the Ocean sometimes gives us cause for concern .
Especially in the area of trade , the US attracts the criticism that it takes little notice of international agreements .
In addition , I hope that the United States will change its mind about the Kyoto Protocol .
I can support the resolution on these scores .
The criticisms levelled at the States by this Parliament , however , go further .
In all kinds of ways , the EP is hauling the United States over the coals , the alleged unilateralism displayed by the US being designated as the main culprit .
It does not befit the EU , however , to play the role of moralist if the EU itself is unable to pursue an effective and consistent foreign policy .
The EU may have extremely high ambitions , but they still hardly ever materialise in practice .
Pleas for more integration have never been fruitful ; the interests of the Member States are simply too diverse for this .
In this light , the criticism in the resolution loses some of its essence . Indeed : what real alternative does the European Union offer ?
And why should this alternative be attractive to the United States ?
These questions remain unanswered .
Additionally , it is questionable whether the European Member States always sail the right course .
All we want to do is enter into consultation , thereby avoiding the root of the conflict , as is illustrated in the background to those fatal events of 11 September last year .
Delaying until everyone can strike a weak compromise ; is this always preferable to taking action ?
The criticism of unilateralism ignores the fact that in many cases , the United States only has the choice between acting on its own or not acting at all . Especially in the light of the fact that the current threats may require vigorous action .
I gladly refer to the ongoing danger which the regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq represents for us .
Even a friendship that goes back many years is not immune to deep rifts .
This would be very detrimental to transatlantic relations .
This is why I regret , finally , that the resolution does not have a good word to say about the different forms of transatlantic dialogue .
Precisely in situations where there is a difference of opinion , these dialogues can help foster mutual understanding and work towards solutions .
I will therefore support the amendments that moderate this criticism , for it is important to nurture friendships .
After all , friendship can never be taken for granted .
The rapporteur is right to note that the transatlantic relationship was , in fact , the keystone of our security as long as it was under threat from the East-West divide .
Given the fact that our relationship with the Russian Federation has undergone so much change , there is a need to review our relationship with the US .
For a very long time , there has been talk of the European pillar alongside the American one .
Unfortunately , the European pillar is not much of a pillar .
In some respects , it is more like a pile of loose bricks .
As the meaning of national sovereignties is overrated and this concept is used incorrectly , the Member States are bound to remain satellites of some kind .
Despite this , our ambitions go further than this .
The report deplores American unilateralism .
However , there is hardly any way in which this can be broken , other than by reinforcing the other arm of NATO and of European-Atlantic relations , namely the EU structures .
If we do not strengthen these , we will remain a disconnected bunch . We will never be able to take a stand ; we will simply remain divided .
The lack of a Community approach affects many areas .
Where this Community approach is in place , for example from an economic point of view , as the President-in-Office of the Council illustrated with examples a moment ago , the European Union can most definitely be a strong partner that also prescribes requirements and takes initiatives itself .
This is thanks to the power of the Community approach .
In the case of European security and defence policy , this is still very much lacking . That is why the report calls for bold steps towards integration .
In my opinion , this is an important position in the report .
As has been stated before , these steps are far more important than the increase in the Member States ' defence budget .
After all , as long as the return on our defence expenditure is only 15 % of that of the Americans , far more progress can be made by a full-on Community policy .
In addition , I should like to congratulate Mr Patten for his counter-attack .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , transatlantic relations are going through a difficult period .
I feel we must emphasise how paradoxical this situation is , because , as Commissioner Patten said , the expression of European solidarity following 11 September was indeed absolute and exemplary and Europe expressed this solidarity using the resources at its disposal .
We can , of course , always criticise Europe for the disparity between its international ambitions and its defence means or the coherence of its common foreign policy , but the fact remains that Europe did display its solidarity .
There are lessons to be learned from the weakness of our resources and I support Mr Obiols i Germà 's comments on this point .

I also believe that we must recognise that the task of the Commission and the Council is made more difficult by the attitude of a US Administration which , whilst continuing to make demands in terms of solidarity , is totally indifferent to the effects of its own policy on its partners , and on developing countries as well , when you consider the consequences that its decisions might have for the agricultural or steel industry .

We all want to strengthen our relationship with the United States , but let us hope that we will not have to sacrifice our European positions to achieve enhanced cooperation .
I do not think that we can criticise the Commission for a lack of strategic vision , as the Commission is defending European positions in the transatlantic relationship .
Given the intransigence of the US Administration , however , the response is certainly not to sacrifice our values but perhaps to state more generally , at international level , the strategic vision that Europe is adopting to contend with the sizeable problems of collective security and co-development and with the problems of the future of the planet and the environment .
This should encourage us to bring an end to the confrontation with the United States .
A further reason for our current difficulty is the fact that the United States is finding it hard to accept that the European Union naturally aspires to be an equal partner and on friendly terms , but also to be treated as equal in return .
It is up to us to affirm our European identity , as Mrs Bonino said .
I think that this will greatly contribute to more balanced relations with our American partner .
Mr President , strengthening transatlantic relations is a welcome move .
However , there are several points which are crucial for Europe because they directly affect our lives .
They are - and I make no claim that the list is complete - the Kyoto protocol , the biodiversity convention , involvement in the International Criminal Court and a complete ban on atomic weapon tests .
Even the atrocious crimes of 11 September must not be used as a pretext for aggressive nuclear arming in the USA , which has even admitted it is planning to carry out pre-emptive attacks using mini atomic weapons .
It is highly ominous that the production of tritium for hydrogen bombs , which stopped in 1988 , is to start up again and that a new factory manufacturing plutonium parts for atom bombs is to be built .
It is also a matter of acute concern that the USA has indeed signed a comprehensive ban on atomic weapon tests but has never ...
( The President cut the speaker off . )
Mr President , I wish to begin by taking this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
This debate has certainly stimulated interest in what the Commissioner described as one of the most important relationships that exists : the relationship between the European Union and the United States .
The rapporteur was right to state that there was no long-term view .
At this moment in time we must appreciate how difficult it is for Americans to achieve that long-term view because of the events in the United States on 11 September , which , to some extent , meant they turned their attention to other issues , such as their " homeland " security .
At times we Europeans do not understand the effects that 11 September had on the people of the United States .
That does not mean that we cannot move forward in cooperation , indeed , we must cooperate and pursue our dialogue .
Of course , there are many issues that we will always disagree on .
However , we must pursue our dialogue to try to resolve those issues .
No doubt there will be other issues , such as the situation this week with the new Farm Bill , which will cause tremendous problems for the European Union in the longer term .
The steel issue will be resolved eventually .
Thus we have to continue the dialogue and face the challenge .
We must not allow the issues as they come forward to distract us in any way from this vital relationship between the European Union and the United States .
There is a challenge here for us .
Parliament has a modest role to play .
I am pleased that the Commissioner recognised that .
We have to take up that challenge and work together with the Commission and the Council to ensure that we have a long-term view .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteurs on this report .
They rightly assume that we need a proper partnership between Europe and the USA .
And partnership means that both partners have equal rights , although they need not and perhaps should not be identical .
For example , we have different concepts of security and security risks .
We place greater emphasis on the economic , social and ecological aspects of security and security risks and we need to introduce this into the debate .
But we Europeans must admit that security does not come cheap and that perhaps we need to spend even more in order to achieve it .
However , it would be a mistake to say that we need the same level of military spending as the United States of America .
No , what we need most of all is more efficient spending .
What we need is more efficient civil spending which accounts for a higher and probably more significant - by which I also mean materially significant - proportion .
And that will only happen if we move towards common European defence structures .
I hope that Mr Elles is willing to move with us in this direction and create common European defence structures one step at a time .
Mr President , in order to give some substance to EU-US dialogue , which brings together two partners with very different competences , we should focus the dialogue on the areas where we have similar responsibilities .
It seems that this was the approach taken on 3 May , when the specific economic programme was adopted at the Washington Summit .
The controversial topic of agriculture , which so often occupies centre stage at multilateral trade negotiations , should be the subject of in-depth debates and not only , as planned , in the area of mutual recognition of standards for organic farming .
European citizens should not simply regard the new farm bill as an instrument that will disrupt trade , since its objectives , scope and length also acknowledge each country 's right to support its agricultural industry , given the practical challenges , such as social , territorial and environmental balance , which cannot be left to the mercy of free trade mechanisms alone .
This considerable rapprochement of ideas on both sides of the Atlantic can only benefit dialogue , Mr President , particularly within the framework of the WTO .
Mr President , I will be very brief as I realise time is short . Furthermore , this debate has not proved controversial .
I think it has been useful to review our position on the important issue of transatlantic relations . As this relationship is a very intense one , almost a ' family relationship ' , it is sometimes very complex , because we demand so much from ourselves and also from our partners .
We believe that in its dealings with us the United States should adopt the same demanding standards we impose on ourselves .
We shall not to be able to solve this problem as we each have different shortcomings .
We have spoken of America 's tendency towards unilateralism and of its unwillingness to make commitments in the context of international mechanisms .
On the other hand , we have also stated that we are aware of our own failings . We do not invest enough , we do not keep up to standard and we often fail to reach agreement on the implementation of certain policies .
It has been said that it was evident that Mr Prodi and Mr Aznar were not of one mind when they met with President Bush .
I think that this is an exaggeration of the truth .
In fact , there has always been a broad measure of agreement between the Commission and the Presidency . This is certainly true of the current Presidency and will probably also be true of future ones .
I must say that I could not express the European Union 's feelings on relations with the United States better than Commissioner Patten has already done in this House .
Therein lies our weakness , however .
We lack a common policy on many issues and there is still deep disagreement over foreign policy . The independent Member States of the European Union continue to make their own decisions .
We need to bring our position on major international issues more closely into line with each other .
Nevertheless , there really is consensus between the Council and the Commission on a strategy for our future relationship with the United States . One really does exist .
In addition , there is a willingness to retain the special nature of the relationship .
We must have all this constantly in mind as we deal with the usual blips in the relationship . We should also be mindful of it as we continue to work on this warm , fruitful and vital relationship every day that goes by .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Council for the detailed summit conclusions it gave us , as well as the appreciation that there was a real need to have a look at a long-term strategic view of the transatlantic relationship , taking into account security and political and economic aspects .
This was at the heart of the report adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy by 40 votes to 5 .
I would remind the Commissioner not to personalise debates in the way he did - although there was an element of humour about this - because I represent the views of the committee and the amendment he referred to was adopted unanimously by my group .
We hope that in time the Commission will fall into line with most of this House and the Council in understanding that there is a need for a longer-term review .
That is what we have requested , and we expect a strategic report to be presented by 30 September 2003 .
I hope the Commissioner can produce that for us .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.29 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

The next item is the vote .
Recommendation for second reading in the form of a letter , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 95 / 93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports ( 6661 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0149 / 2002 - 2002 / 0013 ( COD ) )
Amendment No 1 :
Mr President , my group will be withdrawing the amendment .
We had tabled this amendment because we believe that the system with which slots are currently being allocated places a heavy burden on competition in aviation .
We reluctantly accept the Commission 's argument that the emergency measure is now necessary in the interest of the European airline companies , but we adhere to our position and , further to Mr Stockmann 's report , will also most certainly defend the substance of this position very passionately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I said yesterday during the plenary debate , the Commission welcomes the agreement on the Caudron report on the Sixth Framework Programme for research .
I would again like to stress the excellent interinstitutional cooperation which formed the basis of the legislative procedure and which enabled us to conclude an important agreement .
I can confirm that the Commission is able to accept the 34 compromise amendments adopted by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on 13 May and presented to the House today .
I would once again like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , the shadow rapporteurs , Mr van Velzen , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , Mr Piétrasanta and Mr Alyssandrakis , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Industry , Mr Westendorp y Cabeza .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are now contemplating the possibility that , for the first time , a framework programme for research will be approved without a long and complicated conciliation procedure .
This is the result of the work undertaken with the Council , the rapporteurs from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , and also with the Commission and the Council .
Agreement has been reached because the Council shares the concerns expressed by Parliament .
I think it is important to send a signal out to all those involved in science and technology in Europe that Parliament supports the Sixth Framework Programme . This aims to create the European Research Area .
I would like to finish by thanking the Chairman of the Committee for his work . Thanks are also due to the rapporteurs who have worked so hard with the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank all the Members who have helped me over the last year and a half with the work on the Sixth Framework Programme on research .
I would point out that the FP6 , with a budget of EUR 17.5 billion , is Europe 's third largest policy .
My thanks go to Commissioner Busquin and to Mr Marimón Suñol , both of whom just reiterated that we reached agreements thanks to the 34 compromise amendments which were adopted on Monday evening by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
As rapporteur , I of course urge my fellow Members to adopt these amendments and these amendments alone which will mean that , today at midday , we will be on the verge of finalising our Sixth Framework Programme and that it can be applied in the best possible conditions as of 1 January 2003 .
Thank you all !
It is now my pleasure to welcome to the official gallery a delegation of 20 parliamentarians and senators from Mexico .
The delegation is led by Ms Beatriz Paredes Rangel , Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies .
( Loud applause )
As they will have heard , the House extends a very warm welcome to them and hopes their meetings in the context of EU / Latin American relations are fruitful .
We will now continue with the vote .
Report ( A5-0131 / 2002 ) by Horst Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin ( COM ( 2000 ) 438 - C5-0377 / 2000 - 2000 / 0179 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0119 / 2002 ) by Marit Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents , amending Council Decision 90 / 424 / EEC and repealing Council Directive 92 / 117 / EEC ( COM ( 2001 ) 452 - C5-0372 / 2001 - 2001 / 0176 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0120 / 2002 ) by Marit Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the control of salmonella and other food-borne zoonotic agents and amending Council Directives 64 / 432 / EEC , 72 / 462 / EEC and 90 / 539 / EEC ( COM ( 2001 ) 452 - C5-0373 / 2001 - 2001 / 0177 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.58 a.m. for a formal sitting and resumed at 12 .
34 p.m. )
Mr President , it is a great honour and a pleasure for us to welcome you to the European Parliament today .
For the first time , the President of the United Mexican States will address our House , and your presence here today underlines the growing quality of relations between Mexico and the European Union .
For me personally it also carries a special significance : you are the first Head of State to address our House during my presidency .
I should also like to welcome the delegation of the Mexican Congress to our gallery .
They have come to participate in the fourth interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and the Mexican Congress .
Mr President , your election on 2 July 2000 marked a new stage in Mexican politics and the democratic consolidation of your country .
The priorities that you have marked for your government - strengthening the Rule of Law , reform of the justice system , promoting economic growth and opportunity , developing human resources and dialogue with the Zapatistas - are all priorities which the European Parliament has strongly supported and continues strongly to support .
Mexico shows how a country with an age-old culture can combine its strong historical links with Europe with a new strategic role and partnership in Central American politics .
The links between Mexico and the European Union are strong : your country was the first from all the Americas to sign an Association and Free Trade Agreement with the European Union .
This agreement is a milestone in our relations .
It is important to point out in Parliament today that it is more than just about a market and trade connection .
It is a political commitment of profound significance , covering economics and also political dialogue with a parliamentary dimension , and shared values at the core .
It aims to include the promotion of democratic principles and respect for human rights which , for this Parliament , are indispensable parts of our association agreements and association councils with other states .
As you know , the European Parliament has been a strong supporter of this agreement from the outset .
In a couple of days , in Madrid , you will attend the second EU-Latin America and Caribbean Summit of Heads of State , which aims to renew and boost relations between these two regions .
The European Parliament also will be present and earlier today had a lengthy discussion on the summit meeting which you will attend .
Mr President , we thank you for your attendance here today .
We thank you for your visit .
I thank you in particular , as President of the European Parliament , that in coming to Europe and in going to a summit meeting , that you should take the time to address parliamentarians and to celebrate an awareness of parliamentary democracy itself .
For us , that too is a significant act of politics and not merely a gesture .
Therefore it gives me great pleasure , Mr President , to invite you to speak to our House which is , as an elected Parliament , the largest supranational democratically elected Parliament in the world .
I give you the floor , Mr President .
( Loud applause )
Colleagues , before drawing this formal sitting to a close , I should like in particular to acknowledge , Mr President , the presence of my colleague and predecessor , Mrs Fontaine , who on our behalf made an official visit to Mexico in April 2001 .
I thank her for the initiative in inviting you here today .
Mr President , it says on the voting list that , if Amendment No 40 is accepted , Amendments Nos 1 and 2 and paragraphs 16 and 17 will be invalid .
We disagree .
We feel that the second part of Amendment No 1 is totally compatible with Amendment No 40 .
It is important that we vote on the second part because it reads :
It was deemed incompatible as it would be against the spirit of Amendment No 40 , if it was carried , to then vote on Amendments Nos 1 and 2 on paragraphs 16 and 17 .
But I am happy to take the advice of the rapporteur on this point .
Mr President , it becomes clear that the Socialists are shifting ground as we go through this debate .
The original text of Paragraph 16 states that it is inevitable that " a significant increase of defence expenditures to fill the current capability gap " will be needed .
I agreed in discussions with the Socialist Group to alter that to " an increase " on the assumption that our Amendment No 40 would be the basis for our compromise .
We then went further , and I agreed to put an oral amendment stating it should be " adequate defence expenditure " .
As the Socialist Group has withdrawn its approval of Amendment No 40 at it stands , I suggest we revert to the original wording of Paragraph 16 - " significant increase " - and vote on that text first .
The Council and the rapporteur use the phrase ' macro-financial assistance to Ukraine ' . We think this should instead be called disgraceful financial blackmail .
The draconian conditions that the Council is imposing on what it describes as new aid - namely , the privatisation of large enterprises , breaking up the public sector to benefit small businesses , liberalisation of prices and sector reforms - provide perfect support for the so-called adjustment programme desired by the IMF , the initial implementation of which had no other effect than to aggravate the situation in Ukraine in 2000 .
Despite the fact that the rapporteur notes that GDP has been in constant decline for several years whilst consumer prices have continued to rise , these reforms , if re-launched , will serve only to push Ukraine deeper into crisis , and thrust the majority of its population into even greater destitution .
The rapporteur fails to mention the fate of the Ukrainian people and the fact that they have become terribly impoverished since the break-up of the Soviet Union .
This is not his problem .
The only thing of concern to him is ' the transition to the market economy ' which , despite the fact that it has hardly got off the ground , has already produced human , economic and social upheaval which is evident to all and which the report cynically puts down to profit and loss ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
- ( PT ) Unfortunately , the amendments I proposed to this report on potato starch were rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Let me remind you that those amendments were aimed at creating a common organisation of the market in potatoes for human consumption , something that is particularly important for Portugal .
As it now stands , the report only mentions the Commission proposal on starch and continues to undermine the position we support .
The fact is that the potato starch support system is a significant burden on the Community budget , yet only benefits a few countries .
That is why we consider it important to review this support immediately so as to ensure greater fairness in support for potato production and to assist the majority of potato producers , that is to say small producers and family farms .
We have , therefore , not voted for this report .
The GUE / NGL Group endorses and supports the joint motion for resolution on Euro-Mediterranean relations .
However , I should like to take this opportunity to highlight the importance of the final statement of the contact group of the presidents of the Euro-Mediterranean parliaments .
Especially Article 2 on the application of Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 , the phrase " for peace " and the legal right of the Palestinians to self-determination and to an independent state , paragraph 6 condemning military occupation by Israel and paragraph 7 condemning all forms of violence and terrorism against innocent Israelis .
- ( PT ) The main reason why we did not vote in favour of this resolution was to protest against the inclusion of the amendment tabled by the PPE and PSE Groups calling on the Council to add to the list of organisations all those groups and organisations that resort to murder , kidnapping , blackmail , extortion and any other type of terrorist action .
This means that it is not made clear what other type of terrorist action is being referred to and accordingly no distinction is made between the actions of organisations fighting for democracy in their countries and true acts of terrorism . That is unacceptable .
Nevertheless , there are various positive aspects to the resolution , especially as regards stepping up cooperation and solidarity with the countries of Latin America so as to encourage their economic development and to guarantee social services and combat poverty , whilst reiterating the need for the European Union to make available adequate resources for implementing this policy .
We of course believe that it is vital to develop a true cooperation policy and not just trade agreements that essentially benefit multinationals , as has sometimes happened .
That was inventive as ever , in terms of making the subject fit the item on the agenda .
Report Caudron ( A5-0153 / 2002 )
Mr President , the funding of destructive embryo research is against the constitutional position of Ireland , as it is against the constitutional , legal or political position of four other Member States .
The European Union does have competence in research and technological development - Title XVII of the EC Treaty .
This has to be exercised complementing the activities carried out in the Member States - Article 164 of the EC Treaty - and always in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity - Article 5 of the EC Treaty - and respecting the national identities of its Member States - Article 6 of the EU Treaty .
Therefore , contrary to the opinion of the Commissioner for research , the EU does not have the right to overrule national legislation , regulations and ethical guidelines or to insist that Member States have a duty to draw up regulations in the field of embryo research .
I regret the Irish Government 's silence regarding the unacceptable situation whereby Irish taxpayers are obliged to fund destructive embryo research under its participation in EU funding and I reject EU funding of destructive embryo research as contained in the Caudron report , in line with the majority view in the PPE-DE Group .
I welcome the concentration on a select number of priority areas under the forthcoming programme .
I believe that in this way Europe can make real added value and move towards its goals of the Lisbon Process .
I fully support the strengthening of links between European , national and regional initiatives .
Decentralised management is most welcome as we all wish to see a less cumbersome and bureaucratic approach to the running of European programmes and drawing down of funds .
I am conscious of the need for continuity in the research area , both in terms of the integrity of the work being undertaken and the engagement of personnel on projects .
We have a responsibility to play our part in ensuring that there is a smooth transition to the Sixth Programme .
Finally , I would like to refer briefly to the ethical aspects of research .
While subsidiarity dictates that each Member State can decide what kind of research may be carried out within its territory , we must not forget that we are talking about European taxpayers ' money here .
In my Member State , Ireland , there is a clear ban on any form of experimentation on human embryos or cloning .
I have been a long-standing supporter of European research efforts .
Problems related to research on stem cells and supernumerary embryos must not be tackled in emotional or simplistic terms .
Given the fundamental , high principles and the universal values that we defend , it is our duty to completely rule out the risks of eugenics as well as cloning for reproductive purposes .
We must not hide the fact that many people who are ill are waiting for new therapies to be developed that will offer many of them the possibility of recovery .
Although the legislator 's task may be to provide a framework for research , the risk is that it will be bound up in an overly restrictive straitjacket .
We must also encourage a Europe of discovery .
Research also affects the daily lives of all European citizens and priority areas such as food safety , the fight against major diseases and the improvement of public health demonstrate the desire to associate research and well-being .
I am also pleased to note the support for developing research into rare illnesses .
For businesses based in the European Union , the economic implications of a European research policy are far-reaching .
That is why , perhaps in this area more than in any other , we must encourage greater cooperation amongst the Member States .
This is because a successful European research area is one of the key elements of our future economic growth .
However , the definition and scope of the fundamental ethical principles , which the Council common position states must be observed when carrying out research , are not clearly explained .
Attitudes towards research on human embryos differ from one Member State to another .
Recent scientific discoveries can , however , offer us an alternative to the use of embryonic stem cells , namely adult stem cells .
We can therefore now reconcile scientific research with ethical principles .
I therefore regret that we do not have a majority in favour of re-launching this debate which is essential for the future of research .
This may lead to a situation where Member States finance research - research that some of them disapprove of - which is carried out on their own territories .
This is an attack on the respect of national sovereignties but also on the moral sovereignty of Member States and their citizens .
- ( PT ) Therapeutic cloning , which provides new ways of treating certain diseases , depends on the destruction of embryos , and although it is the technology that has been utilised most , and is therefore the most accessible , it is not the only technology and it is certainly not ideal .
For this reason , I am calling for a legal ban at European level on creating human embryos by cloning , be it for therapeutic purposes or for reproductive purposes .
Nevertheless , there should be two exceptions to this ban : supernumerary embryos and the 64 available cell lines .
However , with regard to financing research , and in particular as regards the Sixth Framework Programme , which is the subject of the Caudron report , I believe that priority should be given to Community financing of research projects on the use of adult stem cells for therapeutic purposes .
- ( PT ) After all the many months of work and wide-ranging interinstitutional discussions , both in public and within the Parliament , I regard it as being very regrettable indeed that the majority of this House has still insisted on rejecting all the amendments inspired by basic ethical imperatives of a humanitarian nature .
A majority of this House has thus revealed that it is absolutely insensitive to basic human values , and displays an unfortunate belief that technology should prevail without any limitations .
I am referring to the rejection of Amendments Nos 89 , 91 , 92 and 95 , which undermines a very important milestone for Europe 's scientific community and for EU research policy .
I personally particularly regret the rejection of Amendment No 89 , which I tabled , which upheld the " principle of legislative unanimity " which in my view offered the only firm and indisputable legal solution to those issues , while entirely respecting democratic legislative decisions taken by Member States .
Accordingly , we could be faced , because of this obstinate blindness on the part of the majority , with a situation in which - through the European Union - the taxpayers of one Member State in which a particular substance , method or technology is considered illegal could find themselves financing something that is banned or illegal in their own country .
It goes without saying that this would be not only an offence to democracy in the true sense of the word and to national legal systems , but it would also be completely absurd from a legal point of view and would be at odds with the normal legislative hierarchy .
I have voted against the report .
The constitutions of four EU Member States protect the sanctity of life to the extent that they prohibit research on stem cells taken from embryos , or unborn children .
The fact that the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council are not prepared to take account of this constitutional protection within the framework of the EU common research programme is extremely regrettable .
I was one of the signatories to Amendment No 92 , all four sections of which were defeated ( 193-284 with 22 abstentions ; 183-293 with 21 abstentions ; 182-303 with 21 abstentions ; and 184-312 with 18 abstentions ) .
This gives the go-ahead to use taxpayers ' money to fund an activity that is illegal and unconstitutional in four Member States , including Germany .
There are therefore serious shortcomings in the ethical standards for the Sixth Framework Programme , especially with regard to research involving human embryos .
The Member States have widely differing attitudes towards this type of research , and these must be respected .
It should thus be self-evident that embryos created for in-vitro fertilisation but not used for that purpose , together with research using embryo stem cells , must not be funded by the EU .
Community resources must benefit all countries .
Member States must not be obliged , as is currently the case , to fund research that is illegal and unconstitutional in their own countries .
I welcome this report which represents a big step towards making the EU the most dynamic and competitive economy in the world by 2010 .
Without endorsement of this Programme , Europe could never hope to become a world player in the field of research and technology , where we are lagging seriously behind the US .
The Sixth Framework Programme will also respect ethical principles held across Europe ; in particular research activity into human cloning for reproduction will be banned .
I feel that the European institutions can congratulate themselves for coming to a reasonable and effective agreement on this issue .
The global advantages of the Sixth Framework Programme need to be fully translated to our citizens : all sections of society , from young scientists to disabled and elderly people are set to gain from its contents .
Indeed , if ever there was a case for European co-operation , the research programme makes it strongly .
I am delighted that European scientists in Europe 's regions will get financial reward for their intelligence .
All in all , this will make us more competitive and will help in the fight against serious illness and environmental problems .
Mr President , I basically want to state my views on two proposed amendments in the Schnellhardt report , namely Amendments Nos 129 and 82 , and to confirm that I voted in favour of them .
On balance , this is a very even-handed report and I congratulate Mr Schnellhardt on his hard work .
I think it is clear from Plenary 's acceptance of these two amendments that a sensible compromise can be found between the need for European rules and the use of common sense where small quantities are involved .
In addition , subsidiarity can also be sensibly applied to hygiene rules for hunting and I trust that the provisions in question will find their way into national regulations .
It was not so much me who had their mouth watering .
The secretariat started looking forward to their lunch .
Hailing from Ireland , the ' Food Island ' , I am extremely conscious of the need to convince European consumers that European food products are second to none in the world when it comes to hygiene and safety as well as quality .
Following on from a number of scares in recent years , tremendous steps have been taken to fine-tune the whole food production process so that nothing can be left to chance and so that our consumers can have peace of mind .
I particularly welcome the putting in place of rules which seek to guarantee that food imported from outside the Union must meet with the same rigorous standards that apply to producers within the EU .
As we fast approach enlargement , this must remain high on the agenda so that the standards which European consumers have come to expect can be maintained .
The cornerstone of food safety policy is the establishment of the European Food Safety Authority .
It is a matter of deep concern that almost half a year after the start-up date , the permanent home of the Authority remains undecided .
This gives out a very dubious signal to consumers as to the urgency with which European authorities treat the whole question of food safety .
.
( DE ) I welcome the differentiated approach taken by the Commission in order to guarantee a high level of health protection using specific hygiene rules for food .
That these rules also apply to wild game on sale to consumers in large quantities is only logical .
Nonetheless , we really must make a distinction between commercial marketing and the private consumption of game bagged in small quantities .
Hunters who give away or sell small quantities of game directly to the local retail trade after the hunt cannot and should not have to meet the same requirements as large meat-processing factories .
We need specific rules for hunters which reflect common practice .
However right and welcome these new rules are , private hunters must be exempted from them .
Our hunters already know a great deal about game hygiene and diseases .
Trained hunters already take full responsibility for the healthy state of the game which they provide and will continue to do so in future .
The European Parliament Committee on the Environment has accepted several proposed amendments which allow flexibility in the marketing of game and game meat without jeopardising food safety and I urgently call on the whole House to support these amendments .
- ( PT ) With regard to the first of the two Schnellhardt reports , on the hygiene of foodstuffs , we are pleased that the relevant committee adopted an amendment which will allow Member States to adopt specific measures applying to local markets and to the food companies that supply them , and thus protect traditional production methods and food ingredients , as long as they do not present any risks for food hygiene .
This is certainly an issue that cannot be ignored and on which our efforts need to be focussed in order to improve the wording regarding these special items , given that certain concepts may not yet be worded in the most felicitous and comprehensible way .
The hygiene of foodstuffs is without doubt a basic requirement , but it is important to resist an exaggerated " fundamentalist " approach which on the one hand would subject local markets to disproportionate requirements and intolerable bureaucracy , and which on the other hand would wipe out many kinds of traditional food production by give food industry lobbies their way , thus weakening our peoples ' food diversity and delivering a fresh body blow to European agriculture and to our own national and regional cultures .
I welcome this report which calls for a consolidation of existing European food hygiene and animal health inspections .
Food hygiene is something which affects European citizens ' daily lives and a topic in which many people have great interest .
It is important , therefore , that all legislation relating to this question should be as clear and accessible as possible .
The call for all food businesses to be registered is also apt .
At present , no such system exists and it is time that food producers became solely liable for food safety .
If this is to become the case , when food safety issues arise , consumers will have less bureaucracy to deal with and a better idea of who is culpable .
Lastly , the call for all meats to be treated equally under the new rules is also welcome .
There is no compelling justification to treat game differently from other meats , as is the case at present .
Indeed , if a European citizen has problems with food safety only to find that there is an exemption for the particular meat in question , it could render this whole package of measures meaningless .
.
( DE ) Due to an oversight , a number of motions for separate votes or votes in sections were not tabled in time on behalf of my group and the oral motion for separate votes on three proposed amendments tabled by our coordinator was rejected .
I should therefore like to state , as rapporteur , that I reject Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 17 and only accept the end of Amendment No 11 , i.e. the words " The Commission shall inform the competent authorities , the Member States and the European Parliament of the result of the checks carried out " , as an addendum to the original Commission text .
I support Amendment No 16 without the words " by means of the early warning system " .
However , as the report contains other , far more important amendments , I did of course vote in favour of the amendments voted en bloc and I voted in favour of the legislative resolution itself , even though I do not agree with the content of all the amendments .
Events themselves , with fatal cases of serious " unprecedented " illnesses , should have made us face up to crucial questions about the health of our livestock , the quality of our food and the huge threat to consumers .
Of course , it is also vital that we set out clear legislative rules if we are to have quality standards and ensure that food is controlled .
However , before taking any legislative measures , we must identify the reasons why the food chain has been downgraded and adulterated .
And that means pointing the finger first and coming down hard on the merciless laws of the capitalist market , which turn herbivores into carnivores .
Otherwise , we shall end up tinkering with individual technical aspects which do nothing for public health and misleading consumers in the process .
The root of all this evil is increasingly intensive production , the pressure on producers from traders and processors and huge food and feedingstuff multinationals to squeeze production costs and increase output so that they can maximise their already obscene profits .
Finally , the gradual and ever-increasing shift of power away from veterinary departments in the Member States and towards a Commission super-service , of which they then become outposts , may serve other suspect political objectives to which we are violently opposed , but it does nothing to foster effective control or consumer protection .
- ( PT ) This initiative , which aims to encompass the various directives in force in this field within a single text , is very important .
There are in fact seven different directives establishing specific hygiene standards for intra-Community trade in products of animal origin and imports from third countries , with a view to preventing the spread of epizootic diseases through food sales , a field in which , as we know , the overall European system is not at all transparent and has led to highly unacceptable instances of discrimination .
On the other hand , I am also following , with some caution I must say , the new approach adopted by the Commission to achieve this unification and simplification of European legislation . That approach is to use a regulation , which as it applies directly will make it possible to overcome another deficiency currently found here : the disparity between the various sanctions applied in the different Member States .
It was with this in mind that we decided how to vote and we will continue to be guided by the same principles on this issue in future .
The GUE / NGL Group has endorsed the joint motion for resolution on relations between the EU and Russia .
I , for my part , would like to point out that :
First : we need to create a pan-European system of security and political dialogue , mainly under the auspices of the ? SCE , in order to forestall any concern on Russia 's part about the integration of the Baltic states and Poland into the European Union .
However , it would be a huge mistake to extend ? ? ? ? eastwards , as Russia would interpret this as an effort to encircle it .
Secondly : the European Union must take a positive attitude towards Russian goods entering the markets of the new Member States following their accession , taking account of the peculiar nature of the competition problems still facing Russian companies .
Thirdly : at a more general level , the European Union needs to promote the perception of and the institutional structures and economic mechanisms for a common European area with Russia , as with the Ukraine .
Conserving cold-war divides at political and economic level under post-cold war conditions would be a policy fraught with danger and bereft of any prospects .
Mr President , I supported the resolution on Kaliningrad by Mrs Hoff .
We have to follow the example given by Mr Patten in his remarks yesterday and make a clear resolution in favour of cooperation with Russia and on the question of Kaliningrad to fit in with the wishes of the people of that small territory .
Mr Putin is a friend of ours , and we should encourage him .
He has brought economic growth to Russia at a time of very great danger in the economic system of that country .
He has sorted out the taxation system , which makes the very valid point that reducing rates of tax very often results in an increase in revenue .
Chechnya is his black mark - we must be critical of the Russian government here .
Mr Putin is sensitive to criticism , and a word of caution should go out from this European Parliament and be carefully noted by colleagues , even if they are not present in this Chamber at the moment .
The fact that , after the fall of the Soviet Union , Russia foundered , that its economy collapsed due to plundering by the nouveaux riches and the corrupt authorities , and that its people were plunged into poverty are problems that more often than not fail to cause European leaders any great concern .
Now , however , the enlargement of the European Union towards the east means that a small area of this foundering Russia - the region of Kaliningrad - will be completely landlocked by two Member States . This will have implications in terms of pollution , trafficking in drugs , weapons and human beings .
We suddenly find out that it is in the best interests of the EU to take an interest in this matter .
How can it resolve these problems ?
The European Union does not , in fact , have a solution , and the report acknowledges this .
It reiterates its fervent wishes as well as proposing to organise European-Russian border patrols on both sides of the border , in order to make it more difficult than at present for those who live there to cross the border .
As for the subsidies that the EU is preparing to grant Kaliningrad , and which are designed to transform it into a ' pilot region ' acting as a bridge between the EU and the rest of Russia , we all know that these will only be used to line the pockets of the local ruling mafiosi .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Once upon a time , East Prussia was a threatening German enclave in the middle of the Slavonic and Baltic areas .
Soon , the Kaliningrad oblast , the northern half of former East Prussia , will be a Russian enclave surrounded by EU Member States .
This is a region that enjoys a much lower level of prosperity , which suffers from considerable environmental pollution and needs free passage through the Polish-Lithuanian border region to Belarus and Russia .
Due to the introduction of compulsory visas for current and future EU Member States , this region threatens to become cut off from the state to which it belongs .
Over the past decade , western Europe has occasionally mooted the idea of assigning the Kaliningrad region to Volga Germans who lost their own Soviet Republic during the Second World War , or to other population groups , such as the Russian minorities in the Baltic states , without taking into consideration the current population which flocked in from all corners of the former Soviet Union between 1945 and 1991 .
Fortunately , the rapporteur is making a deliberate attempt not to reclaim Kaliningrad for Germany by separating it from Russia and replacing the current population with another .
I support the course taken , namely to treat the Kaliningrad oblast as an experimental part of Russia that , with Russia 's approval , is strongly involved in its EU surroundings and is granted financial aid for this purpose .
The Marinos report that the European Parliament has just adopted presents a very comforting view of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes within the framework of the EMU .
We do not share this view .
It is true that the Stability and Growth Pact is a natural consequence of the interdependence that the euro creates between Member States - for better , for worse . It aims to achieve budgetary rectitude , which in principle is healthy .
The first months of its implementation have unfortunately been littered with increasingly serious incidents involving Ireland , Italy , Germany and Portugal .
Now it is the turn of France to be in the hot seat .
These differences of opinion express , with increasing urgency , the need for the national economies and societies to develop at their own pace , in accordance with their own specific characteristics , without being encased in a rigid straitjacket that aims to make everything uniform .
Therefore , the logic of the euro is beginning to frustrate the logic of nations .
These two approaches will soon clash head-on .
Which is the more important for democracy ?
It is clearly the logic of the nations .
But which is the more powerful ?
The answer to that is more difficult , and this is why we have always thought that the euro adventure gives cause for concern .
- ( PT ) We voted against the Marinos report because it essentially supports the application of the Stability and Growth Pact , as the Commission has indeed just advocated in Commissioner Solbes 's speech , which emphasised the importance of stability and of achieving a near-balanced or surplus budget outcome by 2004 at the latest .
In various parts of the report what emerges most clearly is the reliance on neoliberal revenues which means that it is always the same people who bear the burden of budgetary and economic difficulties - the workers .
Thus it advocates a moderate wage policy combined with respect for a 3 % budget deficit limit and the " the implementation of structural reforms in sectors of the economy , particularly in the products and capital markets , including the pension sector , as well as in the transport , energy , communication and labour markets " .
In other words , more of the same !
With regard to the situation in Portugal and Germany , the report criticises the failure to rigorously apply the Stability and Growth Pact , which is unacceptable and deeply inequitable , firstly because it is not comparing like with like , and secondly because it does not take into account socio-economic reality in Portugal , which has the highest rates of poverty in the European Union .
What is needed , as we have advocated , is for the Stability and Growth Pact to be suspended , rather than the measures that the Portuguese government has just taken in its amending budget .
.
( DE ) Economic growth in the EU as a whole fell to 1.6 % in 2001 ( compared with 3.3 % in 2000 ) , the unemployment rate remained more or less stable at 7.7 % in December 2001 , compared with 7.9 % in December 2000 , the rate of inflation rose from 2.1 % in December 2001 to 2.5 % in January 2002 with the introduction of the euro and the ratio of investment to European GDP is far lower than that required for sustainable growth .
Instead of public investment , a radical employment policy programme and meaningful concepts to guarantee health care and pensions , the rapporteur calls for strict compliance with the stability and convergence pact as an end in itself .
His proposals for achieving this are as old as they are misguided : he calls for expenditure to be capped ( naturally with social transfer benefits as the main source of savings ) instead of calling for improvements on the income side and he calls for wage restraint at a time when wages are generally falling in real terms and transnational groups are making a killing and often do not even have to pay any tax .
How is this sort of strategy expected to force demand ?
I cannot vote in favour of such a report .
The report insists on the strict application of the stability pact , which has reduced the standard of living of huge swathes of the population and , despite all the publicity it has received , has done nothing to help turn the European economy around or achieve high rates of growth .
It reinforces the anti-grass roots policy of constantly higher profits with proposals which provide cover for the rampant neo-liberal economic and social policy of the ? U and its tragic consequences .
At a time when the social and economic situation is worsening and inequalities are spreading , it advocates a policy of structural reform to apportion unemployment , make flexible forms of work and job uncertainty and insecurity the rule , condemn millions of citizens to poverty , penury and marginalisation , reduce wage costs and ensure that big business keeps making bigger and better profits .
It calls , for the sake of sound public finances , for faster dismantling of pension systems and full liberalisation of the markets , offering the monopolies blanket unaccountability in the process .
Calls for budgetary prudence are merely an attempt to justify the constant reduction in expenditure on social protection , education , health and public utilities , while expenditure to strengthen big business remains untouched and the unfair taxes paid by the workers keep rising .
We are voting against the motion because the policies of the ? U and the Member States are incompatible with the needs of workers , farmers and small and medium-sized enterprises and are dictated by and serve the interests of big business .
We stand by those in society who oppose and are fighting to overturn the insensitive economic and social policy imposed by the Stability Pact .
- ( PT ) For a Portuguese Member of Parliament from the CDS / Partido Popular , a party which has been notable for its opposition to and criticism of the very negative way in which the Socialist government routed in Portugal 's elections on 17 March has run the economy and the public finances of our country in recent years - and , indeed , during the period under review - it was particularly difficult for me to formulate my position on Mr Marinos 's important report .
On the one hand , we support many of his criticisms and the way he has drawn attention to worrying situations in various countries . But on the other hand , we cannot support him in advocating that the Council should have adopted more draconian measures .
Nevertheless , it really is regrettable that things should have gone this far .
When it comes to Portugal it seems that what is most important now , rather than complaining about the past , is to focus the attention and will of everyone interested in these issues on vigorously supporting the redoubled efforts of the new Portuguese Government , in very difficult circumstances , to get things back onto a more positive track as soon as possible . An example of this came at the end of yesterday 's debate when , in response to me , Commissioner Solbes specifically recognised this .
I am certain that these efforts on the part of the new Portuguese authorities will be recognised and appropriately supported at political level by all the European institutions and that those efforts will be supported by a majority of Members of this House .
Mr President , when we look at relations with the United States , we have to ask ourselves whether or not the United States is prepared to adhere to multilateral agreements .
We have seen what has happened in relation to Kyoto ; we saw the attempt to sabotage the UN Conference on the proliferation of small arms and we now see the Farm Bill , which threatens to exceed the limits set out in the WTO in terms of subsidies for farmers .
What is worrying about this is that in the Doha agreement both the EU and the United States promised the smaller countries that they would have access to our textile and agricultural markets .
Now the US seems to be going back on that , just as it has done with textiles in relation to the Caribbean countries .
The real danger is not only the message the Farm Bill sends out to the poorer countries , but that it will also encourage those Members of the EU who are opposed to our own farm reform .
We have made enormous progress in CAP reform , but a lot more is needed .
I would hope that the actions by the United States in pursuit of " pork barrel " politics , because of the elections in November , are not going to encourage those Members of the EU who are opposed to further reform .
Mr President , in the context of the previous report , we talked about relations between the European Union and Russian Federation .
Now , this report by Mr Elles discusses relations between the European Union and the United States of America .
I voted for the motion because I feel that relations should be closer .
Indeed , I would go so far as to propose that an interparliamentary committee be created , made up of members of the US Congress and Members of the European Parliament and meeting several times a year .
First of all , however , I would like the United States to abolish the death penalty and reduce the indiscriminate sale of weapons in all large stores , in all the department stores in the country .
That would greatly help to further improve the already excellent relations between the European Union and the United States of America .
- ( PT ) There are many aspects of the resolution approved today by the European Parliament which give rise to criticism and profound disagreement .
One of these is the way NATO is seen as a central pillar in defining relations between the countries of the European Union and the United States , and in particular the desire to achieve a partnership for world domination , with priority being given to the establishment of a " European army " and the development of the arms industry .
Despite the timid references made to the United States ' failure to observe the terms of various key international protocols , conventions and treaties , the resolution fails to criticise or condemn the USA for its responsibility for the present deterioration in the international situation , for the war , for increasing military interventionism , for the arms race , and for its responsibility for supporting the criminal policies being pursued by the Israeli Government against the Palestinian people .
What also needs to be stressed is the EU 's timid reaction to the United States ' non-compliance with international trade rules , in particular in the case of steel and aid for agricultural exports , while there is a total absence of any condemnation of the United States ' embargo against Cuba , or the so-called Colombia Plan , to name just a few examples .
The basic purpose of this report is to ensure that the ? U does not play second fiddle to the USA when it comes to planning and carrying out aggressive warfare , dividing up markets and implementing a strategy to subdue the popular movements opposed to the " new world order " .
As far as the ? U is concerned , ? ? ? ? is a " fundamental guarantee for the Euro-Atlantic stability and security [ and ] the essential framework for coalition operations " and the EU aims to be a " coherent , reliable and equal partner to the US " in the context of NATO .
The report therefore recommends that the Member States increase their military spending .
Imperialist intervention in Afghanistan , the threat of global war , the US withdrawal from the ? ? ? Treaty , preparations for star wars , the prospect of the nightmare of nuclear war and the abolition of basic democratic rights are either completely ignored by the rapporteur or are broached with regret , because the US has acted without consulting the ? U , ? ? ? ? or the UN .

Competition between the imperialist powers finds expression in the report 's call for the US to honour its commitments to the WTO , the IMF and the World Bank .
That Plenary voted in favour of the report is proof positive of the fact that Parliament has ambitions for a more autocratic , militaristic and aggressive ? U. That comes as no surprise to us Communists .
The fact that the people of the ? U and throughout the world have realised this and are fighting against is an encouraging sign .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
- ( PT ) In general , the Elles report is a very good one .
Its main objective is to add to the debate on enhancing relations in a new global context by setting out the Parliament 's official position in this area .
We consider that the strategy adopted in drawing up this report was reasonably effective .
The rapporteur from time to time stresses , with a certain regularity , the concept of " new global challenges " . This applies both to security and to the economy , thus justifying the present need to reinforce transatlantic relations .
Nevertheless , this report , and thus the resolution contained in it , make a clear appeal for the communitarisation of the ESDP , as in Paragraph 9 of the resolution .
I do not agree with that , and I consider that the criticism of the foreign policy of the United States is inappropriate . This criticism does not contribute to the climate of confidence needed to resolve these questions openly , nor to reinforcing the indisputable common heritage that unites and should continue to unite Europe and the United States .
That is why I have abstained .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.19 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Before we proceed with our agenda , I just note for the benefit of Members in the House that last week I made a brief working visit to Cyprus .
As you know , this is a very crucial and decisive time for the whole enlargement process and especially for Cyprus .
There is now an unprecedented window of opportunity to try to press for a comprehensive settlement in which the imminence of European Union accession can play a role .
It certainly represents a compelling deadline .
I mention this because today , the United Nations Secretary General , Mr Kofi Annan is in Cyprus .
I would like to express to him , on behalf of Parliament , our hope that his visit will lend a new impetus to the face-to-face talks taking place in Cyprus through his good offices .
I would ask this House to join me in sending a message of support and encouragement to both parties to seize this moment of opportunity .
The next item is the statements by Mr Solana , High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , and the Commission on the situation in the Middle East .
Mr President , firstly I would like to apologise because I was not present on 24 April when I was supposed to come and take part in the debate with Commissioner Patten .
But I was in a very different place on that day , namely at a meeting with the President Arafat who was still in the Mukata without freedom of movement .
I am sure you will understand that I could not be with you .
Mr President , unfortunately the situation in the region is still very critical .
There are enormous restrictions on the Palestinian people , military action is persisting , terrorist actions are persisting and , as has been said here , last week another fifteen civilians were murdered and more than fifty were wounded .
We must take account of the fact that no democratic society can endure weekly terrorist actions without demanding that its leaders act .
In addition , on a political level , we have witnessed the regrettable resolution approved by Likud , the importance of which we should not overestimate since luckily it is a minority view within the Knesset and also within Israeli society , as indicated by the opinion polls mentioned by Mr Solana , just as the statements by the leader of the radical Islamic group Hamas do not naturally represent the views of the Palestinian National Authority .
However , there are some hopeful signs .
The huge demonstration by citizens in Israel calling for an end to the occupation , President Arafat 's statements against terrorist actions , ordering police action and indicating his willingness to accept co-existence with a Jewish State , which coincide with the statements made in Sharm-el-Sheikh by Egypt , Saudi Arabia and Libya , and also the end of the confinement of Mr Arafat and the siege of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem , are naturally extremely positive .
The hand of the European Union is clearly evident in some of these hopeful signals - and we should bear this in mind since we often tend to underestimate our own capacities .
The mediation of the European Union is crucial and we must therefore roundly reject the unfair and unfounded accusations that Community contributions are being misused .
I am happy with the speedy and thorough explanation by Commissioner Patten , but , as he himself has said , we must be very scrupulous .
On previous occasions my group has expressed its concern about the destination of certain aid for education .
The parties in the conflict recognise that the participation of the international community is essential .
We must contribute to consolidating the existence of the Quartet so that it may ensure the staging of an international conference , which of course incorporates the Arab countries , and let there be no doubt that the European Union will play a prominent role in that conference .
Mr President , Mr High Representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the information presented today by the High Representative gives us hope despite the gravity of the situation .
It is true that attacks are still taking place and it is also true that there are still summary executions , but there has been a change over the last month : there is the Mukata Agreement , the issue of the solution to the problem of the Church of the Nativity , and there are other important issues .
One of them , which has been mentioned by the High Representative , is the vote in the Likud Congress .
We must remember that Mr Netanyahu , who makes Mr Sharon look like a moderate , and Mr Sharon signed the Wye Plantation Agreements as executives of the State of Israel and that brings responsibilities .
Something else has happened , and that is the demonstration by more than one hundred thousand people in Tel Aviv asking for immediate peace and , finally , a fact that is not usually mentioned , and that is that the Israeli Government has demobilised the reservists it had called up to punish Gaza , which I believe to be an important shift in approach .
Knowing as we do that our action , the action of the High Representative and of our representatives in the region , is more effective in terms of its content than in terms of publicity - where the United States are ahead of us - I believe we must encourage them to continue along this road even if they do not appear in the European Parliament .
I believe that the absence of Mr Solana on 24 April was fully justified ; we have not asked him to explain it .
Secondly , I believe we agree that we must speed up the creation of a Palestinian State , and I refer to the resolutions which began in 1948 , at the time of the creation of the State of Israel .
The High Representative said during his last appearance that , surely , on the basis of the Mitchell and Tenet plans , what we had to do was speed up and create a Palestinian State .
And as he has said that we must ensure that the Palestinian State - or the Palestinian Authority - increasingly comes to resemble a State , I believe that the process needs to be speeded up , because one of the consequences of what is happening is that the identity and sense of responsibility of the Palestinian people has been strengthened enormously .
I therefore believe that we must try to ensure that this process is as quick as possible .
Turning now to the possible Peace Conference , Mr President , I believe that it must take place under the auspices of the UN - we must never forget that Israel was born as a result of a UN decision .
On behalf of my group , I regret that there has been no follow-up to what happened in Jenin and that the International Commission of the United Nations has not been allowed to investigate events ; if there has not really been a genocide , I believe that that investigation would even have helped Israel to present and justify its action .
In any event , I believe we have to continue working with the Quartet and with the Arab League in order to stage this Conference without excluding anybody .
I believe that the Israeli Prime Minister 's insistence that he wants to decide who to negotiate with is completely unacceptable : everybody has to represent themselves .
Finally , Mr President , with regard to the accusations which have been made in certain sections of the media in the United States and also in the US congress - and we have just approved our resolution on transatlantic relations - branding us as anti-Semites , I would like to refer to the resolution we approved last month which reiterates our condemnation of anti-Jewish attacks in Europe .
But I believe we should also tell those sections of the media and congressmen that they should reread the Bible and that both peoples are Semitic , they descend from Shem , son of Noah , and they also have a common ancestor in Abraham ; both Arabs and Israelis are therefore Semitic .
I am speaking on the basis of one fact , and that is that I feel more Semitic than anything else since , as I said in the Knesset , we Spaniards say that we have traces of Moorish and of Jewish blood .
Therefore in reality the anti-Semites are the ones who really want to monopolise this issue .
We believe that we have to try to ensure that these two peoples who have been brothers for five thousand years find a solution which allows them to live together , and therefore I believe that to make this type of accusation is not only unjustified , but also it makes absolutely no contribution to the necessary peace process in the Middle East .
Mr President , Mr Solana , I do not envy you your travel schedule .
May I congratulate you on your successes in Reykjavik .
As a Swede , I can only deplore the fact that Russia now has greater influence over NATO than does Sweden .
That is not , however , what we are here to discuss .
My Israeli and Palestinian friends and those who want peace wonder why we in Europe only talk and do nothing .
Of course , we are powerless to stop the violence and bloodshed .
Yet the accusation is extremely unfair .
I am convinced that the commitment , travelling , money and resources invested by Mr Solana , Mr Patten and all the institutions will have long-term benefits , both in providing a solution to the Church of the Nativity problem and , in the longer term , in bolstering the Palestinian Authority .
We cannot , of course , talk violence away , but not many other options are on offer .
Negotiation , discussion , dialogue and compromise are the tools we have used to build our European cooperation .
I really would like to believe that they might work in the Middle East , too .
Violence is no solution .
The terrible suicide attacks must cease .
Killing innocent people can never be justified .
There can be no peace as long as they continue .
Nor are the Israeli attacks justifiable .
They have not put an end to the suicide attacks .
The current internal debate in the Likud Party and the potential leadership crisis must not be used as an excuse to kill more innocent Palestinians .
It is also deeply tragic that the independent UN investigation into the events in Jenin did not go ahead .
If Israel had nothing to hide , then it had an opportunity to show the world that no massacre had taken place .
No serious observer has said that there has been a massacre .
However , if injustices have taken place , then they must be investigated .
Naturally , as Commissioner Patten says , Israel must provide evidence for the very serious accusations that the EU has funded terrorism .
It is clear that corruption - on an enormous scale - exists within the Palestinian Authority .
We have discussed this on several occasions .
Doubtless , some resources have ended up in the wrong pockets , but to say that we are funding terrorism is a very , very serious accusation .
I should like to thank Commissioner Patten for taking the matter seriously , and for attempting to find out what is happening and report back to us .
A few words about the conference .
It is good that a conference is to take place .
It is good that the international community is involved , but also that the Arab League is to take part .
This is not the first conference .
There is a certain conference-weariness , but some knots can perhaps be unravelled .
The Palestinians must , of course , be allowed to send their representatives .
It is unacceptable that Mr Sharon has vetoed the presence of Mr Arafat , since he is their spokesman .
What should actually be on the agenda , then ?
Should we try to solve all the issues , or should we just take one step at a time ?
What should our point of departure be ?
Those I have spoken to on both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides give different answers : Oslo , Camp David , Mitchell , Taba , the Saudi proposal or the various UN resolutions .
There is no agreement here .
Yet it is important to try to draw up a common basic agenda .
It would be very helpful if Mr Solana could clarify what he realistically believes will be on the agenda .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning , we discussed transatlantic relations .
We failed to note that the weapons used by the Israeli army are weapons paid for by US taxpayers and that they have been used to destroy buildings and institutions belonging to the Palestinian Authority which are financed by European taxpayers .
This is also an established fact of transatlantic relations .
I feel that the time has come to stop complaining and I agree that we should try to define how far we can move forward .
The International Conference must have an aim , namely to prepare the ground so that , before the end of the year , the UN General Assembly can make a formal declaration on establishing a Palestinian State , following the same model used establishing the Israeli State .
It is the United Nations , therefore , which is assuming responsibility just as it assumed this responsibility for the Israeli State , which proved to be fair for some and unfair for others .
All that has been said regarding the need to help establish a Palestinian Government is based on straightforward common sense , because a State needs a government .
Given this context , I feel that the statement by the Likud is to be welcomed , for the simple reason that it at last requires Israeli society and the Israeli leaders to shoulder their responsibilities .
Israeli political leaders have been saying for years that they support a Palestinian State whilst doing everything they can to thwart it .
In this context , I believe that the statement by the Likud will stimulate the debate , because peace , one of the keys to peace , is to be found in Israeli society ; the 70 % of Israelis who say that they are in favour of the Palestinian State must take political action !
This action is urgently needed so that those Palestinians who support the recognition of the Israeli State stop the massacres against Israeli nationals .
If we achieve this , the UN declaration will be perfectly acceptable , because it creates a political framework which forces everyone to decide to take action .
I would therefore like the political representatives of the European Union , who are paid by the European taxpayer , to say firmly to the American and Russian representatives that the problem can be resolved by the UN making a formal declaration on establishing the Palestinian State .
Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , many of us here today visited Israel and the Palestinian territories during the last part-session . For some Members , it was their first visit .
When one is on the ground and is able to listen to the evidence of the long-suffering populations , to assess the scale of the physical destruction and to guess how deeply the moral scars run , one can gain a better understanding of the meaning of the news that is now coming from the region .
One can also grasp the significance of the vast demonstration that took place in Tel Aviv at the end of last week .
Once again , ten of thousands of people assembled , which , given the size of the entire population of Israel , is an impressive gathering .
They put forward very firm demands relating to conditions that must be met , namely the end of military occupation , of colonisation and of the despicable crimes committed by an army of a country that aspires to be a great democracy .
At the end of April , we met the representatives of most of these movements in Tel Aviv .
I feel that their work does Israel great credit .
These groups , like the Israeli political leaders taking part in the coalition for peace led by the former Labour minister Mr Beilin , in conjunction with the Palestinian minister Mr Rabbo , embody the hope that things may in future change in Israel .
The renewed strength of this current is , without doubt , the manifestation of some more profound changes which are surfacing within a section of Israeli society that seems to have strong misgivings about using the policy of force as a method of promoting Israeli security .
There seems to be a greater degree of questioning , especially after the terrible revelations in relation to Jenin , about the consequences of the military offensive against Palestinian towns and camps in terms of Israel 's image around the world , and even about the possibility of international legal proceedings against Israeli leaders .
Lastly , there is great interest in favour of the historic proposal from neighbouring Arab countries to return to good relations with Israel in exchange for a withdrawal from the occupied territories .
It is most certainly in response to these signs that the extreme Israeli right wing members are behaving increasingly aggressively in order to reaffirm , in a deliberately provocative manner , their opposition to any prospect of a Palestinian State .
This extremely dangerous policy is one that the Likud is stating in its resolutions and one that Sharon is exercising on the ground .
His staunch opposition towards the Palestinian Authority and Chairman Arafat , his decision to systematically destroy the infrastructure and assets of the embryonic State established by the Oslo Accords , the construction , according to Peace Now , of 35 new settlements and the organised dividing up of Palestinian territories leave no doubt whatsoever as to the strategy being pursued , unfortunately with complete impunity .
It is in this context that the European Union is gambling its credibility .
I urge the Fifteen to consider this appeal from a young girl living in the Jenin refugee camp to a visitor who came to express his solidarity .
' I do not want aid ' , she said to him , ' can you give me justice ? '
Justice , of course , means reconstruction but it also means the end of impunity by the occupier and the end of the occupation , respect for international law , recognition of the two States and the guarantee of security of both peoples .
This is the clear message that , on behalf of our peoples and the majority of the House , an official delegation made up of Members from Parliament 's highest level , should now take to Israel and Palestine .
Mr President , what Likud 's resolution in reality does is openly to signal a policy which Sharon has been conducting all the time , namely a policy designed systematically to undermine any hope that a Palestinian state might be set up .
That is why the EU is now being accused of helping to finance terrorism .
That is the explanation for going in and destroying villages and all the Palestinian structures .
We must be careful not to fall into the same trap by saying that whoever governs the state must be responsible for security , for it is obvious that Arafat wishes to do all he can to combat terrorism but uncertain whether he can control it .
We must therefore take care not to reproach him if the terrorist attacks continue .
If we wish to see a Palestinian state established that resembles other democratic structures as closely as possible , I should like to hear what we in the EU intend to do to ensure that the leaders concerned are able to meet each other .
In the last year and a half , the Palestinian Authority has not had the opportunity to meet physically .
How is it intended to put pressure on Sharon to make that possible ?
A government that cannot meet will not of course be able to start operating properly .
It is important that , in the international conference , we associate ourselves as closely as is humanly possible with the Saudi peace proposal , for it is this that will secure peace for Israel .
It will secure recognition for Israel , and that is what Israel has been working towards for very many years .
I believe it is absolutely crucial for us to do everything in our power to support that initiative .
Mr President , I would like to start by condemning the European Parliament delegation for relations with Israel , which held a formal inaugural meeting in March , for not holding its first official meeting until 12 June .
We have the utmost consideration for the personal problems of its chairman , but I feel that it might have been preferable for the delegation to have met and been able to debate during these extremely difficult and sensitive months for Israel and the Middle East .
High Representative , this House has always condemned the unilateral vision of the majority of the European political groupings , which are unable to distinguish between democratic countries committed to respecting human and civil rights against all odds , and corrupt , despotic regimes .
Europe has , to date , been almost unilaterally condemning outright the actions of the Israelis to control and eliminate terrorism while voicing only mild , routine criticism of the actions of the suicide bombers striking in Israel , who were under the same clear , cynical orders as those who struck in the United States .
Even with regard to Jenin , High Representative , Commissioner , Europe stirred itself up into a fury and lynched Israel , accusing it of mass slaughter without any actual evidence .
Now , at last , it is becoming clear that there can be no peace without freedom or democracy .
Mr Solana , you have assured us that Europe will continue to call for a more democratic Palestinian Authority which shows greater respect for the rights of the Palestinians .
Indeed , we can delete the word ' greater ' .
However , this means acknowledging that the principle cause of the tragedy we have witnessed in recent months and years was the denial of freedom and democracy to the Palestinian people and all the other peoples who live in that region under the yoke of tyrannical regimes , satrapies and dictatorships .
We must not be racist .
We must be cautious but it would be wrong to forget that the Lebanese , Syrian , Iraqi and Palestinian citizens are entitled to freedom and democracy ; we must condemn the fact that it is often precisely those States that foster terrorism which refuse to contemplate the idea of freedom and democracy in their territory .
Commissioner , when Binyamin Netanyahu wonders what our opinion is on the Likud motion , when he raises the question of the nature of the Palestinian State - whether it is a free , democratic State or a State full of unlawful activity and terror which , as a result , breeds terror - he might be asking us , asking you too a valid question .
We welcome the launch of an electoral process in Palestine .
However , we are mindful of the fact that Yasser Arafat should have been re-elected in 1999 but that no elections were held , and that was before the start of the intifada .
Mr President , my reason for taking the floor in this debate is to repeat to the House the appeal that was made by the participants of the ' Promote Peace ' meeting which was organised by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on 13 May .

Mrs Leila Shahid , the Palestinian representative , Mrs Dayan , Mr Vilan , who are both members of the Knesset , met to remind us , as if it were necessary , that the European Union should , firstly , continue to condemn all forms of terrorism , whatever their origin , and , secondly , should encourage the search for a solution , which they believe involves the implementation of both the Mitchell Plan , which , in my view , has not yet been exhausted , and the Saudi Arabian initiative adopted at Sharm-el-Sheikh .
The Likud talks that are currently underway do not appear to support the application of either plan .
I have before me the initial conclusions adopted two days ago by the European Union 's General Affairs Council .
I condemn the fact that the Member States have not yet managed to deliver an opinion on the possibility of the international conference , the urgency and importance of which Mr Solana has just emphasised .
In any case , I regret that , the day after Likud announced its position , the Council did not reiterate the resolutions adopted by the United Nations and call for them their application .
Lastly , I am concerned that Likud will push ahead regardless , even against the advice of Ariel Sharon , and I would like to know , Mr Solana , taking into account your knowledge of the situation on the ground , how you see the situation in Israel unfolding , were the coalition that is currently in power in Israel to collapse .
High Representative , along with other Members of the House , we went to celebrate Europe Day in Jerusalem , to celebrate a day of peace .
We met the Israeli and Palestinian political leaders as well as NGOs .
Words cannot , of course , express the atrocity of the massacres , but I would prefer to pass on to you the message that they gave to us .
If the European Union wishes to remain true to the values that it defends , it must urgently demand the withdrawal from the occupied territories and the recognition of Palestinian State , reaffirming the 1967 borders , which requires the breaking up of settlements , the boycotting of products from these settlements and sending an international peacekeeping force to guarantee the protection of the people .
On Saturday 11 May , more than 70 000 Israeli citizens gathered in Tel Aviv to show their support for peace . This gathering shows us that we need to go further than humanitarian discussions and to start to take action .
The European Parliament shouldered its responsibilities by adopting resolutions .
These are not designed to give it a clear conscience and they must not be forgotten .
It is now up to the Council , as it alone can give force and vigour to our resolution , to agree to implement them .
As you know , the European citizens working on the ground form an effective force for peace .
They have been a constant presence by willingly forming a human shield .
I formally appeal to you to be worthy of these citizens : would the international conference not give us the opportunity to recognise the Palestinian State alongside the Israeli State ?
This recognition would give confidence to the Palestinians and could set in motion genuine reform of the institutions of the Palestinian Authority .
We can only welcome the end of the occupation and the siege of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem : this is a glimmer of light at the end of an extremely dark tunnel .
The prospect of peace in the Middle East began to fade when the two cornerstones that are equally necessary for a political agreement to be reached were called into question . These are the legitimacy and the security of the Israeli State and the need for the Palestinian people to own a State .
These two cornerstones have recently been subject to particularly formidable attacks , however .
By adopting a strategy of terror in the form of the second uprising , which sees suicide bombers blowing themselves up in order to slaughter civilians , the Palestinians have plumbed new depths in their pursuit of anti-Israeli violence .
This violence now serves to take them one step further away from the Palestinian State .
The greater part of the majority party in Israel has just declared itself against a Palestinian State , thus undermining one of the bases of a political resolution .
We must , on both counts , find a way out of this dead end .
Mr Solana , you spoke - and this is the key to the resumption of the peace process - of the urgent need to reform the Palestinian Authority , which will involve exercising a genuine sense of responsibility and the rejection of terrorism .
Only the Palestinian people can take this step , but our aid must be strictly linked to these changes .
European taxpayers , Mr President , will no longer agree to continue to provide ambiguous aid to an ambiguous Authority ; they will only agree to grant justified aid to an Authority which behaves like a constantly evolving State .
Mr President , the attitude of the Council towards the Middle East is characterised by extreme leniency . This is , without doubt , because of the unanimity of opinion .
Every day , for many weeks now , the International Red Cross , Amnesty International , Médecins sans Frontières , the United Nations agencies , as well as the Israeli and European NGOs that are present on the ground have all been telling us and telling you , Mr Solana , that serious breaches of human rights and humanitarian law have been committed in occupied Palestine and that the conduct of the Israeli army is unacceptable .
In a sickening act of vandalism , human excrement was smeared and urine was poured over the shredded files and ransacked offices of the Palestinian Ministry of Culture in Ramallah .
Despite this outbreak of brutalities , the Council has not taken into consideration our resolution of 10 April which calls for the suspension of the Association Agreement with Israel .
The Council has not yet ordered the embargo on arms exports to Israel , which is a flagrant breach of the 1998 Code of Conduct , in which the Member States banned arms exports to regions in crisis .
What is worse , unlike the President of the Commission , who clearly explained his views on this subject , the Council has not formally protested against the UN Secretary-General 's withdrawal of the investigation team into the Jenin massacre .
This is a dark moment in the history of the United Nations , which is unacceptable in law , unacceptable in actual fact .
MEPs would have preferred to see their ministers on the front line making Mr Sharon give in to the requirements of international law .
Through the Association Agreement , Mr Solana , you have the means to make yourself heard .
If you sit back and do nothing , you must not be surprised if violence prevails over law in the Middle East and throughout the world .
Mr President , inconsistent and contradictory events are currently taking place within the Israeli State and society .
It is true that the 100 000 peace demonstrators in Tel Aviv on 11 May offered the hope of a social reaction to the barbarity of Sharon .
The slogan of that demonstration was meaningful enough : " For the sake of Israel 's salvation , we must withdraw from the occupied territories " .
However , other forces of a different kind are working hard to eliminate not just the process , but also the spirit of Oslo .
It is true that Netanyahu took it upon himself to create a Likud central committee according to his own wishes before losing power in 1999 .
Perhaps this puts the recent vote of that body against the creation of a Palestinian States into perspective , but the resolution exists .
As if that were not enough , Netanyahu has just said : A state , with all the rights of a State [ a Palestinian State , that is ] , is not possible .
Not with Arafat ; not with any other leader ; not today and not tomorrow .
Likud has acted just hours after the Heads of State of Egypt , Jordan and Syria - Syria , no less , and I stress this - said literally : we reject all forms of violence ; we confirm our desire for a genuine peace with Israel .
As we know , the Israeli Parliament yesterday agreed that Israel would not reopen political negotiations with the Palestinians until two requirements are met : a complete end to violence - I stress the adjective ' complete ' - and a thorough reform of the Palestinian administration .
Sharon stresses this : there will be no peace with a dictatorial , corrupt and tyrannical regime .
There must be another Palestinian Authority .
A few hours ago , President Arafat made some excellent comments : accepting external involvement , he told his Parliament that the time has come for changes , reforms and elections and he condemned suicide attacks .
Sharon - of course - has just said that Arafat has said nothing new .
Since we can expect him soon to invent a new pretext for preventing the creation of a Palestinian State and the onset of peace , I believe that the famous Quartet should take precisely the opposite stance .
Mr President , I will try to respond to those Members who have asked questions and who are in the Chamber as well as those Members who have asked questions but , since they have greater interests elsewhere , have had to leave it .
I agree completely with what Mr Galeote has said and I believe it is absolutely essential to take advantage of a window of opportunity which is not large but rather small .
I believe that all the comments by Parliament 's very worthy representatives have indicated this in one way or another .
There are some reasons to be hopeful , but there are still huge reasons to feel frustrated and hopeless .
What we have to do is to take advantage of this moment , this window of opportunity - and I believe that is what the international community is trying to do - to make progress .
Circumstances like the current ones , which have been pointed out by Mr Patten , many Members , and myself are not going to come about again .
Let us therefore get to work .
That is what we are trying to do .
We must do everything we can to prevent the peace process being hijacked .
We have spent too much time living with the consequences of the great political error of the famous seven days of total peace .
That decision of the seven days of total peace , with no doubt whatsoever , delayed the process and prevented decision making .
I believe that we should now do everything possible to prevent conduct which could stop us from making a rapid , and parallel , start on work in three directions : security , the new composition of the Palestinian Authority and the new legitimisation of the Palestinian Authority and of the peace process .
These three elements - in my judgement - should move forward in parallel and neither one of them should hijack another .
The third issue I wanted to mention - as I have said many times and I repeat today , since I am convinced of it , though I could be mistaken , but I know that even in the European Parliament people can make mistakes - is that I believe we have had a lot of experience of peace processes since the Madrid Conference , including the Oslo Conference until the present time ; however , what we have not had , unfortunately , is actual peace .
I believe the time has come for a short process and a long peace .
We have had long peace processes but no peace .
The time has come for a short and quick process which brings us as quickly as possible to peace and , from then on , to rebuild the Middle East , a process in which the offers made by the countries of the region can be measured in real terms .
What we are offering today are commitments which , for the first time , are of a contractual nature .
I would like to say one thing which has not been said and which I would like to repeat .
President Arafat said something yesterday on television which he had never said or which , at least , I had never heard : he spoke of the State of Israel as a Jewish State .
I believe that President Arafat had never spoken in these terms before .
That short phrase of three words contains a very large part of the solution to one of the most difficult problems : the problem of the refugees .
We must therefore carefully weigh up every word uttered by anybody , and not only one person , because sometimes we find , in certain phrases which we do not analyse in depth , thoughts which may have significant consequences for the solution of the problem and there is no doubt that the problem of the refugees will continue to be a fundamental problem in terms of a solution .
If you ask me what the most realistic agenda for the Conference should be , I would reply in all honesty that at the moment I do not know .
I believe that the agenda must be based on basic principles , that is , peace for territories , the Security Council resolutions and that , as I said before , it should include an essential element which is new : the Beirut Initiative , which does not only also offer a framework for the traditional Madrid lines of negotiation , but also introduces a regional aspect which could be of fundamental use in terms of resolving the problem .
It has been said that the Palestinian State must be recognised as soon as possible .
I agree , but it must not be before the Palestinians want it to happen .
If you came with me to ask Mr Arafat , at this moment , if he would like , this very afternoon , the Palestinian State to be declared , he would certainly reply : " do not be in such a hurry and wait a bit " .
This is not the moment therefore and we should do things in accordance with the rhythm that the Palestinians themselves want .
The Palestinians know that if the Palestinian State were established today , they would not be in a position to operate as effectively as we would like and therefore we must give them the opportunity to prepare themselves adequately and to have the guarantee that the Palestinian State is a State that functions , that is viable and that defends the values which we all , and above all they all , or the majority of them , wish to be respected .
With regard to terrorism , I believe that we must continue to say over and over again that it is not possible to achieve peace while there are suicide bombers who do not only kill themselves but who also kill others .
We must state and recognise this , both in this House and in any other .
The other day I said to President Arafat that he needs ' the best ' - his young people - in order to build a future , and the future will not be built if ' the best ' are killing and being killed .
The best he can do is to convince those young people to support and participate in the construction of a Palestinian State .
They will all be necessary .
And that teacher of mathematics or that teacher of literature who are killing or being killed would have been essential in order to teach literature in the university when the Palestinian State is functioning or to be a good mathematician .
That is what the leaders of Palestine must say clearly to their citizens : you are all necessary !
We need all of you in order to build a great country .
Mr Cohn-Bendit suggested that we allow a year for the creation of a Palestinian State and for the United Nations to declare its existence .
I do not want to argue about that timescale : I do not know whether one year is better than nine months or twenty-two months .
That is a decision which does not fall to us , but to the Palestinians , but it is true that the sooner it is and the sooner they are ready the better .
A resolution by the Security Council of the United Nations would be the most logical and appropriate way to recognise the existence of a State .
Mr Poos said some very sensible things and I completely agree with many of them , I would differ slightly in relation to certain others but in general I believe that we are on the same wavelength in terms of the solutions we are proposing .
I would like to say to my good friend , Jacques Poos , that I believe some people here may have been sitting back and doing nothing .
The honourable Members are well aware that this speaker has never sat back and done nothing , neither when he was a Minister representing his country - when I was a colleague of yours and we had many opportunities to speak ; we must therefore be respectful in the words we use .
If you believe that I have been sitting back in relation to this conflict , I think you are wrong and , if you will allow me , I could look back and recall moments when the European Council has been sitting back .
As for Mr Emilio Menéndez del Valle , once again I respect what he says and I appreciate the passion with which he has defended the peace process for a long time , but I believe that we must not be naive - which he is not , but many other are , in general : I believe that the Likud Party will continue to say what it has always said and we cannot expect it to change its position at the moment .
We cannot expect the Likud Party to applaud the immediate creation of a Palestinian State .
It is not going to do so .
However , it is very possible that , very shortly , that party 's position may not be the same as the one expressed by the Council the other day , as our experience over many years suggests .
Mr Menéndez del Valle , who knows the issue well , is well aware of the mark made by Mr Netanyahu when he was Prime Minister , which the previous President of the Government was unable to do .
We have therefore seen many changes of position - I will not mention opportunism - over the years and , in the Middle East , we have yet to see many more .
The important thing is that the ones we see should lead to a peaceful and just future .
I sincerely believe that the European Union is fulfilling its obligations .
We cannot solve the problem on our own , but nobody can solve it without us and that is where our strength , and the road we must take , lies .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Council reform .
Mr President , we are now dealing with a completely different issue and we will have to adapt our mental ' chips ' to the new topic .
I would very briefly like to talk to you about two issues .
The first relates to a report which I had the honour of producing at the request of the Council with a view to studying whether , before the end of the whole process of reforming the European Union - in particular institutional reforms - the Council could operate more efficiently , naturally within the existing legal framework and in accordance with what the Convention and , later on , the Intergovernmental Conference , may decide .
The proposals which have been presented and which are being analysed at the moment , so that some of them can be approved at the Seville European Council , are very simple and easy .
The first would involve a change in the operation of the European Council .
The Council , as you know , does not operate as it should , at least in my opinion .
The European Council was conceived as the motor for the European Union 's great political strategies and it should therefore have a speedier and simpler working mechanism which is more suited to that objective .
The European Council currently has far too packed an agenda , which the Heads of Government do not have time to prepare .
Those Heads of Government spend a very large amount of their time approving conclusions on a huge number of dossiers - sometimes more than 60 - which means a tremendous amount of writing , and the effort required to produce them does not correspond to the number of people who read them .
We therefore have to do everything we can to ensure that the European Council operates in a speedier and more rational way , just as the cabinets in the majority or all of the countries of the European Union operate , with well prepared agendas which focus on decision making in those Councils which require it .
This does not require great institutional changes : all it requires is the political will to achieve it .
We should also try - and this is my suggestion - to hold European Councils of at least three different types : a European Council intended to take well-prepared decisions , with a clear agenda in which decisions could be taken , in my opinion , also by a qualified majority in the future ; a second Council which would be of a more monographic nature , that is to say that the Heads of Government would concentrate on one part or element of Europe 's great political life and in which they do not only try to give instructions but also , if possible , offer practical solutions which could aid the functioning of the European Union ; and thirdly , European Councils of a more informal nature , in which the European Union leaders could sit around the fireplace - although it would be a huge table rather than a fireplace - and discuss issues which are of importance in terms of the present , the near future and the long-term future of the European Union .
I feel there is a lack of in-depth consideration of very important issues which perhaps relate more to the future than to current times .
Having said this about the European Council , I would now like to discuss its preparation .
This includes deciding what Council to prepare and what form it should take .
Until now , as you know , the tradition has been for the General Affairs Council , which is made up of Foreign Ministers of the various European Union countries , to be responsible for preparing it .
However , these Ministers have an increasingly busy and packed agenda , on issues which strictly relate to the European Union 's foreign and security policy .
If you see the agendas , you will realise that they are increasingly full and this raises the question of whether it is possible for the General Affairs Council , with its current structure and form , to devote sufficient time to horizontal issues which are ultimately issues dealt with by the European Council .
There are many formulae for solutions .
I am not going to point out any particular one : I suggested three or four which are now being discussed , but I do believe that in one way or another , we should opt either for separating the Councils or for dividing into separate sessions - which cannot be the same Council with different sessions - issues strictly relating to foreign and security policy , of which there are many , from those issues which relate to the preparation of the agenda of the European Council .
In the end , what happens is that those issues are not prepared thoroughly enough for the European Council to be the effective organ we all want to see .
Therefore , there may be two or three models for Councils : one in which there is a separation of the General Affairs Council with the essential role of preparing the European Council , which will imply an increasing amount of work ; another possibility is that the General Affairs Council could consist of general affairs in a stricter sense , where each government could send somebody to contribute more effectively to the preparation of the European Council , in accordance with the issues , and another formula which would mean that it devotes itself strictly to foreign and security policy issues .
The third issue raised in the report is an issue whose solution will fall to the Convention and ultimately to the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , I believe , Mr President , that it is an issue which we will have to start thinking about .
It is undoubtedly a difficult issue which changes certain fundamental elements of our European Union tradition , and that is the notion of the rotating six-month Presidency .
During my long political life , which is becoming too long , within the European Union , I have been a Minister in the Presidency of the European Union twice and now I see that Presidency from a different point of view .
I honestly believe that , as the number of countries increases and international life becomes more and more complicated , it is going to be more difficult to maintain the six-month rotating Presidency .
In the early days of the European Union , when we essentially dealt with internal problems exclusively affecting the countries of the European Union , we were able to do so with the six-monthly rotating system .
As the Union takes on many more responsibilities , which do not relate to us - to our countries - but also to third countries , I believe that speed , the maintenance of certain common positions and the tenacious defence of certain elements of our policy , make it difficult , unless we adapt the model for the Presidency , to achieve all the results which the honourable Members frequently say in Parliament can be achieved .
I know this is a very difficult issue and that there are countries for whom it is essential or very important to their conception of being a Member of the Union that they hold the six-month Presidency on a regular basis .
I understand this , but all countries should consider that when the day comes that we are twenty-something countries , they will have to wait a long time for the Presidency to come round again .
So perhaps the value of holding the six-month Presidency on a regular basis will be reduced when the interval between one Presidency and another becomes many years .
However , my comments on this issue are of a purely personal nature , because it is clearly something which the Convention will have to deal with , just like the other issues , and which ultimately the Intergovernmental Conference will have to decide on .
The fourth issue which I believe we should devote some time to - and that is why I put it in writing , so that it might be discussed - is the issue of the transparency of the Council in general , but , in particular , when it is acting as legislator .
I believe we must think about a way to involve public opinion more closely at times when the Council is acting as legislator ; this is another issue which must only be dealt with in the Convention and subsequently in the Intergovernmental Conference , but I do think it is important for us to start creating a certain environment or culture in which , sooner or later , and the sooner the better , this type of consideration takes place throughout the collective life of the European Union .
But to return to the two fundamental issues , which do not require either the Convention , in principle , nor the Intergovernmental Conference , but simply political will , the will to get things done , I believe that achieving a more effective preparation and management of the European Council , ensuring that it focuses more on the fundamental issues , that it carry out more rigorous analysis , with more solid , serious and effective preparation , is something which can be done without waiting for tomorrow .
If there were currently the political will , it could be implemented today , because there is nothing to prevent it - the Treaties do not prevent it - and it would in no way alter the fundamental operation of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , this is the kind of work we are immersed in at the moment .
As I have said , in Barcelona I presented an initial brief report indicating these kinds of issues almost in note form .
Today , the Presidency - together with the team of the Secretariat - is making contact with the different capitals to see whether there is any possibility , between now and the end of June , when the Seville European Council takes place , of reaching a consensus on some of these issues which strictly require the political will of the fifteen leaders , and the Commission , to sit around the table .
This is very briefly what we are working on at the moment , ladies and gentlemen .
There are many other things to do in relation to the reform of the Council , which will no doubt be on the agenda of the Convention and the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference .
We will have time to discuss them and , if possible , to reach agreements that favour a more efficient institution which can deal with issues in a more rational and effective manner in a Europe which , fortunately , is new , because the world is new ; a better Europe because the world is better .
Mr President , Secretary-General of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , all the opinion polls on Europe which we have been analysing show that , in the eyes of our citizens , our institutions are very complex , in fact too complex , that they are not transparent , and that they are too far away .
I myself believe that this complexity , or at least part of it , should be assumed and explained by each of our institutions , because this complex aspect is the price we have to pay in order to have a Europe which is united without being , at the same time , uniform .
That does not mean , however , that as far as the remaining - not inconsiderable - amount of complexity is concerned there is no room for improvement , or no need for changes to be made , particularly at a time when we are getting ready to face numerous threats to the operation of the European Union , with 30 countries ( initially 25 ) sitting around the table instead of 15 .
We are well aware , as Javier Solana has said , that the essential reforms will require amendments to the Treaties .
There have already been some amendments , but they were , to say the very least , far from being enough .
This means that if we are to succeed this time we must first of all discuss the tasks of the Union , and that is what we are doing in the context of the Convention .
That is the Convention 's work on the future of the Union .
However , other reforms can be carried out now within the present legal framework , simply , if there is a willingness to do so , by changing habits or practices .
As far as the European Commission is concerned , on whose behalf I am speaking , at President Prodi 's instigation we have begun a series of internal reforms .
We have launched quite a broad programme of administrative reforms involving the working methods of all our departments .
As for the Council , it has been carrying out its own reflections , initially on the basis of a report whose recommendations , made in 1999 , have not yet been followed up .
It seems to me that the great strength of Javier Solana 's report is that it relaunches the debate in very specific terms , even in a somewhat pedagogical manner , and , as he himself has said , that it provides - already in Barcelona and shortly in Seville - a basis for creating political willingness among the Heads of State and Government .
These basic documents remind us of the need for more structured planning of the Union 's initiatives at the level of the Presidency , and confirm the need for better horizontal coordination of the various formations of the Council .
They envisage a European Council which is centred on its role of providing political impetus and , finally , they recognise the need for greater transparency in the legislative process .
For the Commission , this debate is a very important one , and Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , is making an extremely constructive and substantial contribution to it , thanks to the work of your rapporteurs , Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Poos .
On behalf of the Commission , I should simply like to assure you of our support for the four aspects of the reflections being undertaken regarding the reform of the Council .
Regarding the first aspect , we say yes to the idea of introducing , as soon as possible and wherever possible , improvements to the way in which the Council works .
The Commission supports the Council 's intention of implementing , in the near future , every possible initiative which does not require an amendment to the Treaties , while leaving it to the Convention to draw up more global and definitive proposals for the future institutional system of the European Union .
On the second aspect , we say yes to the principles of consistency , efficacy and transparency on which the Solana report wants the reform of the Council to be based .
As the Commission has already had occasion to emphasise in the White Paper on governance , each of our institutions must , of course , concentrate on its essential tasks .
However , the reform of the Council is not only necessary for the Council itself : it is also necessary for the other institutions and for the Union itself .
As for making sure that the Council goes back to concentrating on its essential functions , I would just note in passing that the conclusions of the European Council in Barcelona , the Commission 's proposals and those expressed by Parliament in its various resolutions , including those that you will be adopting at the end of this debate , are all in line with one another .
For example , the Council should be organised differently when it is creating legislation , with open debates and public votes .
On the subject of a possible legislative Council , I have nothing to add to what I told you when we were examining the Poos report last October .
Thirdly , on behalf of the Commission I shall say yes to what I would call the rediscovery of the Community method , because this is the only method that gives us a chance of resolving certain difficulties immediately .
For example , one of the objectively important and delicate questions concerning the way the Council works is the question of the rotation of the presidency , a question which Javier Solana spoke about just now .
We have two options : one option which , in order to stabilise the presidency , assumes that the Treaties will have to be amended , and another option which would not require any such amendment .
In the case of the second option , I would point out that continuity in the Council 's work and consistency in the planning of successive presidencies can be achieved by the traditional route : the Commission proposes , and the European Parliament and the Council deliberate .
The annual policy strategy submitted by the Commission will thus make it possible , this year , for the first time , for Council and Parliament to enter into a real and stable dialogue on the policy priorities and the working programme for next year .
We also support the idea , without amending the Treaties , of creating a Council responsible for horizontal questions .
We support this idea , which would lead to such a body having assigned to it the original mission of the General Affairs Council , in other words the coordination of the Council 's specialised bodies and in particular the preparations for the European Council .
Let us rely on Coreper , which should once again become the traditional route by which the Council 's meetings are prepared .
Finally , and following Mr Solana 's example , I shall close by saying that we also say yes to more transparency .
This is now obligatory , following Regulation No 1049 / 2001 and the measures which Parliament , the Council and the Commission have already taken and will be taking shortly with regard to the question of access to preparatory texts .
This will make the Community legislative process easier to understand .
However , a number of documents are already accessible .
Above all it is a question of helping members of the public to find more easily the information that they are seeking .
There will soon be a joint brochure issued by the three institutions , which should help them to do just that .
Above all , we shall achieve even greater transparency by giving maximum publicity to the deliberations of the Council , particularly when it is engaged in the legislative process .

That is the spirit in which we welcome Mr Solana 's report , together with the innovative and practical proposals that it contains and , of course , as Mr Solana has said on several occasions himself , knowing that a large part of the progress , the reforms and the improvements will depend on the existence of an immediate political willingness on the part of the European Council and , a little later , on the existence of a political willingness within the Convention , and then within the future Inter-Governmental Conference , when we shall have to discuss more fundamental and more substantial reforms .
Mr President , Mr Secretary-General , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first a warm word of thanks to Secretary-General Solana - and of course to the Commissioner - but especially to the Secretary-General , because we generally agree on most points with the Commissioner anyway ; a word of thanks for having kick-started the reform process in the Council .
Secretary-General Solana , I should also like to offer you a heartfelt word of recognition for the almost superhuman work which you carry out around the world as our High Representative - with particular commitment in the Middle East - and as Secretary-General .
It is only because you are such an extraordinary person that you can do this .
I do not want to start an institutional debate on your office right now , but I cannot even begin to imagine that there is anyone else out there who could bear the double burden you have to bear and shoulder it so brilliantly .
I should like to offer you my warmest thanks for having tabled these proposals .
As Commissioner Barnier said , we have a joint duty to reform our institutions , in this case the Council .
The first thing we need to do here is to make a distinction between the General Affairs Council , the Council as legislator - which is , in fact , the most important Council - followed perhaps by the Council that prepares the meetings of the European Council and then of course the Foreign Affairs Council for foreign policy matters .
We know - by name - who arrives late at the Foreign Affairs Council , leaves early and , in between , sits looking rather bored while the Council legislates , which is why we feel we need a European Affairs Council for European legislation and a separate Council for foreign policy in general .
This European Affairs Council would always be present at legislative work and could also prepare the meetings of the European Council , the most important task of which is , of course , to legislate .
The European Affairs Council would , of course , be responsible for appointing the representative to the Council / European Parliament conciliation committee when legislation is on the agenda .
We know that at the moment officials - nothing against officials , it is just that they are not politicians - often attend as Council representatives and then consult with the European Parliament on the issues in question .
But we need politicians who have the courage to bring about results with Parliament and we expressly support radical reform in this direction .
We would also be doing the legislative process a service if the Council of Ministers or , perhaps , the Europe minister representing the presidency also attended Parliament when legislation is on the agenda or even that one or more representatives of the European Parliament - i.e. MEPs - attended the European Affairs Council when it is acting as legislator , so that the Council can ask the European Parliament for its views .
There is still a great deal that needs to be debated here . What I should like to ask you to do , Secretary-General , is to discuss the matter again with the relevant committee - its chairman is right here - while you are preparing your paper and before you send your final report to Seville .
If , understandably , you cannot do so personally , your representative could consult with the relevant committee .
You rightly addressed the question of transparency , which is a matter of particular concern to Mrs Hanja Maij-Weggen who , with Mr Poos , drafted the resolution to which our group still has a number of proposed amendments .
Mrs Maij-Weggen is not here today because she left for the Netherlands after today 's vote in order to take part in the elections , the outcome of which we are all waiting for with bated breath .
We want maximum possible transparency , which is why the Council , when it holds legislative meetings , should meet in public once the reform process is completed .
The media - including the television - should report on the Council , so that we know exactly how each individual government voted at the end .
Please , Secretary-General , once it has finished with the regulation on transparency , let us instruct the interinstitutional working group to draw up guidelines for greater transparency which ensure that we get through to our citizens .
Your proposals , what the Commission has said and our contributions basically go in the right direction .
If we carry on working with commitment , we shall together achieve a good result for our institutions ; and not just for our institutions , but for the European Union as a whole and for the citizens of Europe , and I wish both you and us success in our endeavour .
( Applause )
Mr President , Secretary-General , in its resolution of 22 October 2001 on the reform of the Council , the European Parliament expressed the opinion that the proper operation of the Council is essential in order to guarantee the democracy , efficacy and coherence of the decision-making process in the enlarged Union .
That resolution also condemned the present institutional drift away from the Community method , as well as numerous instances of the malfunctioning of working methods and of the way in which the Council operates .
The European Council in Barcelona last March finally tackled this recurring problem , though not without deciding , yet again , to postpone it to the European Council in Seville which is planned for June 2002 .
Nevertheless , we should welcome the fact that , in the meantime , the Blair-Schröder letter and the report by Mr Solana entitled ' Preparing the Council for Enlargement ' have defined those questions which will require an answer before the next reform of the Treaty .
The proposal to lighten the agenda and to get the European Council to concentrate once more on its role of providing guidance and impetus , as laid down in the Treaty , is an initial step in the right direction , and I should like to thank the Secretary-General for having emphasised this important point in his speech .
The restoration of the importance of the General Affairs Council and a radical reform of the way in which it operates are obviously the essential corollaries to a reform of the European Council .
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and / or European Affairs , of which it is composed , should work more and better .
In other words they should meet more often and subject themselves to greater discipline .
Instead of being interested solely in the CFSP , they should pay more attention to horizontal issues and should once again become the principal decision-making body and the principal body preparing for the European Council .
If the General Affairs Council - and I am delighted that the President of the Council is with us today , so that he can pass on the message to his colleagues - as I was saying , if the General Affairs Council does not pull itself together , it will sink into oblivion .
It will be the Heads of State and Government who will take over everything , who will deal with everything , via their secretaries of state or other delegated ministers , and who will , in short , bypass the Community preparation process , including Coreper .
If this happens , make no mistake , the intergovernmental method will have triumphed and we can kiss the Community mechanism goodbye .
That Community mechanism requires the Commission to propose and the European Parliament and the Council to dispose , all in the greatest possible transparency .
In the draft resolution that we have in front of us , the two rapporteurs remind us of the principles which , according to the European Parliament , ought to inspire the reform of the Council , and they emphasise the fact that there is now an urgent need for action .
Mr President , I thank Mr Solana for his extremely interesting statement .
But reading between the lines , as one should , it is fairly clear that not much progress is being made to reform the Council .
Perhaps it is quite unrealistic to think that there could be progress before the problems are dramatised with the presence of 25 or so ministers at the table .
But , frankly , I find it extraordinary that Mr Solana and Mr Blair and several others can float the idea of creating an executive committee formed out of the Council presidency without referring to the role of the European Commission .
It would be best to be blunt here .
The imposition of a board of directors of the Council would steal the Commission 's right of initiative and destroy its critical role in identifying and expressing the common interests of all the Member States .
It is only the Commission that can ensure the equality of all the states .
As to the question of the presidency , no debate could be complete without considering whether it would be the proper thing , in the end , to let the Commission chair the ordinary meetings of the Council , while letting Mr Solana chair the Foreign Affairs Council , preserving the routine six-month circus for the European Council itself .
That might be the most appropriate approach to ensuring tight coordination and continuity within the Council .
Finally , we should refer to the Byzantine tangle of comitology .
The efficiency of the Union will be greatly improved as soon as the Commission is granted sufficient executive authority to act without the constant interference of the Council .
So reform has much further to travel before the Convention will be satisfied that we have grappled satisfactorily with all the important questions .
Mr President , Secretary-General of the Council , the Council is without doubt the institution most in need of reform .
There is much that is no longer acceptable , be it the complicated structures and sub-structures which have got completely out of hand or the lack of coordination of Council work by the General Affairs Council .
Blurred structures , overly complicated decision-making processes and , above all , a lack of transparency and openness are the reasons why much is beyond our citizens ' comprehension , when they even know about it , that is .
Ask anyone you like to tell you the difference between the European Council and the Council of Europe .
We know that European regulations cannot be passed unless the governments agree in the Council of Ministers , but still one of their favourite games is to tell the public that " Brussels " is to blame or to attack the Commission simply because it goes down well with the voters at home .
Unfortunately , my government has gained a rather dubious reputation here recently , which is why we need really radical reforms , reforms which stop ministers from hiding from their responsibility for European decisions behind " Brussels " .
So how should we proceed ?
We need clear regulations so that national parliaments can exert a democratic influence on , and democratic control of , what their governments do in Europe .
Secondly , we need a Council that meets in public when it is legislating , with television cameras to relay debates and votes and allow the public to follow the decision-making process .
And thirdly - and I agree with Mr Poettering here - we need to create a European Affairs Council which takes account of the progressive drive towards European integration , because European policy is no longer foreign policy in the traditional sense , it is actually European domestic policy .
Mr President , I would also like to start by thanking Mr Javier Solana , the Secretary-General of the Council , for attending this debate and by congratulating him on the document he presented in March and which was the subject of a preliminary debate in Barcelona .
I find it difficult to understand the criticisms made by some Members given that this document is largely in line with this Parliament 's own views .
Nor can I subscribe to the critical comments that I have seen in certain diplomatic circles to the effect that the document produced by the Secretary-General of the Council does not contain many new ideas , but is a collection of ideas that have already been discussed for a long time in the Council .
As I see it , this is not anything negative , it is in fact positive , especially if the decisions to be taken in Seville are to be effective and vigorous and cover ground that has been an issue for a long time . However , the Heads of State and Government have hesitated to take such decisions or have even resisted taking them .
There are sometimes areas in politics on which we all agree , and there are other areas on which we all differ . The issues of building Europe and institutional reform do not fall into either of those categories .
We neither agree on everything nor differ on everything .
These are issues on which we partly agree . I would also like to make another point : sometimes we agree on objectives but not on the means of achieving them ; at other times we agree on the means but not the objectives .
We wish to clearly distance ourselves from the motion for a resolution presented by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs in that it suggests that the proposed reform should favour the Community method or the intergovernmental method .
We do not believe this is the path we should be going down . But we agree with the concrete steps proposed , especially regarding what must be achieved in the short term and as regards the so-called transparency of the functioning of the Council in its legislative capacity .
I even believe that it would be helpful for us to give this transparency another name , because the transparency we are talking about here is not the same thing as transparency in access to documents .
Publicising the workings of the Council in its legislative capacity or open meetings are in fact important ways of achieving reform in working in this area and a way of tackling the heart of the democratic deficit of the European Union .
I am associated with sectors that are calling for greater involvement of national parliaments in the building of Europe . And I even believe that this can only happen when the Council opens its doors during legislative debates .
Our colleagues in the national parliaments will relate and react differently to EU legislative work done at Council level if they can directly follow what our governments , the governments of every Member State , are discussing and the positions that they are adopting within the Council .
So there is a serious contradiction in this secretive approach , a fundamental contradiction between the democratic basis of the Council and the undemocratic way in which the Council works .
We believe that this needs to be put right , and that is not because we want to weaken the intergovernmental axis of the European Union ; just the opposite in fact . We want to protect that axis and strengthen it , but we want to give it more visibility and make it more democratic and participatory .
I would like to see reform heading in this direction and to leave other subjects until later , in particular the more sensitive issue of the presidency of the European Union .
We are not willing to contemplate any departure from the principle of the rotating presidency .
Mr President , the proposals named by Mr Solana today have scarcely all been prepared by him .
Dispensing with the rotation system resembles successive French Presidents ' attempts to make their mark on the EU through what was termed a ' directorium ' .
Is it the Deputy Secretary-General of the Council , Mr de Boissieu , who is behind this ?
The rotation of the presidencies is the most democratic thing about the EU .
It means that everyone is equal .
Luxembourg can chair the meetings in the same way as France .
Lilliputian Luxembourg has in actual fact had some of the best presidencies .
President Chirac of France 's Treaty of Nice does not do credit to France , and it would scarcely get past the French electorate in the event of a referendum .
The majority of Frenchmen are , in general , more intelligent than France .
Mr Aznar , the Spanish President-in-Office of the Council , has specifically used his presidency of the European Council to instruct the President of the Commission to postpone the reform of the common fisheries policy and sack the Commission 's Director-General for Fisheries .
On Friday , Mr Smidt was Director-General and was not on the rotations list .
On Sunday , a trick was played in the course of a telephone conversation .
On Monday he was sacked , and the Commission lied directly about the reason .
The events are the biggest scandal I have experienced in my 23 years in this House .
It requires an independent inquiry , which the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has quite correctly requested .
For now , it must simply be concluded that coming from a large country is not in itself any guarantee of a good presidency .
Let us bear in mind the similarities between the countries and share the tasks .
We must not have group presidencies involving the large countries , in which the small countries are allocated the least interesting tasks .
It would be wiser to reduce the number of Councils of Ministers and working parties and focus on the transnational tasks we cannot carry out as effectively in our own countries .
It would be wiser to limit and consolidate EU legislation so that it becomes more manageable .
It would make more sense to introduce full transparency in the Council of Ministers when the Council acts as legislator . In that way , we should all be able to see when officials legislate instead of the elected representatives who have legislative power under the constitutions of all 15 EU countries .
In that way , we could have openness , democracy and proximity to the people instead of secrecy , a lobbying culture and government at a distance .
Mr President , the European federalists are not very happy with the report on the operation of the Council prepared by its Secretary-General , Mr Solana .
That report says , and I quote , ' The European Council is the Union 's supreme political authority .
It possesses a legitimate power of decision . It represents the unity between the Union , on the one hand , and its Member States , on the other , in its closest form ? .
Yet this statement is perfectly true , and it could also apply to the various Councils , in particular as regards the essential , or even vital , link which it establishes with Member States .
I will go even further by saying that , with the prospect of an enlarged Europe , which will of necessity be a flexible Europe , the Council will naturally play a pivotal role , because it can be easily adapted to fit the variable geometry , whereas the Commission is a more rigid institution , as is the European Parliament , at least in its current form .
Therefore future reforms will have to take into account the Council 's central position in order to improve its efficiency , its visibility and its transparency .
The reforms proposed by Mr Solana seem to us to be along the right lines , subject to certain reservations , which I shall refer to in my explanation of vote .
Mr President , all the institutions face a major challenge with enlargement bringing in more members to each institution , but none more so than the Council .
The Commission and Parliament are better placed to deal with these difficulties , but meetings of ministers flying in for a short time to Brussels , when it takes half a morning just to have a tour de table - really provide the Council with a challenge .
Much of that will require treaty amendments .
That is a matter for the Convention .
In the immediate future , in Seville , the Council will be facing changes that can be made within the framework of the existing Treaties .
I too welcome the identification in Mr Solana 's report and elsewhere of the changes that could be made .
It is right that we should try and get the European Council to focus on strategy and on the key strategic issues and no longer be a court of appeal when the ordinary Council is deadlocked .
That is of fundamental importance .
In addition , where subjects which , in the ordinary Council , would be taken by a qualified majority , go to the European Council , they should similarly be dealt with by a qualified majority in the European Council .
That is also well and good .
It would also be a good idea to split the General Affairs Council from the Foreign Affairs Council .
Some Member States will want to send the same minister to each for various internal reasons .
Others will not .
That is up to each Member State , but the functions should be separated so that they are both done well instead of badly .
Other changes can be made without amending the Treaties .
Meeting in public when the Council acts in its legislative capacity is one of them .
Yes , we have made progress in terms of access to documents and publishing the results of votes in the Council .
That was an important step forward , but we must go that step further and actually meet in public .
Finally , members of the Council should establish a better rapport with members of their national parliaments .
The protocol set a six-week period for them to do this for any item of legislation . They should do this properly .
That is the way to involve national parliaments , not by creating some new institution which would duplicate the Council , some sort of third chamber .
Get the ministers to do their jobs properly and it will be done well without needing new structures .
Mr President , Secretary-General , Commissioner , well done to the Council for thinking about its own reform .
There is , in fact , a great deal we can do without treaty amendments and it is indeed important for us to think about efficiency and transparency as we do so .
I think that splitting the Foreign Affairs Council from the General Affairs Council is , as Mr Corbett has just said , the right starting point on the administrative side .
On the legislative side , we really do need public meetings . Public meetings in the sense that the Council as a whole is publicly accountable , so that our citizens know who is responsible for what and so that the public interaction between the legislators , between Parliament and the Council , can take place in public , so that our citizens can understand who is responsible for what in Europe .
I think that this also has a positive side effect and will bring about a degree of improvement in that the individual specialist Councils would then become committees of the legislative Council rather than legislative bodies in their own right , with the negative , unbalanced results which that might bring .
But what is also of paramount importance , I think , is that we make sure in our declarations in the run up to Seville that these endeavours , which are right and proper , do not end up stealing the Convention 's thunder and we make sure that the control functions tally and that Parliament 's codecision function is not undermined .
What we want to avoid , when decision-making procedures are dealt out , is a situation in which the European Council becomes the supreme legislator in the European Union with no codecision ties to the European Parliament - a situation in which only the Council can legislate .
I warn you , if that is what is being attempted , we should write down anything and everything which might weaken Parliament and the Commission and reduce the potential for control before the Convention reaches any conclusions , because otherwise the good image of Seville may be in serious jeopardy .
Be careful not to entertain notions such as these , notions which I sometimes hear coming out of Berlin and London .
Mr President , openness will be one of the most important yardsticks for citizens in assessing the results of the EU 's efforts concerning future reform .
The EU institutions must show citizens that they are prepared to live up to their expectations .
In European Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents , we have a specific set of rules whose Article 4 addresses the need for secrecy .
This must not be sidelined through the institutions ' internal rules and classification .
The Inter-institutional Committee has an important brief and it must push ahead and implement existing legislation in a spirit of greater openness .
Hopefully , the Spanish Presidency will manage to push through proposals in Seville that will comply with expectations .
Spain has a big responsibility in terms of openness .
Spain could take the initiative in helping to foster a more positive attitude in those who still harbour doubts about openness .
Particularly in view of Spain 's earlier reticence , it is now important to demonstrate a more positive approach to openness .
The fact that the Council of Ministers is to meet openly when discussing legislation is a step in the right direction .
To this I would like to add a wish list for Seville .
All the documents - - including those from Council working groups - - that are subject to the co-decision procedure and the first pillar , must be available .
This would be the logical follow-up to your earlier comments .
Subsequently , we should also be provided with information on national positions .
Finally , we also need reasonable democratic control of documents covered by the second and third pillars .
The pillar structure is , at the end of the day , a totally useless construction for establishing openness .
Mr President , Mr Secretary-General , Commissioner , there are gestures which deserve our applause in their own right .
That applies to the plans for reform of the Council .
Some of the subjects that the Secretary-General referred to , which are highly complex politically speaking , need a revision of the Treaties .
For this reason it would be very helpful if the Council could present these proposals to the Convention on the future of Europe in time for them to be discussed and incorporated , if that is agreed , into the outcome its work , which is to be presented to the Intergovernmental Conference next year .
However , I think we all agree that many , indeed the majority perhaps , of the reforms needed for the Council to function well do not fall into this category .
There is essentially a consensus that the day-to-day working of one of the most important institutions of the European Union has drifted away from the model set out in the Treaties .
In practice , this " intergovernmental drift " has not only deprived the Commission and the European Parliament of some of their powers under the Treaties , but has also deprived our national parliaments of means of effectively scrutinising their own governments .
For this reason , I agree with Mr Poos , the co-rapporteur of the report presented to Parliament on the reform of the Council , when he says that people expect the European Council to have an open and forward-looking political vision , and strategic options and guidelines , rather than responsibility for coordination or taking decisions which should be made by the General Affairs Council .
It is also crucial to recognise that as a co-legislator the Council should not hold its discussions behind closed doors and that it should be open in exercising its political responsibilities .
It is important that it should be possible to identify who does or does not make decisions at European level .
For many of our citizens , Brussels is distant and needs to be given a human face .
The Council bears a great responsibility for this failure to bring the Community institutions closer to the public , making its mission very important .
I wish them good luck !
I will say very briefly that in the 16 speeches I have counted , issues of all types have been raised .
I can see that the Convention will have an enormous job to do in order to agree on all of them .
As for myself , what I wanted to present to you was a much smaller and more modest idea , which can be carried out immediately with just political will and which could have positive results in terms of the good functioning of the European Union .
The majority of suggestions made go much further than what I wanted to discuss with you and are not within my remit , but will fall to the Convention and subsequently the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , I would like to say that I have learnt a lot and if the 620 MEPs had been here I would have learnt a lot more .
I am sure we would and I hope we would .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0017 / 2002 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Question No 1 by Bart Staes ( H-0265 / 02 ) :
Subject : More beneficial use of unspent budget appropriations
The Court of Auditors ' annual report on the 2000 financial year revealed that more than EUR 11 billion in European budget appropriations had remained unspent .
Commissioner Schreyer confirmed at a recent meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control of the European Parliament that the budget surplus for 2001 was approximately EUR 10 billion .
Under the existing financial rules , these unspent funds are returned to the Member States .
Yet the European Union is in need of large sums of money , inter alia to help cope with the impact of enlargement .
The Council and Parliament together comprise the budgetary authority .
What view does the Council take of the idea of amending the financial rules so that in future unspent funds would no longer be returned to the Member States but be paid into a fund which could be used to finance measures , for example , connected with enlargement or to fight poverty ?
Mr President , since last time I was accused of filibustering by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , who told me that I was wasting time with my answers , I am going to start to answer as quickly as possible , but I would like it to be recorded in the Minutes that I am beginning exactly seven minutes late .
I do not therefore want to be accused of that type of thing again .
In response to the question from Mr Staes , I would like to say that the Council is aware that the implementation balance of the last two budgetary years reached a very considerable volume .
I would point out to the honourable Member that , in the Council recommendation on the discharge of the 2000 budget , the Commission is asked , with the cooperation of the Member States , to be more accurate in its budgetary forecasts , both in relation to sources of funding and in terms of expenditure , with a view to preventing excessive surpluses in the future .
If necessary , and as suggested by the Court of Auditors in its annual report , the Commission should make modifications , in order to take account of the different developments , by applying the existing budgetary instruments .
The Council believes that , within the framework of the legislation in force , we should insist on the need to improve budgetary estimates so that this situation does not arise to this extent again in the future .
On the other hand , with regard to the suggestions of the honourable Member , the Council would like to point out that it cannot go ahead with such a revision without a previous proposal from the Commission .
In its latest proposal to reshape the Financial Regulation which is currently being debated in the Council , it has simply insisted on the principle in accordance with which the balance for each financial year will be allocated in the budget of the following year , as income or as expenditure , whether there is a surplus or a deficit ( in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of Article 32 of the Financial Regulation of 21 December 1977 , which is now being reviewed ) and this must be done by means of an amending budget .
Consequently , and in accordance with what I have just said , the Council is still seeking a way to maintain the payment appropriations allocated in the budget .
I am delighted with your response .
We had a minor dispute about Chechnya yesterday , but I am satisfied now .
Things can change , as you can see .
Mr de Miguel , I completely share your view that a better description must be produced and that the budget must be planned more effectively .
All of this must be done .
However , if there happens to be a budget surplus , if there has been underspending , if you establish that this amount was 10 billion last year , and 11 billion the year before that , and maybe a few billion this year , then would it not be a good idea to put this money in a fund of some kind ?
This fund should also be used , really used , for emergencies which we know are heading our way .
Enlargement is going to be far more expensive than currently envisaged .
Let us put the money in a fund so that it cannot return to the Member States , for in the final analysis , we agreed in the ping-pong game between the Council and Parliament , the two budgetary authorities , that a certain amount will be spent in a certain year , and that we actually spend this money on Europe and not let it make its way back to the Member States .
I could not agree with you more .
It is a shame that the budget is not spent and the money has to be returned at the end of the year .
Naturally , it does not fall to me to decide this ; there would have to be a provision in the Financial Regulation which , as you know , would have to be approved unanimously by the Member States .
It would therefore be highly desirable for a provision of this type to be introduced and approved in the new Financial Regulation , which is about to be adopted .
With regard to Chechnya , I regret that there has been a misunderstanding .
I reacted like that simply because I believe we have been insisting on the issue of Chechnya with true dedication , in accordance with the views of the European Parliament .
I did not mention it in my speech , but not because I had forgotten it , since we always have it very much on our minds .
Question No 2 by Glyn Ford , which has been taken over by Andrew Nicholas Duff ( H-0267 / 02 ) :
Subject : North East Asian Development Bank
Does the Council support the establishment of such a bank in order to provide desperately-needed infrastructure investment in the region ?
The Council has not received any requests to support the establishment of the North East Asian Development Bank and furthermore has no knowledge of such a proposal .
Question No 3 by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0268 / 02 ) :
Subject : Request from the Basque Parliament to the Council for measures to promote dialogue in the Basque country
On 1 March 2002 , the Basque Parliament adopted a ' non-legislative proposal ' drawing attention to the various positions adopted within the European institutions on internal political conflicts in the EU , such as the European Parliament 's Reding report of November 1996 and Watson report of November 2001 .
Finally , it called on all political forces , without prejudice to the need to take measures against all crimes committed by those who use violence for political ends , to support the following resolution :
' The Basque Parliament expresses its firm belief that political dialogue is necessary to resolve conflicts .
This Parliament also calls on the Council , the Commission and the Presidency of the European Parliament , on the bases outlined above and in line with the different positions expressed by various distinguished political representatives , to persuade the European Union to use its political resources to promote measures to encourage dialogue and détente in the Basque country ' .
In the light of the above , what measures will the Council take to encourage a dialogue process capable of resolving the long-standing conflict in the Basque country , bearing in mind in particular that , because the region is situated between France and Spain , this is an internal European question ?
Mr President , the Council has never debated the question posed by Mr Ortuondo Larrea as it is not within the scope of the powers conferred on the Council by the Treaty .
I would like to remind Mr Ortuondo Larrea that our system is governed by a Treaty that confers powers on the various institutions and that the Council only handles matters specifically attributed to it by the Treaties , and that the subject of his question is not in the Treaties .
Mr President , I would like to quote a few words by Arturo Campión to the President-in-Office of the Council . Arturo Campión , a great Navarran thinker , used to say that there are French Basques who are not Spanish , but who are Basque , and Spanish Basques who are not French , but who are Basque : both are Basques and Europeans .
How can we say that a Basque problem is not a European problem ?
Mr President , in view of Mr Ortuondo Larrea 's question and what he has just said , I would like to begin my speech with a basic geography lesson .
The Basque Country is not between France and Spain . It is not Andorra .
The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country is in the Spanish state , and , naturally , the French Basque Country , as the name itself suggests , is in the French state , and is part of the French state .
Let us , however , move on to the supplementary question .
Does the President not think that if Basque President Ibarretxe , who is of course the main representative of the Spanish state in the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country , according to the Organic Law of the Statute of Autonomy , were to devote all his efforts and those of his government to going after and arresting terrorists , and isolating their accomplices , and had he come here , to Parliament and the Institutions , to ask us for help in putting a stop to ETA , the terrorists would already have lost hope ?
Does the President not believe that the problem in Basque politics is not only lack of freedom due to terrorism , but also the existence of a democratic government that undermines the democratic institutions it democratically employs , and creates conflict , and I repeat , creates conflict between the Kingdom of Spain and the French Republic ?
Mr President , I am not answering as President-in-Office of the Council , but as a representative of the Spanish Government : I can do nothing but agree entirely with the opinion expressed by Mrs Díez González .
Mr President , I would like to know whether perhaps the question I put to the President-in-Office of the Council does not deserve a reply , as I have not heard his reply .
Mrs Díez González , who appears to be the representative of the Spanish Government here , has replied to me .
I have a lot to say to her , but this speech is addressed to the President-in-Office of the Council , rather than to her .
Mrs Díez González wishes to raise another point of order .
I would ask you not to raise any more , as there is a second supplementary question .
I must say at the outset that I yield to no one in my condemnation of terrorism and terrorist acts , and this issue affects not just Spain but all countries in the European Union .
Mr Aznar spoke recently about the need for dialogue between the Palestinians and the Israeli government in the Middle East peace process .
Could the President-in-Office - in either his capacity as representative of the presidency or as representative of the Spanish government - give an example of any previous situation in world history where a policy of non-dialogue with people who are carrying out terrorist attacks in a country such as Spain has ever resolved the situation .
There are many people in this Parliament and in Europe who believe that at some stage it will be essential for Spain - however regrettable , however much it dislikes the idea - to enter into a dialogue .
If that is not the case , could he give me an example of some situation where non-dialogue has worked ?
I have already said that I am here as President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers of the European Union and I repeat that the Council of Ministers has never discussed the subject brought up by Mr Ortuondo Larrea and by the last speaker , and that this subject is outside the scope of the powers attributed to the Council by the Treaty .
As President-in-Office of the Council , therefore , I have nothing to say , and as representative of the Spanish Government , I answer to my own Parliament , not the European Parliament .
Naturally , as President for this sitting , I must not enter into the debate , but chair it . For information purposes , however , I must tell you that Annex 2 , which concerns the procedure for Question Time laid down in Rule 43 , clearly states that questions shall be admissible provided that they do not contain assertions or opinions .
There are questions that contain very important assertions or opinions , which are not always in agreement with the Constitution of the Member States .
I must tell you that this question was considered admissible in the context of support for freedom of speech , according to the French translation . The Spanish translation was not taken into account .
A similar question submitted in future , however , would not be declared admissible .
I have already said , moreover , that as President for the sitting , I am simply clarifying the Rules of Procedure for you insofar as they are relevant to the nature of the question .
Mr President , I do believe that you are now giving a very one-sided interpretation of the Rules of Procedure .
I have not been an MEP for very long , but I have been around long enough to know that we definitely used to discuss past problems within Member States .
The Northern Irish issue springs to mind .
A whole series of reports have been written on that subject , and it is therefore not unknown for this House to discuss Member States ' internal problems where the fight against terrorism is concerned .
I fully subscribe to the question from the English fellow MEP from the socialist group .
Only a dialogue - involving terrorists if necessary - can secure sustainable peace .
Mr Staes , I am not going to enter into a debate .
I was commenting on the Rules of Procedure and the assertions made in the question .
It is inadmissible to make important assertions that are contrary to the current state of affairs in Europe .
I was not entering into any debate .
I do not agree with you , the debate has taken place with the utmost respect for freedom of speech , and all I have done is comment on the Rules of Procedure .
Question No 4 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0272 / 02 ) :
Subject : Influx of immigrants from the Third World
Every time there is a mass influx of immigrants across the EU borders , we see a revival of the public debate on the need for joint action by the fifteen Member States .
Despite the fact that the need for a common European asylum and immigration policy is generally recognised , the issue is addressed in a fragmentary manner with long delays .
Given the inadequate means available for tackling this problem ( the European Refugee Fund with a very small budget for 2001-2004 and the proposal for a Council directive laying down the minimum standards on the reception of applicants for asylum in the Member States ( COM ( 2001 ) 0181 / final
The conclusions of the Tampere European Council of 15 and 16 October 1999 , the objective of which was to apply the provisions of Title IV of the Treaty , aimed at the gradual creation of an area of freedom , security and justice , stated the need to establish a common policy on asylum and immigration .
The conclusions also indicated the four elements on which the said policy should be based : partnership with countries of origin ; a common European asylum system ; management of migration flows ; and fair treatment of third-country nationals .
In November 2000 , in line with the Tampere conclusions , the Commission adopted two communications , one on a common immigration policy and the other on a common asylum policy . These communications laid down guidelines which the Commission believes should be used as a basis for defining a common strategy in the medium and long term and creating a common framework .
The conclusions of the European Council Meeting in Laeken of 14 and 15 December 2001 highlighted the need , consistent with the establishment and application of a common policy on asylum and immigration , cited in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council , to push through the proposals debated in the Council and consider the adoption of other actions and measures as soon as possible .
In this respect , the bodies of the Council are currently examining various legislative proposals .
With regard to the area of legal immigration , the debates concern very important and sensitive matters , such as regrouping families of third-country nationals and the situation of third-country nationals who have been resident in a Member State for years and the requirements to be met by third-country nationals in order to be allowed to enter the Member States and be able to exercise an economic activity in these States .
In the case of asylum , even though debates on the subject are under way with regard to certain proposals for directives , the Council , on 25 and 26 April , was able to establish general guidelines on the highly important directive laying down the minimum standards on the reception of applicants for asylum in the Member States , pending the opinion of the European Parliament .
With regard to reinforcing border controls and combating illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings , it should be reported that the Council of 27 and 28 February 2002 approved an action plan establishing the actions and measures that the European Union must adopt and setting deadlines for their implementation .
Reference must also be made to the activity of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration , charged by the Council on 25 and 26 January 1999 with drawing up action plans for the countries of origin and transit of asylum seekers and migrants , on the basis of an integrated approach .
The said action plans establish , amongst others , actions to encourage and promote development in the countries concerned , and practical measures to reduce clandestine migration flows .
The Council has adopted action plans for Afghanistan , Albania - a region bordering the EU - Morocco , Somalia , Sri Lanka and Iraq .
In this respect , it should also be noted that a budget heading , B7-667 , has been established . This is intended to finance projects within the framework of cooperation with third countries in the area of immigration .
The difficulties experienced in the areas of immigration and asylum , to a great extent , relate to the significant differences between legislation in the Member States , which has changed substantially in recent years .
What is more , the need to anticipate and combat illegal immigration has sometimes led to the adoption of more restrictive national legislation .
Nevertheless , despite the difficulties and problems raised in the debates on instruments laid down and proposed to implement the provisions of the Treaty , in particular on the basis of the guidelines laid down in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council , the commitment and efforts made at Council level to speed up their examination and adoption , and thus create a basis for a body of binding legislation for the Community as a whole in this respect , should be highlighted .
I thank the President-in-Office for his presentation of the intentions of the Member States , even though we already know what they are .
I asked for plans and dates .
When shall we have this sort of policy ?
My question did , of course , include a number of issues which appear to be of no concern to the Council , such as aid for refugees and efforts to integrate them .
Be that as it may , my question is as follows :
Mr President-in-Office , on 15 April , the Council decided on a number of measures which will apply to countries which do not cooperate with the European Union and which in fact facilitate , even if they do not exactly channel waves of illegal immigrants towards the Member States ; however , it opted not to list these countries , while at the same time stating that it would be taking measures against these countries , which are clearly not doing their job and cooperating with the European Union .
Surely this is a contradiction , Mr President-in-Office ?
Which countries are they ?
Why do you refuse to name them ?
And what measures do you intend to take to make them cooperate with the European Union ?
I would like to remind Mr Papayannakis that just yesterday afternoon , the Spanish Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for the Interior appeared in Parliament solely for this subject .
All these matters were discussed for hours .
I think that , after the debate that took place , it would be superfluous to repeat everything Mr Rajoy said yesterday .
I believe I have given a long and comprehensive answer to Mr Papayannakis ' comments , and it seems to me that it would be superfluous to enter into another debate on these matters , since one took place yesterday .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I believe we are all aware of the fact that the distribution of these tasks between the Member States is incredibly uneven .
We know , of course , that Greece will bear a heavy burden and that Spain and Italy bear heavy burdens that are completely unreasonable in relation to the average income in these countries , especially when comparison is made with a country like Denmark , which is a comfortably long way away from the influx of refugees .
We now see a number of countries which are , as I say , a comfortably long way away from the influx of refugees considerably tightening up on their refugee and asylum policy .
Britain is doing so , and so is Denmark .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , a joint resolution needs to be adopted as a matter of urgency .
Some joint projects in this area are also needed without delay , as is a sharing of the burden if we are not , in these circles , to end up very seriously at odds with one another over this problem .
I would like to say to Mrs Frahm that , naturally , it is true that there is tremendous pressure on the southern countries of the European Union .
With regard to the country I know best , however , my own country , I can tell you that Spain is well able to control its southern borders and that , currently , its problem is not border control , but the fact that there are no readmission agreements between the European Union and most Sub-Saharan African countries .
Therefore , as the Deputy Prime Minister said during the debate yesterday , the problem is not so much controlling immigration as saving the lives of immigrants who come over in dangerous vessels .
Our real problem , moreover , is not arresting them , which is very easy ; our problem is saving their lives , and once we have saved their lives , the next problem is that there is no way of sending them home , as there are no readmission agreements , nor do their countries want them .
In this respect , the European Union could put great pressure on those countries that are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement .
That way , we could impose this obligation on them .
I would also , however , like to tell you for information purposes , Mrs Frahm , that the greatest flow of illegal immigrants received by Spain does not actually come from the south .
The majority of illegal immigrants coming to Spain arrive easily , unchallenged , across the border between France and Spain and come from the Eastern European countries .
These illegal immigrants cross the borders of Germany , Austria , Italy and all the other countries that have a border with the Eastern European countries perfectly easily . They cross the whole of Europe with ease and settle in Spain , and we have no means of controlling them .
That is what really concerns us , because in Spain as in Italy , which has common borders with the rest of the European Union , we are receiving more illegal immigrants across our borders with our fellow Member States than through crossings from the south by sea .
Question No 5 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0275 / 02 ) :
Subject : Discrimination against Moroccan workers replaced by eastern Europeans
Five thousand Moroccan workers who in previous years were employed in the strawberry harvest in Huelva ( Spain ) have this year been left without employment or protection following their replacement by eastern European workers , thanks to a decision which has clearly received the encouragement or consent of the Spanish state , since the workers arrived with a contract signed in their country of origin .
What action does the Council intend to take , in the face of this seriously discriminatory attitude which runs contrary to the principles of the EU ?
I would like Mr Nogueira Román to be aware that there are no provisions , either in Community legislation or in any agreement between the European Union and third countries , including Morocco or the candidate countries or other Eastern European countries , by virtue of which workers from a particular third country can have priority treatment to gain employment in a Member State of the European Union .
The replacement of workers from a third country with workers from another third country cannot , therefore , be considered discriminatory .
Many of the European agreements between the European Union and the candidate countries include references to conditions and methods in each Member State in the sections on the movement of workers and the provision of services .
It should therefore be pointed out that , although the situation you are referring to is very sad , it should be considered in the context of the bilateral relationships between Spain and Morocco or Spain and the Eastern European countries . The Council of the European Union is not familiar with and , I believe , does not need to be familiar with , the terms of these relationships .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my question was about a human problem , and your reply was full of unacceptable generalities .
I suppose you are aware that the Spanish newspapers recently reported on immigrants working in a strawberry production company in Huelva who were , and I quote , " living like animals " , with the company owing them more than three months ' wages .
If these immigrants , who are hoping for something called " work " , are living in these conditions , one can only guess at the miserable conditions being experienced by the five thousand Moroccans I referred to in my question , who are roaming around that region without work .
These people , after being used to working on the strawberry harvest for years , were this year replaced by temporary workers from eastern European states , who ironically benefit from labour contracts recognised by the Spanish Government but denied to our Moroccan neighbours .
This behaviour , apart from being inequitable and inhuman , will lead to a deterioration in relations with Moroccan immigrants , will worsen the position of the communities affected , will damage mutual respect and even lead to racist behaviour , while encouraging political extremism , which we condemn .
Mr President-in-Office , what are you actually planning to do to combat this type of behaviour ?
Once again , I would remind you that we are in a world governed by a Treaty that confers powers on the various institutions and , as far as I recall , labour market regulation is not among the attributions of the Treaty .
The Council , as such , therefore has nothing to say in response to Mr Nogueira Román 's question .
I am going to accept the point of order , Mr Nogueira Román , but I would remind you that the Council replies as it sees fit .
I would also remind all of you that this is Question Time , not Statement Time or General Debate Time .
You must ask specific questions .
I am going to give you a version of the Rules of Procedure as explained by me so that you remember .
Mr President , I am not happy with the reply by the President-in-Office of the Council , because I was asking him about the humanitarian situation of five thousand persons currently living in Spain in wretched conditions .
Question No 6 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0276 / 02 ) :
Subject : Representations by the Spanish Presidency to the authorities in Cairo concerning the fate of Kostas Kastanias
In his considered response to my oral question H-0950 / 01
Last March , pursuant to our debate and the pledge that I made here in Parliament , the Spanish Ambassador to Cairo made contact with the Egyptian authorities with regard to the case of Mr Kostas Kastanias and other people who are in the same situation .
The Ambassador asked the Egyptian authorities to authorise the repatriation of these people to their country of origin to serve their sentence .
As the Presidency indicated to Mr Alavanos in February , the protection of people who are arrested or imprisoned is one of the universal principles of human rights .
The Spanish Ambassador , the President-in-Office of the European Union , referred to this , as well as to the association agreement signed in June 2001 , although I would like to point out that this agreement did not enter into force due to the lack of parliamentary ratification in the Member States .
In spite of everything , the response of the Egyptian authorities was negative : they insisted that this matter is one of national competence , in that the crimes committed by the prisoners to whom we are referring concern national security and that the current conventions do not allow for repatriation to the country of origin .
The Council is aware of the importance of the cases in question and , as it has done on many occasions in the past , it will continue to raise these cases within all our bilateral contacts , in every way possible , putting all the necessary political pressure on the representatives of the Egyptian Government .
I thank the President-in-Office for the sensitivity which he has demonstrated , both now and when we discussed the matter today , when referring to the intervention on the part of the Spanish embassy with the Egyptian authorities .
Of the three prisoners , two have died and the third has every illness you can imagine , he is a walking medical textbook . Recently he went blind in his left eye .
I repeat , this is the chronicle of a death foretold , and I beg the President-in-Office not to abandon his efforts .
In the final analysis , what counts in our political career , over and above the grand speeches we all make , is whether or not we are able to save or improve a few lives .
I would like to respond by saying that , as a representative of the Council , I am extremely open to Mr Alavanos ' petition , which basically refers to a real humanitarian situation , that of a citizen of the European Union who , unjustly , is suffering an extremely cruel imprisonment .
I would like to reiterate before Parliament that the Spanish Government , which currently holds the Presidency of the European Union , will not only take another step , but will take all the necessary steps , while we have this responsibility and beyond , to achieve the release of this prisoner who , as we have been told , has suffered loss of health to an almost life-threatening degree .
Question No 7 by Andrew Nicholas Duff ( H-0278 / 02 ) :
Subject : EU Recruitment Office
The draft decision concerning the establishment , organisation and functioning of the European Recruitment Office would seem to breach the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Article 21 of the Charter explicitly prohibits discrimination on the grounds of age .
Article 51 addresses the provisions of the Charter to the institutions .
Yet the draft decision enables the EU institutions to discriminate in their recruitment on the grounds of age .
The Council , Commission and Parliament are solemn signatories to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
How does the Council reconcile its proclamation of the Charter with its policy on recruitment ?
I would like to remind Mr Duff that the Council has already replied in detail to this same question during Question Time in November 2001 in response to Question No 0795 / 01 submitted by Mrs Catherine Stihler .

I would like to inform you that , since then , the position on this matter has not changed , as the Rule of Law is still the same and , therefore , I invite you to refer to the response given by the Council on that occasion .
Mr President , I still have three concrete questions which puzzle me concerning this troublesome issue of the recruitment agency of the EU .
First : What was the point of solemnly proclaiming the Charter of Fundamental Rights , should the Council be unwilling to implement it ?
Second : What sort of message does he think this sends to the citizen of the existing Union and also of the applicant countries ?
Third : When does he expect the matter to be finally and satisfactorily resolved ?
I can only take note of your comments , which , naturally , I will pass on to the authorities responsible for recruitment , but at this point I have nothing to add to everything I have already said .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question of recruitment is important because it is a question of objectivity .
Whether we like it or not , we need criteria for recruitment .
We know that age , quotas for women and quotas for countries are often used as recruitment criteria .
My question - and this qualification needs to be set out - is : are there any plans to obtain professional advice here in the future , perhaps to instruct recruitment consultants to deal with this question , so that the best possible staff can be recruited in the future ?
That is not really a question .
It is the speaker 's opinion .
Mr President , perhaps something was lost in translation . My question was : are there any plans to use external professional support or recruitment advisors so as to ensure that the best possible staff are recruited ?
The European institutions , Parliament , the Commission and the Council , have sufficient experience in staff recruitment .
Furthermore , they have a tradition of taking on staff which enables them to assess the qualities and the merits that they require in order to select their staff without needing to consult external sources .
This has not been the practice to date and I do not think it will become the practice in future .
I must inform you that Parliament 's Presidency is looking into the working methods of this recruitment office , or rather interinstitutional staff selection office , and we hope that it will work , as Mr de Miguel said , competently and to the equal benefit of the three institutions .
We will have time , however , to discuss this at the appropriate moment .
I should like to thank the Presidency for the somewhat brusque reply .
However , the Spanish Government must reasonably have an opinion if , for example , restrictions are placed upon Spanish citizens ' right to live in another EU country .
Or does the Spanish Government have no opinion on this ?
Europe 's entire political architecture is based on every Member State respecting the national legislation of all the others but there is also the Community acquis , which we are all obliged to respect .
The appropriate body for determining whether a domestic law of a given country does not conform to the Community acquis is the Commission .
If every country or every Presidency were to judge the others , we would fall into a spiral of recriminations that would be extraordinarily damaging to peaceful co-existence within the Union .
This is why we have the European Commission , an institution with supranational powers that we have conferred on it , which has the obligation to ensure that Member States comply with the Community acquis and which must act as guardian of the Treaties .
It therefore falls to the European Union to point the finger and tell each Member State whether its national legislation conforms to the Community acquis .
Allow me then to express my hope that the Commission performs its duties and that the Spanish Presidency , as I expect of all the following Presidencies , acts with great caution and respect towards the other Member States of the Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , allow me to put a question to you in your capacity as legislator .
It is , of course , the Council which , in the last analysis , makes the rules governing this cooperation .
If it now appears that , with the help of this type of legislation , a Member State can prevent the free movement of labour and of citizens and create problems in terms of EU citizenship , would you be willing to alter the common regulations so that it is quite clear that individual countries cannot introduce restrictions of this kind ?
As you know , ladies and gentlemen - and I am bound to presume that , as a Member of the European Parliament , you do know - the Council only acts and only approves regulations at the proposal of the European Commission .
It is the task of the European Commission to make the necessary proposals , which we then approve .
If , at a later stage , the regulations we have adopted run counter to the national laws of a given Member State , it then falls to the Commission to open infringement proceedings and to take that country to the Court of Justice if necessary .
The Court of Justice will then resolve the matter .
The Council does not resolve disputes between countries , as I am sure you are aware .
We are talking here about an extremely delicate institutional balance and about regulations that are laid down in the Treaties and which have underpinned our co-existence since 1956 .
I shall , therefore , say that the Presidency is going to ensure that this institutional balance is maintained and that the prerogatives of each institution are respected .
Consequently , if a given Member State 's legislation does not conform to the Community acquis or to the regulations laid down in the Treaty , let the European Commission start infringement proceedings against it and let the Court of Justice try the case .
Question No 10 by Rosa M. Díez González ( H-0286 / 02 ) :
Subject : Creation of a Euro-Mediterranean development bank
The European summit in Laeken in December 2001 called on the Council and the Commission to consider the possibility of creating a Euro-Mediterranean development bank to remedy the poor economic results of the countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean and the social and political consequences thereof .
The Spanish presidency set the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean development bank as a priority . However , the conclusions of the Barcelona Council postponed the debate on the matter for a year .
What were the reasons for the unanimous rejection of the Spanish presidency 's project to set up an independent Euro-Mediterranean development bank ?
What strategy does the presidency intend to pursue in order to achieve this objective ?
The Spanish Presidency succeeded in launching the idea of creating a Euro-Mediterranean bank , highlighting awareness of the need to increase investment flows throughout that region .
The Barcelona European Council of March 2002 consequently agreed to the creation within the EIB of a reinforced Euro-Mediterranean Investment Facility within the EIB , which would be set in motion as soon as possible , complemented by the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement and an EIB representative office located in the area .
It should be added that on the basis of an evaluation of loans provided by the Facility and taking account of the outcome of the consultations held with our partners in the Barcelona process a decision on the incorporation of an EIB majority-owned subsidiary dedicated to our Mediterranean Partner Countries will be considered and taken one year after the launching of the Facility .
The Ministerial Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs on the Mediterranean dialogue , held on 22 and 23 of April in Valencia , warmly welcomed Ecofin and the Barcelona European Council 's conclusions on this matter .
It also formalised , first the opening of this new structure within the EIB and , secondly , the fact that a year after the project 's launch , the possibility of opening an independent subsidiary of this European Investment Bank especially dedicated to Euro-Mediterranean financing will be considered .
It does not really need to be pointed out , but it was at the Laeken European Council that the recommendation was made , once again , to create a Euro-Mediterranean development bank to remedy the poor economic results of the countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean and the social and political consequences thereof .
Current growth in these countries , as the President-in-Office of the Council knows , falls considerably short of what is needed , not only to ensure sustainable development and to reduce poverty but to halt the massive exodus of hundreds and thousands of people who are looking desperately for an opportunity not to die in their own country .
Does the Presidency not consider that the instrument they have decided on , yielding to the position put forward by Ecofin - which was not the position of the Spanish Presidency nor of most Council members - and which appears to be inadequate , is the product - to our way of thinking - of an unambitious and unclear decision , which pulls up short and is even , I would go so far as to say , a real step backwards , which can only be explained by the lack of ambition or by the absence of a clear strategy for the development of the countries of the southern Mediterranean ?
I share Mrs Díez 's opinion about the disappointment created by the reality of the situation with regard to the ambition that we had set for ourselves .
As Mrs Díez knows very well , Spain , before holding the Presidency and then as holder of the Presidency , sought to achieve the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean bank and this aim consequently appeared in the conclusions of the Laeken European Council .
This was no chance happening , since we were preparing the ground for the next ministerial meeting and for the Spanish Presidency itself and this desire was asserted once again at the Barcelona European Council , but in a much more low-key way .
It is not that there was any less ambition , because the ambition remains the same and we are ensuring that it remains the same .
It is simply that the process will be more difficult and certainly lengthier than was envisaged .
The reality of the situation is that these matters must be approved with the agreement of the competent Council , which is the Economic and Finance Council and various countries felt , for reasons of their own , that opening a bank at this time would be too risky .
They opted first to create a facility , then to establish a subsidiary and then , with time , to see if the bank could be set up with contributions , not only from Europe , but also from our Mediterranean partner countries themselves , which are clearly very keen to contribute .
As I have said , I can only share Mrs Díez 's disappointment .
I hope that we can continue to maintain our ambition and our objective .
This will be a more difficult , perhaps more tortuous and perhaps a longer process , but our aim is still to create a Mediterranean Development Bank which will benefit the countries of the Mediterranean basin and , most importantly , which will finance all of the enormous development needs that are so obvious to us at the present time . These needs , furthermore , have the tragic effect of forcing the citizens of these countries to leave for Europe and this causes all the misfortunes that immigration entails and with which we are all familiar .
We therefore feel that this is an instrument that can contribute to the development of these countries and , consequently , by adopting this new method , we hope to achieve our stated objective of creating this bank .
Mr President , as I see it , the problem is not so much that we provide too little money or that we would have no opportunity to do something from our side , the problem is the absorption capacity of these countries along the southern shore of the Mediterranean and the fact that , so far , we have been unable to make sure the projects are in place and the money is used for the required purpose .
Do you not rather think that , if we create some sort of Mediterranean Bank , the money will gather dust in it and as little will find its way to the region as has done in the past ?
I really cannot see how some sort of Mediterranean Bank will help to get the money there .
Your opinion , which is , of course , entirely justified , is completely in line with that of the German Government , which was precisely one of those that objected most vehemently to the creation of the bank .
I must say that your arguments are well-founded , because we all know that even monies that are donated , such as the MEDA programme , very frequently go unused due to a lack of absorption capacity , or to an inability to produce projects .
A bank , however , is also an instrument , of course , with which to help countries to better understand how to make use of financial resources .
Furthermore , a bank has the merit that , because it provides loans and the loans cost money , when people pay for a service , they always have an interest in its operating better .
This is the merit of a development bank that , at the same time , is an advisory institution and which , when it charges a price for the money , ensures that those receiving the money gain more from the investment they make .
The argument you put forward is that your country was the only one to have argued for this in Ecofin .
For this reason , the Bank was not approached directly , and for this reason we opted for this phased process and we hope that , with this phased process , the conditions will gradually improve and a new mindset will come into play in the Mediterranean countries to make better use of the monies that , both in the form of donations and of loans , we make available .
Question No 11 by Esko Olavi Seppänen ( H-0289 / 02 ) :
Subject : The nature and funding of Galileo
It has been decided to launch the Galileo project .
What has been agreed within the Council concerning the use of the system for military purposes , and what view does the Presidency take of wishes expressed to use Galileo militarily ?
I would like to reply to the question by pointing out that the Council has stated on various occasions that Galileo is a civilian programme , under civilian control .
This is the result in particular of the Council Resolution adopted on 5 April 2001 and published in the Official Journal of the European Communities No 157 / 1 , of 30 May 2001 ; and also of the Council conclusions adopted on 26 March 2002 and published in press communiqué No 7282 / 02 .
Therefore , all these documents have made it clear that the Council wishes Galileo to remain a civilian programme , under civilian control .
No , definitely not .
We have clearly stated that this is a civilian programme under civilian control .
This is not a decision that has been taken lightly .
It was taken after a thorough consideration of all the consequences and furthermore , placing it in the broader context of the European Union , which is the fact that most of the EU 's Member States are also members of NATO .
We do not want to go into the issue of competence between satellite systems and nor do intelligence matters fall within the competence of the European Union .
I therefore feel that the decision that has been taken is that financing will be provided for this Galileo project , which will be for civilian use and under civilian control , and at no time will additional financing be called for to use Galileo for military purposes .
Question No 12 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0291 / 02 ) :
Subject : Child slaves on cacao plantations in West Africa
The United Nations Children 's Fund , UNICEF , has voiced its concern that child trafficking affects 200 000 children in West Africa , with the cacao industry accounting for a substantial number of them .
Child labour and trafficking in human beings is on the increase .
The cacao plantations mainly use boys , who often have to carry out the heavy work of harvesting the cacao beans .
The working day for these children is up to 15 hours long .
This is not only a question of child labour ; these children are also sold as slaves among the various cacao producers .
What is the Council 's response to these reports and what initiatives does it intend to take ?
What action does the Council intend to take in relation to the West African countries concerned and the cacao industry ?
, Council . ( ES ) The European Union has repeatedly expressed its deep concern at the incidence of forced labour and of child labour , and at the trafficking of children and cases of child slavery , in particular in West and Central Africa .
Last year , the European Union carried out surveys in various countries in the region and urged governments to fulfil their obligations , in accordance with the corresponding United Nations Conventions or Agreements and to adopt measures , in line with these agreements , and to foster and develop cooperation between governments in the region and international organisations , in particular , UNICEF and the ILO .
A number of West African governments have informed the European Union that they have ratified , or intend to ratify , the Convention prohibiting the worst forms of child labour and immediate action for its elimination and that they are totally committed to the fight against the trafficking of children .
Those countries that have not yet ratified this important Convention were urged to do so without delay .
The European Union will continue to stress , in bilateral contacts and in international fora , the importance of taking robust action against child labour and the trafficking of children .
I would thank Mr de Miguel for his reply .
Two hundred thousand children are affected , most of them boys .
This is a considerably widespread problem for these children in West Africa .
The answer I received has much to say about agreements .
Is there anything more we can do other than calling for appropriate conventions ?
Can we bolster the education system and take steps to change attitudes towards people and , in particular , children in order to make it clear that children are not a commodity and that the civilised view of humanity we wish to build on holds that the value of children is sacrosanct and that they must be treated as people in their own right ?
Is there any possibility of coordination with the US and Japan in order to help these children in West Africa ?
It seems obvious to me that all the countries of West Africa are the Union 's partners by means of the ACP Convention , and are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement and , therefore , do not only have a special relationship with the European Union , but also receive very considerable funds - we are talking about EUR 13 billion - for cooperation projects .
They all have , furthermore , what is known as the ' national indicative programme ' agreed on with the European Commission to steer cooperation funds towards those sectors in greatest need , for their economic and social development .
I think that promoting education , integrating children into society and strengthening the family , as well as preventing the marginalisation of the weakest members of society , who are children , are some of the most important guidelines for the indicative programmes undertaken with these countries .
The Commission is extremely aware of this problem , which affects not all but certainly some countries in West Africa , and is endeavouring to use all means available to it , by funding the European Development Fund , to promote programmes of the type that you have suggested .
In any event , your comments will be conveyed to the competent Commissioner , Mr Nielson , in order to make him aware of Parliament 's concern at the grave situation of these children , on whom we should focus particular attention in our development programmes .
Question No 13 by Alejandro Cercas ( H-0296 / 02 ) :
Subject : The Lisbon strategy and full employment
The conclusions of the recent European Council summit in Barcelona state that full employment in the European Union is the core of the Lisbon Strategy and the essential goal of economic and social policies , which requires the creation of more and better jobs .
They add that is therefore necessary to continue paying special attention to the reforms of employment and labour market policies .
The Council Presidency also stresses in its programme that creating and improving jobs must figure among the priorities of every Presidency .
Nevertheless , official estimates in the EU put unemployment at 7.8 % , with Spain being the Member State with the highest rate of unemployment ( 12.9 % , according to figures published by EUROSTAT in February 2002 ) and the least stable job situation , even though it has been experiencing a period of economic growth .
In the light of these figures , what initiatives will the Council Presidency take to ensure that national employment plans actually cut unemployment rates and promote quality jobs in all the Member States ?
The Council considers that in order to achieve the objective of full employment in the European Union , set at the Lisbon European Council and reiterated in Barcelona at this year 's Spring Council , we must continue to pay particular attention to employment policy reforms and labour market reforms .
This is why it is crucial that we eliminate obstacles to integration into the labour market and promote active employment policies , maintaining the preventive approach and individualised attention on the unemployed to prevent them falling into long-term unemployment and to help them to improve their ability to integrate into the labour market .
The Council similarly wishes to emphasise that , in order to achieve the objectives set out in Lisbon , the European employment strategy must focus in particular on the challenges that the European Union faces in the long term , especially those affecting the ageing of the population .
The European employment strategy must contribute to the creation of a dynamic and efficient labour market , in which motivated and well-trained employees are able to undertake high quality and highly productive tasks .
Consequently , the strategy must make proper use of policies that improve both the supply and the demand of work .
In the implementation of the employment strategy , the guidelines for Member States ' employment policies , in 2002 , which were formally adopted by the Council at the beginning of this year , broadly reflect the new political messages sent by the recent European Council , which examined the issue of full employment in Europe .
It is now up to the Member States to implement the employment policy , in accordance with the employment guidelines and in line with the principle of subsidiarity and with the Member States ' own competences in the field of employment .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are quite right to say that it is now - and always has been , since Luxembourg - the Member States that have to make the policy of the employment strategy a reality and adopt practical initiatives and not confine themselves to emphatically reiterating objectives and claims which are regrettably not translated into action and which remain as nothing more than the bureaucratic accumulation of projects or already existing administrative dynamics , without finding a new way of encouraging the nation as a whole , involving social operators , all types of administrative authorities , parliaments , etc .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is the Member States that are responsible and Parliament has just said , in November , and has been saying for five years , that national employment plans have major shortcomings in terms of programming , evaluating and following up ; that there are no concrete objectives , that there are no indicators , that financial resources are not properly discussed .
You said , and rightly so , that individualised programmes must be created .
My reason for saying all of this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is to persuade you that in the 45 remaining days of this Presidency , the Spanish Presidency must really come up with a powerful initiative , because the problem is that the number of unemployed people in Europe is on the increase and we are not creating the jobs that we said we would in Lisbon and we cannot continue always saying the same thing , adopting a purely administrative approach , when faced with a problem of this scale .
I agree with you insofar as , very often , when national employment plans are put forward , they lack the necessary precision and , above all , quantified commitments , with clear objectives , in terms of how employment creation in less-favoured sectors is going to be tackled , how new opportunities are going to be created , and which measures and resources are going to be used .
However , as you know , there is no better way of obliging Member States to put forward truly substantial employment plans , than by applying the kind of pressure and political insistence that this debate represents .
We have to make States aware that the commitments made at the Councils are truly binding and also that the issue of employment is the main objective of the Lisbon strategy .
All the other elements of the Lisbon strategy are geared towards employment creation .
Naturally , I will pass on this concern to the Spanish Minister for Labour and Social Affairs to see whether , in a forthcoming sitting of the Social Affairs Council - which has still to meet before the Presidency draws to a close - we can deal with this issue once again .
However , the presentation of national employment plans takes place at the start of the year .
We made an effort at the start of this year , when everything was presented to the Barcelona Council , where there were new instructions , but I believe that it cannot be said too often , even when it is not time to submit the plans - but when we have to start drawing them up - that the European Council laid down some very clear guidelines with regard to the national employment plans , and it would be good if the States were already to make tangible forecasts and more detailed employment plans for the beginning of next year .
Question No 14 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0297 / 02 ) :
Subject : EU police academy and EU border police force
What is the current state of progress on two key issues which Parliament first raised in 1998 , namely establishing a European police academy and a European border police force ?
I would remind Mr Posselt that , on the basis of the Council Decision of 22 December 2000 , which created the European Police College , a network of European police colleges was founded including all of the Member States .
The stages leading to the implementation of this Police College , or CEPOL , can be summarised as follows , in chronological order :
In 2001 , the network was set up .
The members of the College committed themselves to organising ten training operations on the priority issues set out in the Council Decision .
In 2002 , in the absence of a definitive decision on the location of the Agency 's headquarters , Denmark temporarily hosted the secretariat of CEPOL , having previously obtained a budget of EUR 2.2 million for 2002 to be used to finance 17 training operations .
CEPOL 's activities will increase throughout 2002 .
21 training operations are planned , all having a clear relationship with the priorities set out by the Council .
With regard to cooperation between border control services in the Member States , the Council would refer to paragraphs 24 and 25 of the Tampere European Council Conclusions , in which Council calls for closer cooperation and mutual technical assistance between the Member States ' border control services , such as exchange programmes and technology transfer , especially on maritime borders , and for the rapid inclusion of the applicant States in this cooperation .
Later , on 6 and 7 December 2001 , the Council approved a document entitled ' European management of border control ' .
This concept establishes , amongst other things , that those responsible for border control services should meet at least once every six months , within the Strategic Committee on Immigration , Frontiers and Asylum , and allow the candidate countries to participate in their work , at least once a year .
On 11 April 2002 the first meeting of the aforementioned committee took place in Brussels with the participation of representatives from border control services .
This cooperation represents an initial stage in the implementation of other possible forms of cooperation , specifically in the light of the deliberations taking place on the forthcoming Commission Communication on border management , as well as the result of the feasibility study carried out by the Italian authorities with regard to the creation of a European border police service .
This study , carried out within the framework of the Odysseus programme , was started in October 2001 and consists of four phases .
Its results will be presented at a ministerial conference on 30 May 2002 , in Rome .
I would also like to draw Mr Posselt 's attention to the content of the global plan for the fight against illegal immigration and human trafficking in the European Union , adopted by the Council on 28 February 2002 .
The aim of this global plan is to define a common and integrated approach to all issues linked to illegal immigration and human trafficking .
There are seven areas for action defined in this plan , which include measures relating to border control .
Mr President , I had the honour of initiating both the police academy and the border police and the House adopted my report on them almost unanimously back in 1998 , which is why I am delighted to see that things are now beginning to move four years later .
However , I have two specific supplementary questions .
First , the headquarters of the police academy : when do you think the location will finally be decided and which Member States have applied for it ?
My second question concerns the border police . Will the feasibility study be submitted to the European Parliament in June so that we too can debate it ?
Mr Posselt , I would very much like to be able to tell you right now when the decision on the headquarters of the European Police College will be taken , but I am afraid that this is not an issue on which a quick decision can be made , because the headquarters of this college is included in a package relating to a whole range of European agencies that has been the cause of great controversy in the EU .
You will recall that in Gothenburg the Swedish Presidency tried to reach an agreement over headquarters ; that in Laeken , the Belgian Presidency tried once again , and put forward a proposed agreement on headquarters , which was blocked by not only one , but by various countries at the same time .
And I would like to tell you , simply , in the intimacy of this hemicycle - which is certainly quite intimate today - that the Spanish Presidency is doing everything it can to put together a package that will allow all countries that aspire to host headquarters of European Agencies - given that to get a particular agency in one 's country appears to be a matter of life of death to all concerned - to come to an agreement .
We are currently holding bilateral talks , and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Aznar , when he visits the capitals of the Member States before the next European Council , will try to put together a package that can be presented to the Council .
However , I have to tell you that if this package is not sufficiently solid we are not prepared to go through the tiresome spectacle of watching the Council turn into some kind of souk in which everyone is squabbling over one headquarter or another .
With regard to the Police College , we already have temporary headquarters .
As you are probably aware , as is typically the case in the European Union , temporary headquarters normally end up being the permanent headquarters .
I do not mean to say that the Police College will remain permanently in Denmark , but , in truth , there are some temporary headquarters that have been temporary headquarters for forty years now , and , in any case , money has already been allocated for training and we hope that this will come into operation .
I shall not go into precise details right now about which countries are competing for the headquarters , other than to tell you that there are many , and often no-one knows if these countries really want these headquarters or whether they are choosing this option as some kind of decoy or bargaining tool to get something else .
Therefore , I believe that the less we deal with this issue , the better .
With regard to the second issue you asked me about , I believe that this falls within the competence of the Commission , which will come to Parliament before the end of June .
I hope it will be Mr Vitorino who comes , the Commissioner responsible , who would be the best person to answer your question in this regard .
I myself come from one of the EU 's border areas , Dalecarlia , in central-west Sweden , on the Norwegian border .
Is it too early to get an opinion or could I already ask the Council whether it imagines that foreign soldiers might be responsible for some border protection duties ?
Might British soldiers , for example , be expected to assist Spain with its external border protection or French soldiers help Sweden protect its borders with Norway or with Russia in the case of maritime borders ?
Would German soldiers be able to assist Finland in guarding its external border with Russia ?
Are these perhaps the lines of thinking ?
What would be the language of command ?
Should there be an international language of command or should the country 's native language be used ?
Mr Sacrédeus , I understand that proximity to an EU external border is naturally something that may cause concern , but believe me , the external border with Norway is the least of our worries , because Norway is a country with which we have an agreement , within the Schengen Convention , and is a country that for all intents and purposes is in practice a full member of the European family .
If it is not a Member of the European Union it is because the Norwegian people have chosen for it not to be , not because we do not want it to be .
Therefore , I do not see a problem and I do not think there has ever been an incident on the Norwegian border .
However , with regard to your statement about soldiers of various nationalities controlling borders , including sensitive borders between Finland and Russia , I would say that this kind of idea really belongs in the realm of science fiction .
Firstly , borders are not guarded by soldiers . Within the EU , borders are controlled by border police .
Secondly , it is hard to believe that there are soldiers of different EU nationalities controlling borders that are not their own .
A common border police team could possibly be put together , as has been suggested in the Justice and Home Affairs Councils , but this would be a common body of people recruited in the same way that , for example , we recruit a common body of interpreters or officials in this House , that is to say , they would be Community officials bound by their own rules , with their own uniform and language system - which I can see is something you are concerned about - and which will surely have its own distinguishing marks and , most importantly , a code of conduct that will be common to all .
All of this is no more than an idea , however , in the minds of our Justice and Interior Ministers and for the moment does not take any concrete form , and I believe it will take some time to come to fruition .
Question No 15 by Anne E.M. Van Lancker ( H-0304 / 02 ) :
Subject : Availability of Council meeting and committee documents
Since the start of the Lisbon procedure the Council , together with the Commission , has become the pivot of a number of coordination procedures .
In the committees on economic policy , employment and the labour market and social protection important work is done , which is then discussed and approved by the Council , with no input from Parliament : drafting of common reports by the Council and Commission on employment , exclusion and pensions , as well as on objectives and indicators in the fight against poverty , a subject which also involves pensions .
Sometimes , also , the European Council refers to these documents , without their being publicly available .
Is the Council prepared to forward these documents drafted by the Commission and the other committees to Parliament ?
Is it possible to publish documents approved by the Council in the OJ and on the website ?
Is the Council prepared to collaborate in seeking a procedure which would enable Parliament to be more involved in decision-making under these procedures ?
Despite the current provisions on public access to documents published by the three institutions - Council , Parliament and Commission - there is currently no specific procedure regarding the official communication to Parliament of documents relating to the Lisbon objectives .
Having said this , within the framework of transparency , all the reports and other documents approved by the Council in this regard , particularly those which aim to coordinate economic policies , are normally published , once approved , on the Council website , and are therefore generally accessible to the public .
Thank you , Mr President .
I would also thank the President-in-Office of the Council for this response , but you will appreciate , Mr President-in-Office , that this cannot , of course , give us MEPs any satisfaction .
We set great store by the employment strategy .
The open method of co-ordination can be very effective , provided that it is democratic and transparent .
As it happens , it is not democratic , for the national parliaments and the European Parliament are not sufficiently involved .
Neither is it transparent , because even the evaluations that are made of national action plans , paid for with European money , and the studies carried out by the Committee on Social Policy and Employment Policy are not accessible to the players , who , in fact , are required to guarantee the democratic legitimacy of this employment strategy .
What does the Council Presidency intend to do about this ?
Are you not of the opinion that the democracy and transparency of this employment strategy and the open method of co-ordination should be enhanced ?
Funded with European money , no less !
Mrs Van Lancker , I have the utmost respect for all that you say , and it is clear that there remains much that can be done to improve transparency and the availability of Council documents .
It goes without saying that , as you say , Parliament is the body that represents the peoples of Europe .
It is also true that we work within a regulated system where Council is obliged to send documents to Parliament where this is a requirement of the legislative decision-making process .
There are some documents that do not relate to the legislative decision-making process , which fall within the competence of the Member States and , with regard to which , there is no requirement to communicate them .
The truth is that , in today 's European Union , the sky is the limit , because virtually all documents from the Member States are published on the Internet . I would find it very hard to recall any Council , including Councils dealing with the most sensitive issues , such as the Foreign Affairs Councils , in which documents have been kept secret or not made available to the public .

I believe there are some documents that are sent to Parliament as a matter of course , and there are other documents that , if they are not sent to Parliament as a matter of course , MEPs simply have to ask for , because they are usually available . They are not kept secret and they are available within the Member States .
I would say , in this regard , that the Internet makes life so much easier these days .
In any case , I have made note of this interest - and this is certainly not the first time I have heard it aired in Parliament - in Parliament being more involved in the whole of the Lisbon strategy ; and , naturally , in order to be more involved , more information is required and , therefore , I shall pass this on so that we can improve the communication of documents to Parliament .
Question No 16 by Richard Howitt ( H-0306 / 02 ) :
Subject : ' Untying 'of development assistance from commercial interests by EU Member States
Can the President-in-Office confirm that Member States at the Barcelona Summit rejected the Commission proposal to ' untie ' development assistance from commercial interests , and can he describe the objections made to the proposal ?
Given the commitments made at the Finance for Development Conference at Monterrey to further discuss this issue , what further steps does the Presidency plan in this respect ?
I would like to draw Mr Howitt 's attention to point 13 of the Barcelona European Council conclusions , which does not specifically mention the lifting of development assistance conditions .
The European Council , nonetheless , welcomed the agreement reached on official development assistance ( ODA ) by Foreign Affairs Ministers in view of the Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development , an agreement it supported .
In this agreement , the Council of the European Union affirms its willingness to apply , along with other commitments , the recommendation for the lifting of development assistance conditions for less developed countries and to continue the debates with the aim of continuing to lift bilateral assistance conditions .
The European Union will also study measures to continue the lifting of Community assistance conditions while maintaining the current price preference system within the framework of the ACP-EU agreement .
I think the President-in-Office neatly side-stepped my question .
Of course , paragraph 13 records what was agreed , not what was not agreed .
So I repeat my question to him : Was it discussed ?
What were the arguments ?
What was the balance of opinion on that occasion ?
Surely he can share that with us this evening .
What is more , will he take back to the further discussions in the Council the advantages of untying aid ?
According to the World Bank , this increases aid effectiveness by between 12 and 20 per cent .
Surely , he would agree that development is about helping developing countries to help themselves .
And if we rely on European consultants , European companies , European technical assistance , are we not just reinforcing the dependence which development is trying to replace ?
Does he finally agree that untying aid increases the role of the private sector within developing countries ?
It increases local skills and knowledge .
It brings about local ownership development projects .
If he does agree , will he do something about it ?
You will understand that , given the discretion required of the President-in-Office of the Council , I am not going to publicly reveal the precise positions adopted by the various States and which countries did not agree with the idea of separating development assistance from commercial interests .
You will be aware that very often there is a series of special credits within the development assistance mechanisms dedicated to financing development assistance projects provided that they favour the implementation or realisation of contacts with companies located in the States .
Whilst I do not wish to make an assessment of whether this is a good or a bad thing , it has been an extremely powerful instrument in encouraging countries to allocate large amounts of money to development assistance , and has also been an extremely powerful instrument in encouraging many companies , boosted by these particular credits , to get involved in carrying out projects in countries where , if they had not been provided with these special credits , it would have been extremely risky to have started various projects .
Naturally , I would prefer it if this type of link did not exist , and this idea was defended by some countries , and naturally by the Commission , but the reality of a custom and practice that has been in force for many years now won through , and an agreement was not reached on the separation of development assistance from commercial interests .
This is all I can say in this regard .
Question No 17 by María Rodríguez Ramos ( H-0311 / 02 ) :
Subject : United Biscuits ' closure of the Fontaneda factory
On 4 April 2002 the multinational company United Biscuits , which owns the Fontaneda biscuit factory in Aguilar de Campo , announced its decision to close the factory without giving any advance notice to workers , who discovered the news in the press .
For more than a century , this factory has been producing a make of biscuit which is emblematic in Spain , and without the factory the district and its 8000 inhabitants have no real alternatives for development .
Mr Aznar , the current Council President , has said that there is nothing he can do , since multinationals have created many jobs and funded research , even though they create problems on other occasions .
Does the Council believe that , when multinationals act with complete disregard for the social rights of workers , there is really nothing the EU can do , and does it believe that these statements by its President tally with policy on the social Europe that we aim to build ?
As Mrs Rodríguez Ramos is well aware , in 1994 the Council adopted the Directive on the establishment of a European Works Council in order to consolidate the position of employees of multinational companies operating at European level by means of mechanisms for involving those employees in decision-making processes .
With regard to the more specific issue of alleviating the negative effects of massive job cuts , in 1975 the Council adopted the Directive on collective redundancies , amended in 1992 and consolidated in 1998 , in which specific requirements with regard to information and consultation from company executives were laid down .
In any event , it does not fall to the Council , in its capacity as a legislative body , to judge whether the case of United Biscuits , a multinational company , and the Fontaneda biscuits factory would be covered by these Directives or corresponding national legislation , nor if they have failed to respect the social rights of workers in this case .
These issues should be resolved by national judicial systems , and I believe that this particular case is already the subject of a judicial inquiry .
For its part , the Council considers that the legal instruments it has adopted should be fully applied in letter and in spirit .
If these instruments prove to be insufficient for the purposes of protecting workers ' rights , the Council is willing to study any proposal put forward by the Commission with the aim of improving the aforementioned instruments .
With regard to the part of your question that refers to statements made by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Aznar , the truth is that it does not fall to the Council to give its opinion in this regard , but I would also like to tell you that Mr Aznar 's government is actively encouraging dialogue with other investors , from Spain and abroad , to find a solution so that biscuit production at the Aguilar de Campoo factory can continue .
In view of the latest results from these conversations , all indicators point to the fact that it seems possible that this business can be kept active and viable . The latest stumbling block in the process of maintaining this business and getting it back on its feet , as I am sure you are aware , is the issue of the trademark , given that it belongs to United Biscuits , who still have reservations on handing it over to potential investors who may take over the factory .
In any case , with or without the trademark , there are various groups of investors that are clearly interested , who shall be given every facility to prevent this factory , in a town so small as Aguilar de Campoo , from having to close , which would have a very serious effect on the inhabitants of this town .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as you know , the Fontaneda factory and trademark are emblematic in Spain and are historically and geographically linked to the Aguilar de Campoo area .
They are the driving force behind social and economic development in this whole area , which is located in a European Objective 1 region with serious depopulation problems , where , in 2001 , 1 500 people have already lost their jobs .
The announcement of the closure - and it seems that today the company has put this right - was purely in business interests and would naturally mean that jobs would have to be relocated , which shows genuine contempt for workers ' rights , and furthermore the fictitious transfer of the trademark in order to keep producing these biscuits in a location other than the one it has been historically linked to .
This situation is too serious for the President-in-Office of the Council to say that nothing can be done .
It would have been more reasonable had he been concerned about the social consequences of these business decisions and the need for the European Union to confront the challenge of establishing Community principles that respect the social rights of workers , and that offer effective responses to the social , economic and territorial consequences of these decisions .
Does he really not think that such a declaration from the person representing the Presidency would have been more worthy and more in line with the social Europe we want to construct ?
I have always said that I would expect all MEPs to be fully aware of the institutional system in which we are working .
It is neither the Council nor the President-in-Office of the Council 's duty to make any judgement on rules that have been adopted .
The Commission has power of initiative and the rules adopted by the Council have to be adopted by the judges .
Given that you are insisting on some kind of statement by the President-in-Office of the Council , I would tell you that this statement cannot be taken out of context .
To say that government should respect the business decisions of multinational companies is one thing , but to exempt these multinationals from their duty to conform to current legislation is quite another .
In any case , United Biscuits has not been exempted . Current legislation has to apply to this company or any other company for that matter .
Therefore , current legislation must be applied .
If the legislation is insufficient , the Commission will have to put forward a new proposal , and we will give it our total support , and , in the meantime , I believe that the attitude shown by the Spanish Government - to immediately seek investors to resolve the problem , which has already had a result - shows that the Government 's will is precisely in tune with social concerns and that it wishes to prevent the closure of this factory .
I assure you , Mrs Rodríguez , that this factory is not going to close .
It is not going to close , not only because of the will of the people and of the workers , but also because of the will of the Government , which is fully aware that this closure would be an enormous social injustice .
Mr President , instead of a written reply to this question , could it perhaps be answered verbally next time ?
Then we can ask supplementary questions , which I for one would prefer .
Questions that were not answered during Question Time shall be answered in writing , Mr Gahler .
A question can only be repeated after a certain amount of time has elapsed - three months - if I am not mistaken .
I shall also reread the Rules of Procedure , but I cannot tell you right now if you will be able to ask this question orally next time .
According to the Rules of Procedure , this is not possible .
As the time allotted to Question Time has elapsed , Questions Nos 18 to 26 will be answered in writing .
The next item is the report ( A5-0133 / 2002 ) by Alain Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the division of competences between the European Union and the Member States ( 2001 / 2024 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is a first .
Never , since the Treaty of Rome , have either the governments or the European institutions thought it useful to reconsider the division of roles within the Union .
The report which you are considering today is the result of a real joint effort which goes far beyond the rapporteur himself or the opinion of any political group .
It is the culmination of fifteen months of work .
The draft adopted by your Committee on Constitutional Affairs has taken on board the principal proposals of the Committee of the Regions and the four committees consulted , plus one hundred and seventy amendments originating from thirty different authors belonging to all groups .
We have not attempted to re-write the Treaties , but rather to lay down guidelines for such a re-write , which is necessary .
We have done this on the basis of several important policy options .
Firstly , we found that the text of the Treaties was drafted by diplomats for their own use , rather like a car being built by mechanics for mechanics only .
Our first objective is therefore to bring the text within everybody 's reach , in other words to re-write the Treaties in the spirit of a clearer , shorter and more coherent constitution .
Those paragraphs of the Treaties not included in the Constitution would remain applicable but would no longer form part of primary legislation .
Secondly , a general framework of competences would be constructed around three categories .
First , competence is in principle devolved to the Member States .
We are not proposing a list of competences exclusive to the Member States .
The fact that this principle of Member States ' competence is not expressly mentioned in the Constitution seems to us to reinforce it .
Second , the Union has its own competences .
In those areas , it can act alone , as in the case of customs or currency , or it may have primary responsibility , as in the case of the internal market , competition or cohesion policies .
Third , and finally , there are shared competences . This will be by far the longest list .
The Constitution will have to specify , in each case , the objective and scope of the Union 's action , by applying the principle of subsidiarity .
Essentially , we propose to use the existing division between these headings , but with two important political changes . First of all , a distinction is made between political competence and technical competence .
This is what is known as the hierarchy of standards .
Finally , and most important , primary responsibility for foreign and defence policy on the one hand and for freedom and security aspects on the other is transferred to the Union .
As far as these two essential areas are concerned , ten years of applying the Maastricht Treaty have confirmed both the absolute need for joint action and , unfortunately , the inefficacy of the intergovernmental procedures .
Thirdly , it seems important to safeguard the possibility of adapting this framework without having to resort to the excessively complicated and exceptional procedure of constitutional review .
In order to do this , we propose that a mechanism should be retained , such as Article 308 , but that it should be made to work in both directions : transferring competence to the Union or returning it to the Member States in the case of issues for which the national dimension has become predominant once more .
Fourthly , in order to arbitrate in cases of conflicting competences , we propose a solution involving the courts rather than the political bodies .
The Court of Justice would be transformed into a Constitutional Court , and an emergency procedure would be introduced , allowing a qualified majority of the Council , the European Parliament or the Commission to bring matters before the Court between the time when a European law is finally adopted and the time when it comes into force .
Fifthly , and finally , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs spent a long time discussing the problem of the regions and of the other territorial authorities .
The compromise text finally adopted invites Member States to make proposals to the Union so as to ensure that their territorial authorities are more involved in the activities of the Union .
Mr President , the timetable for Parliament 's work has been particularly well-chosen , because next week the European Convention will be considering the subject .
Our resolution will therefore be the first working document of the Convention on this essential subject , and in fact , if truth be told , the only document .
If Parliament gives it a large majority , representing the main political groups and all the different countries , that will give our resolution considerable political authority , and for that I should like to thank you .
Mr President , this report is intended as a contribution to the revision of the Treaties and as a contribution to a European constitution .
Draft constitutions are always politically motivated and include strategic and tactical objectives and considerations as well as aspects of power politics .
The Spinelli draft back in 1984 accepted the competences of the EU and the division of labour between the EU and the Member States , just as the Lamassoure report quite rightly does today .
And the question of competences is even more important now , especially in the area of the economic constitution and economic legislation .
If European economic policy is to be a success and the European social model is to subsist , the competence of the Union in the important areas of the internal market in the broadest sense , the four freedoms - namely financial services , competition , customs and monetary policy - must be retained and the report rightly emphasises this .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs considers that the division of competences in the report is lacking in democratic legitimacy as far as policy coordination is concerned .
We already know from experience with economic policy coordination that competence for coordination needs to rest with the Union if we are to avoid previous shortcomings .
It is not just a question of the democratic control which needs to be exercised by the European Parliament here ; no , what we are trying to do as far as policy coordination is concerned - especially economic policy coordination - is to move from negative to positive policy coordination .
Positive policy coordination requires both clear democratic legitimacy and unified implementation .
The broad economic guidelines , for example , ought therefore to be set jointly by the Council and the European Parliament , based on a formal proposal from the Commission .
This would then serve as an example for other political areas in which coordination should and must be exercised .
The authority , indeed the moral obligation , to set up such a far-reaching framework in the interest of economic welfare is provided by the Principles chapter of the EC Treaty , which lists among Union activities the adoption of an economic policy based on the definition of common objectives which can and must achieve , in particular , harmonious , balanced and sustainable development of economic activities , a high level of employment and sustainable , non-inflationary growth , as well as social protection .
In keeping with the Lisbon process , I am calling in the strongest possible terms for the European Parliament to come down in favour of policy coordination which deserves to be described as such and which makes it quite clear that policies in the general interest can only succeed if the common interest factor is also visible .
Mr President , I am speaking today as the representative of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , which has had to deal with questions of competence from a very early stage , but has not , unfortunately , been sufficiently involved in the latest .
I see that the report proposes that a special report on this matter be drawn up , and I consider this a very good thing , as these questions are not actually adequately dealt with in the report itself .
I would like to take this opportunity to clarify again the position of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , and then perhaps a place might be found for it when this special report is prepared .
I consider it most important that we should not be waiting too long for it , as , if these questions are not resolved while we prepare for the new constitution , it will , I think , be very hard for those citizens who identify with the regions and local authorities to accept this constitution as being their own .
I would like to point out that most EU legislation does not only touch on national competences and national law , but has a direct effect on local rights .
We see this in the area of public services , we see it in the economy as a whole , we see it when it comes to tendering , and so on and so forth .
That is why we need to build in an early warning system .
We have put forward two basic suggestions about this .
One is that all laws should be developed in line with certain principles that would apply across the board , ranging from the principle of subsidiarity to that of partnership .
The other aims to involve regional and local authorities as early as the preparatory stage of legislative processes , that alone being the guarantee that their standpoints will be taken into account with all the others , something which even national representatives will often not have done at the end of the legislative process .
My request to the rapporteur is that , in future , we should carry on working on this issue with the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , and keep this in mind when we do so .
Mr President , this is not the best time to debate the Lamassoure report .
This is because it is very late and , secondly , because the final of the Champions League is being played and Real Madrid - I am sorry , Mrs Randzio-Plath , Mrs Schroedter - are beating Bayer Leverkusen . Oh , no !
Bayer have equalised .
No-one is perfect .
This is bad news , because I was so happy and now the score is one all .
Yet this is also a good time to debate this report , because it is extremely important .
I would firstly like to pay homage to Mr Lamassoure , who is not only a highly intelligent rapporteur , but also a rapporteur from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but who , although he has not said so himself , has seen every single article from his original proposal amended .
This , in itself , is great proof of his flexibility and political capacity .
Look at him , he even seems cheerful .
He could have been very angry at all the changes that have been made - but no - he is happy , because , at the end of the day , the Lamassoure report characterises a solid position adopted by Parliament on an enormously difficult and complicated issue , which causes a great deal of conflict .
I believe , Mr President , that in addition to Mr Lamassoure 's valour in having drawn up this report , we have achieved something very important , which is to have a Parliament position on this issue , a position which , additionally , brings together what Parliament has been advocating for fifty years , which in my opinion , is very important .
In the Lamassoure report , we are defending the competences allocated to the EU .
The rapporteur states this very clearly . We have decided that the European Union must enjoy only the competences allocated to it by the Treaties and no others , which means that we are against this idea of a catalogue of competences , which would only serve to add rigidity to the Union 's competences .
We are in favour of a flexible interpretation and of the idea that , at any moment , through the mechanisms he has upheld , from Article No 308 and other Articles from the Treaty , Article No 99 specifically , we can accommodate the needs of the Union and the aspirations of its citizens .
Secondly , I believe that the Lamassoure report also puts forward a very solid position on one of the great issues in the Convention , the control of subsidiarity .
I believe that one of the main issues in the debate on the Convention will be how to control subsidiarity , for , as the rapporteur has very clearly stated , the great majority of competences are competences shared between the Union and the Member States .
Therefore , to know at which moment we have to use one and at which the other will be the key to keeping Europe running at the rhythm its citizens require .
I believe that we also have a very solid position in this regard .
I am going to make a declaration , because I know that some fellow Members still have doubts , in favour of the position taken by Alain Lamassoure : I believe the control of subsidiarity should be exercised by the body within whose competence it falls to make proposals - in other words - the European Commission .
I believe that the European Commission must have the right of initiative and that it must take charge of subsidiarity .
However , I believe that , if there are any discrepancies , we need to find a way to resolve them , and the way to do this is not through a political body or some sort of subsidiarity chamber , but through a system similar to the one established by the French Constitution for the French Constitutional Council , in which a month is given for the issue to be resolved .
It seems to me that this is a solid , principled position : control by the Commission , with a Constitutional Council , and I believe that we should defend this position .
Finally , Mr President , I believe that the Lamassoure proposal is ambitious .
There is a William Faulkner character who I like very much and am very fond of , who says that we have to have very ambitious dreams , so that , as we go through life chasing these dreams , we know where we stand in relation to them .
I believe that the Lamassoure report allows this and that all our hopes and dreams are also permitted .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Lamassoure on his work these last few months and on the remarkable result he has produced .
It means that the European Parliament will be there at the Convention with a set of proposals on the table .
We will have done our work in terms of contributing ideas and proposals to the Convention and that in itself is very important .
It is important especially if we look at the climate surrounding some of these discussions and debates .
There are those who are alleging that the European Union has become an over-centralised monstrosity ; that we need to take powers back to the Member States ; that we should define a catalogue of competences specifying in great detail what the EU is allowed and not allowed to do .
This report refutes those arguments .
It demonstrates quite clearly , in a very good response , that the competences of the European Union are not over-done : they are , in fact , finely tuned according to the subject .
There are some areas where the Union has what could be called an exclusive competence - though that term has been avoided in the resolution .
They are quite limited but important .
The bulk of the Union 's responsibilities are what could be called shared competences , where the intensity of Union action varies greatly from one subject to another .
In some areas we lay down detailed legislation - which the Member States have to comply with . In other areas the Union has a coordinating role and in still other areas it contributes with complementary actions .
This is flexible and it is adapted to the needs of different policy areas , and should remain so .
The true guarantee against over-centralisation is , and should be , a political guarantee as we consider proposals in the normal procedures of the institutions : from the Commission , as Mr Méndez de Vigo has just said , when it makes its proposals to us as a Parliament , and also the Council .
Let us remind ourselves who sits on the Council : national ministers , members of national governments , accountable to national parliaments - not people who are predisposed towards centralising everything in the European Union .
Not at all .
You have to convince a very large majority of them to get a qualified majority .
These are the political guarantees , the procedural guarantees against over-centralisation , and the ministers in the Council can , and should , involve their national parliaments as well .
The Treaty of Amsterdam gave a protocol giving a six-week period for ministers to discuss with their national parliaments .
That is how national parliaments should be involved , not through some new chamber of subsidiarity or some new institution .
All this is well presented in the report .
Where we in the Socialist Group have a reservation is on the legal control of subsidiarity .
It exists already : the Court is a constitutional court in many ways .
We do not , however , think a new extra procedure - an emergency procedure - is needed , and the wording should be tightened up to show that on shared competences detailed legislation can sometimes be laid down and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the Liberal Group strongly welcomes the report for not simply revisiting existing powers to improve clarity but for boldly seeking to adjust competences to face the challenges that the Union knows , especially in the foreign and security field .
The report will serve as the first contribution to the Convention on the question of competences .
I trust that the Convention will follow the wise approach in rejecting the rigid and misleading concept of exclusive competences and in focusing instead on developing a more sophisticated system of power sharing .
My group supports the idea of creating a new judicial procedure of constitutional complaint for breaches of competency , which implies the rapid evolution of the European Court .
The procedure would be rarely deployed , but it represents a significant insurance scheme to see that the Union authorities do not abuse their reinforced powers .
A further area deserving of greater focus concerns the regions , which can be , and should be , useful intermediaries between the citizen on the one hand and the supranational authorities on the other .
We are proposing amendments which will strengthen the report in this respect .
Mr President , like others I take it to be a great privilege to participate in this debate - late in the day , though it is .
My own group has two particular points that we would like to ask colleagues to build into the report before it finally sees the light of day .
Firstly , just an allusion to the significance of the democratic deficit and the need , finally , fully to democratise the institutions of the Union .
As long as we do not call it a " permanent " democratic deficit , I am sure that the PPE-DE Group will be with us on that , and I hope that will be written in .
Further , we suggest - and colleagues on the left are very much in agreement with this - that a little more emphasis on the social , as well as the economic and political element - should be written in .
Apart from that , we are really very happy with the way this is going forward and look forward to voting for it tomorrow .
The key point Mr Lamassoure makes - and has made throughout - is that the issue is not one of needing to rewrite a new list of competences for the institutions but a need to draw to citizens ' attention to the fact that there is already a very adequate statement of the different kinds of competences - the Union 's own competences and the shared ones - and the fact that the principle of residuarity governs the rest .
The states are responsible for what is not given to the Union .
All that is clear in principle , but it could do with being stated more clearly in practice so that citizens are better aware of it .
That is a very important point .
In that context , we raise the issue of subsidiarity .
Where competences are shared , it is important indeed that in all those areas where local knowledge ought to prevail , local knowledge does prevail .
That is to say , that decisions are taken at the most appropriate level for them .
Recital G makes a very important contribution to expanding and giving greater bite to the idea of subsidiarity , and that is also to be very greatly welcomed .
We in our group believe much in extended subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity does not stop at the front door of the Member States : it goes right down to the territorial entities within the Member States , to the local authorities within the Member States , and that is of critical importance to us all .
We , along with the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Liberals , would like a little more strength to it , but we do not mind .
This report as it stands now represents a huge step forward in the thinking of Europeans and of this Parliament .
I repeat , it is a huge privilege to take part in this debate and in particular - and I say it in his presence - it is a privilege to have taken part in a debate led by Mr Lamassoure , who has done such an extraordinary job of setting up the architecture but being willing to adjust the sculpture , to borrow a metaphor of his own this morning .
He has done a fantastic job , we are all greatly in his debt , and I hope my group will vote unanimously with him tomorrow .
Mr President , the issue with which Mr Lamassoure 's report deals is indeed a complex one .
This was apparent not only in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but was also shown by the first debates in the Convention , to whose work this report will surely make a contribution .
For that the rapporteur deserves our gratitude .
I abstained in the vote on this report in the Committee and would like to adduce a number of examples of things which , to my mind , the report has not yet addressed in a convincing way .
It may well be helpful to define the three types of competence that already exist , but that falls short of a clear statement that the first priority must be to resolve Europe 's problem with democracy .
When we come to the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality , things strike me as having been turned on their head .
Why ?
The report gives the impression that Court rulings are needed in order for both principles to be adhered to and put into effect .
Nowhere , though , in the text as a whole , is there any mention of the fact that the real problem is to be found elsewhere , with the European political actors who actually initiate action .
There are clear provisions in the Treaties , for example the protocol on subsidiarity in the Treaty of Amsterdam , by which all the institutions are bound .
The point actually at issue is rather how they carry out the duties accruing to them on that basis , how seriously they really check whether the principles are being infringed before they take action .
At the end of the day , everyone has to do this sort of initial check .
If they did , nobody would have to go to the ECJ before the entry into force of a legal measure which in most cases has taken years of debate and associated procedures to come into being .
Point 33 states that the framework of competences is to be reviewed after ten years .
What this means , and what its point is , is a mystery to me .
Is it meant to mean that there is to be an amendment to the Treaties every ten years ?
Is a rule of this sort really what is wanted , something that is rigidly fixed to a ten-year cycle and utterly divorced from potential political frameworks and requirements ?
Above all , though , the report fails to make clear the need for a social Europe , and that its creation is one of the EU 's most pressing tasks against the backdrop of economic and monetary union .
We set ourselves the objective of promoting economic and social progress , with a high level of employment as well .
We even want to achieve full employment by 2010 .
The words to date have been splendid , but they need to be backed up by actions .
Employment and social security are not variables in competition , but every citizen 's individual and fundamental right , and it is in that direction that the European Union must develop .
Mr President , I gave the wrong information .
I shall correct that now : Real Madrid 2 , Bayern Leverkusen 1 !
I am sure all of us who are not participants will be very happy to hear that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although we are unable to support the Lamassoure report in the final vote , I too would like to compliment the rapporteur on the extraordinarily high quality of his work .
I would like to welcome this report as one of the most significant documents in the debate in this House .
It is significant in terms of timetabling and the time chosen to present it , it is significant in that its subject matter is one of the most controversial and at the same time most critical for the future of the Union , and it is significant not only as regards the quality of the final report but also as regards the work and discussions that preceded the report .
It is also significant as regards the large number of amendments tabled , including many that fell by the wayside , and for its enormous theoretical richness .
Lastly , it is significant because it demonstrates an understanding and organisation of the system emerging from this work on the European Union and also in the light of the parallel discussions taking place in the Convention .
We regret not being able to support this motion in the final vote because we are even in agreement with the first two paragraphs , and we agree that the time has come to update the division of competences between the Union and its Member States on the basis of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality , in order to take account of the lessons of the Community 's history - particularly those lessons that unfortunately point to so many excesses and infringements of the principle of subsidiarity .
And we also agree that a better division of competences is needed and will result in a strengthening of democracy in Europe , which for us includes restoring greater importance to national democracies and the role of national parliaments and a new interparliamentary process for building the Europe of the future .
However , when we get to the third paragraph , we face an irreversible parting of the ways . We believe that at this point the report deviates from its original objective and joins the growing trend towards a European constitution , an EU constitution , which we cannot support .
Furthermore , we believe , because we are talking about competences here , that it is not within the competence of any European institution to draw up a European constitution .
It is within the competence of the Member States to draw up and revise treaties , and this is a contractual mechanism totally different from the mechanisms relating to constitutions , which are based on the existence of a sovereign people , a people governed by a sovereign body , and that is totally different from our mission in the European Union .
We accordingly differ on a matter of principle that we regard as being fundamental .
Furthermore , when Mr Méndez de Vigo spoke just now about powers of assignment , he rather put his finger on the key point : powers of assignment , and the fact that we recognise their existence , does not just mean what Mr Méndez de Vigo was referring to .
It also means that the Member States have competences under their own common law , and no one needs to assign them as long as the European Union only has such competences to the extent that the Member States delegate and assign them and may also withdraw them , as in the case of the new type of mechanism that would replace the existing Article 308 according to this report .
This is a very important point with consequences for the institutional framework and for how we see the competences of the European Union .
There are a few more observations that we would like to make .
For example , the criterion of synergy is mentioned amongst the criteria identified in Recital G , but this criterion can only be considered within a very limited framework .
The criterion of synergy and of effectiveness is , in itself , extremely dangerous , because that is how all the attacks on the principle of subsidiarity are made .
In isolation , it is easy to maintain that any given action would lead to greater effectiveness - and effectiveness is a dangerous word in itself because it can be used for anything - and to economies of scale , which would provide a platform for constant infringements of the principle of subsidiarity .
By way of conclusion , let me say that we welcome the report and would like to support it , but it is on the issue of this constitutional vision that we differ with the rapporteur , this vision of a European Union becoming ever more like a state , which we consider to be fundamentally at odds with the whole concept of Europe and with our vision of the future of the European Union - one which respects the individual nations .
Mr President , what the citizens want is not so much a division of competences between the European Union and the Member States , but rather the limitation of the competences of that Union , and that is also what the principle of subsidiarity requires .
Over the years , the Community structure has become a tangled undergrowth of texts and procedures in which even the most wary can become lost .
My group proposed several amendments which would help to reduce the inflated number of texts and competences .
Amendment No 34 , for example , proposes that it should be made possible , at the request of one or more States , and thus of their respective national parliaments , to abrogate a text if no majority can be found to confirm it .
My group is very concerned to find that , every time it has been claimed that this clarification exercise is being carried out , the end result is always exactly the opposite .
Yet everyone recognises that it is time to respond to the resentment and lack of interest on the part of our citizens , towards a Europe which is involved in too many things at too detailed a level .
This report only makes things worse by proposing to give the European Union the only powers which it does not yet have .
Thus it lists all the areas which should fall within the Union 's own competences , the list of shared competences , under the close control of the Commission , the guardian of the Treaties , and the Court of Justice , to which have now been added those concerned with the implementation of foreign policy .
As a final precaution a review clause is proposed , modelled on Article 308 , so that more competences can be added if necessary .
After noting that very little is left , one can understand the prudence expressed in paragraph 17 , which does not consider it necessary , unfortunately , to draw up a list of the competences exclusive to Member States .
I believe that , in the last analysis , this report is nothing more than yet another compilation of the claims which the European Parliament was unable to impose in Nice .
Europe is becoming a State above States , free to define its own priorities , while there are already too many meddlesome rules , imposed far away from the daily lives of our citizens and preventing the management of territories in accordance with local and national aspirations .
We shall continue to support the call for more diversity , proximity and transparency , even if these ' mores ' seem difficult to reconcile with the ' More Europe ' slogan of the current Spanish Presidency .
Mr President , Mr Lamassoure 's report reminds me of the film on the TV channel Arte about the ' European bubble ' and the ' Europe addicts ' .
It is all there in full , because the stated aim is indeed to create a centralising European super-state with full ruling powers , while the Member States will retain only a few so-called federal competences on the pretext of a principle of subsidiarity which is actually rendered inapplicable by all sorts of exceptions .
Thus the principle of subsidiarity becomes itself subsidiary , because it cannot prevent the application of Article 308 , or the Community acquis , or the self-proclaimed principle of the European Union .
I thought that the members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs were capable of greater skilfulness or caution , because in the final analysis , whatever the fate of the Laeken Conference , the European structure is looking more and more fragile , artificial and determined to turn itself into a free-trade zone .
What we should be doing is exactly the opposite , in other words we should be looking at what specific contribution each competence of Europe makes to each of our countries , and in the case of France , any Frenchman worth his salt cannot help but conclude that the consequences of that Europe are becoming increasingly negative .
Common sense and hard facts tell us that we should go back to the spirit of the Treaty of Rome , in other words , the joint exercising of certain economic competences in an associative rather than a supranational manner .
Yet because you are part of the system , or even on ideological grounds , you continue to chase after idle dreams .
Having committed the initial historical error of not geographically limiting the European Union by accepting in principle the accession of Turkey , you are now in the process of committing a second fatal error , as the Spanish say , by not limiting the competences of that Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Mrs Kaufmann spoke , the German team started to fall back .
I do not want to suggest , however , that there is any connection .
I am far more worked up about the sentiments Mr de Gaulle has just expressed , as , if he wants to make speeches expressing the desire to take the European Union back to the days before the internal market , one has to say that he was not thinking of France 's economic interests .
I am , therefore very grateful to Mr Lamassoure for what he said , for I believe that the model he has put forward possesses the balance called for between the clear regulation of competences and the need for us to live up to Walter Hallstein 's saying that the European Union is a creatio continua .
What this means is that we are in a position to continue the European Union 's development in line with what is needed .
It is of course perfectly clear that , when applying the subsidiarity principle , we must always take decisions in such a way that the decision is taken at the level at which it ideally should be .
On the other hand , though , we also have to make it clear that it is only appropriately clear delimitation that will enable us , in the negotiating process in the Convention and in the ensuing Intergovernmental Conference , to get agreement to us pushing through majority voting in the remaining areas as well .
There is a close connection here between clear competences and the further extension of majority voting , by which alone the former will be accepted both in political circles in the national capitals and among the public , who want this very clarity on this issue .
We cannot , though , create clarity in a conflict situation via the political level .
If a subsidiarity committee , consisting - as it would have to - of at least 100 MEPs and members of national Parliaments , were to be set up , decisions would be reached on the very same grounds of political opportunism as they are in the Council of Ministers and in this Parliament .
If , however , the regionality principle is applied , even a minority has a chance of getting its view accepted if it believes that powers have been exceeded .
That is why Mr Lamassoure 's approach , taking the matter to the European Court of Justice , is exactly the right one .
It would make it possible , both in the normal procedure and in this accelerated procedure , by way of a range of groups and institutions possessing the right of action , to defend competences where it is believed that the legislature is exceeding its powers .
I would like to propose to you that the national parliaments should also be added to the list of those bodies that possess the right of action in the ECJ .
I see making this possible as extraordinarily important , tactically astute from Parliament 's point of view and in its interests , and , in this case , as necessary and imperative .
In most countries whose regions have the power to pass legislation , those regions have such a right of action through the medium of a national chamber , and this is something that could , to a substantial extent , be taken up .
I do think that this is the decisive point of departure for achieving real decision-making power , getting responsibilities clearly defined , thereby gaining their acceptance , and at the same time guaranteeing legal certainty .
For that reason I would like to congratulate Mr Lamassoure on his report .
( Applause )
Mr Napolitano , I can assure you that your opening comments will be passed on to the Conference of Committee Chairmen , the Conference of Presidents and the services .
For me , as President for this sitting , it is much more interesting to listen to a good debate such as this than most others that take place in this Parliament .
Mr President , clarity , precision and intelligibility - these are obvious bywords in any body of rules and regulations .
They apply to parlour games , sport , constitutions and society in general .
Strangely enough , these bywords have not really left their mark on successive European Treaties and legislative texts over the years .
Indeed , the EU acquis is no game of dominoes , but affects 370 million people .
As a result of haggling over the least comma , anyone wanting to understand how the EU works is hardly likely to choose the Amsterdam Treaty , let alone the Nice Treaty , as bedtime reading if he or she wants to learn more .
It is not surprising that people do not trust the EU when it is so difficult to understand its decisions and division of responsibilities .
We too can get confused , even though we work with these matters on a daily basis .
Mr Lamassoure 's report is therefore an extremely important contribution to the Convention and to the domestic debate in our Member States .
The proposal provides a clear , instructive catalogue of what the EU is and should be doing .
This will be very useful when discussing a hopefully timely constitution .
The division of powers needs clarifying , perhaps not with a list of competences , but with a clearer outline of what the EU should do .
The EU must be stronger in certain areas , but there must also be safeguards against the EU taking on new duties that would best be carried out by citizens themselves in municipalities , regions or national parliaments .
The principle of subsidiarity must therefore be strengthened .
The local and regional level is extremely important , and I endorse the amendments aimed at re-introducing the regional partnership .
I hope we can get a specific proposal in that very area .
If we want the EU to be able to function with thirty Member States , then it must focus its power and commitment on the genuinely cross-border issues .
The drive to get a little order in the EU 's duties has taken a big step forward this evening , and I would like to thank Mr Lamassoure for his excellent work .
Mr President , Mr Lamassoure 's report is very interesting .
I share his ambition to give more powers to the Union so that it can cope with its responsibilities and with what is expected of it .
In particular I approve his efforts regarding foreign policy , defence and security .
However , I do have some objections .
We need to rewrite the objectives which form the basis for the Constitution of the Union , and that is what will convince our citizens that progress in competences is fully justified .
What are those objectives ?
The market , currency , freedom of movement - these are not enough .
We must go further .
At world level Europe is committed to effective multilateralism . It bases its security on dialogue , the abolition of poverty , and development links .
It chooses full employment and progress in human capacities .
It is against exclusion and bases its cohesion on the sharing of common goods , and finally it has given itself a public space which enables multinational and transnational Community citizenship and democracy to be exercised .
These choices are what gives Europe its identity .
In the form of a constitution , they should be the subject of an annual and multiannual policy agenda .
The balancing of rules and the division of competences are intended to achieve these objectives .
In this respect , the report lacks any ambition as regards the essential renewal of the social model and of growth , an important subject for our citizens and a subject on which we are divided .
The rules of competition must be balanced by common rules and tasks concerning security , public services and industrial policy .
The Union must have its own competence in matters involving economic policy , and it must have a redefined framework for the coordination of national policies , as well as fiscal harmonisation of the budgetary and revenue tools .
As for the exercising of these competences , the democratic challenge and the requirement for efficacy , on these points the report is too brief and a few amendments would improve it .
As for the nature of the actions of the Union , I cannot accept the assumption of the rapporteur , who believes that the Union can manage things only in exceptional cases .
A political Union which did not manage at all would actually be very irresponsible .
Finally , the separation and division of competences should not be based only on the principle of subsidiarity .
When coupled with the rule of competition , it does not legitimise a community .
It should be accompanied by a second principle , the principle of solidarity .
Let us try to spell it out .
Players in civil society must be consulted directly , and must be able to manage resources jointly in order to carry out projects which are of Community interest .
Let us therefore be brave enough to form a society in Europe .
Mr President , since I only have one minute in which to speak , I shall be very forthright .
We shall not be approving the Lamassoure report , for two main reasons .
Firstly , it hardly touches the question , which to us is all-important , of the democratic control of competences .
There is nothing about the control of subsidiarity by national democracies , and nothing , or almost nothing , on the exercise of European competences by national parliaments , in particular by the creation of an inter-parliamentary pillar .
Secondly , this report deals with the division of competences from an abstract technical angle , without ever mentioning the sovereignty of national democracies .
This abstract technical bias leads to erroneous federalist solutions which have a negative effect on democracy .
This is why the SOS Democracy Members have submitted a minority opinion which is attached to the report .
This is also why the French MPF Members have drawn up a counter-report in the form of replies to the Convention 's questionnaire on the tasks of the Union , ' Europe - what for ? ' .
This counter-report will be distributed by e-mail to all Members of Parliament , to the Members of the Convention and to anyone who asks for it .
Mr President , many people are very nervous about the EU 's being a sort of slide or helter-skelter of the kind that children use and on which there is really no stopping once you have started moving .
People are afraid that there are some folk down there in the EU , as they put it , who are trying to seize more competences , or more power , without asking them first .
Those myths are nourished on a daily basis by organised opponents , some of whom we have , of course , in Parliament .
I am therefore very pleased with this report , because it helps knock many of these myths on the head .
By that , I mean it states once and for all that it is the Member States who have the power , unless this is entrusted to the EU , and it states that the EU is a dynamic community in which competences are shared when it is most relevant to do so .
The report also has no truck with any catalogue of competences , which would make cooperation far too rigid a matter .
The report is in actual fact very realistic , and Parliament can now no longer be accused of consisting of extremists with their heads in the clouds .
That is something which I also hope that organised opponents in my own country , Denmark , will take account of .
I am talking in this context to Mr Bonde , even though he is not here this evening .
I have a couple of observations on individual parts of the report . On the subject of the subsidiarity principle , I am delighted it has been stated that this is not just a legal principle but also a political principle , for we must have more focus on subsidiarity as a political principle and thus force the Commission to explain itself more effectively to people .
I myself have proposed that an individual Commissioner be responsible for subsidiarity , for that would give us elected representatives here in Parliament the ability to hold the Commission responsible for the subsidiarity issue and so force it both to explain itself directly to people and to justify its actions to them .
Mr President , I am not a member of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and was not party to the discussions .
However , what I have heard so far reminds me of a news item I saw recently on the television .
Two Siamese twins were successfully separated by doctors in the United States and both have survived .
What I mean is that , if we look at competences and powers within the European Union , they are teratoid , they do not divide into regular geometrical shapes and we can only hope that we shall be able to divide them , even if it takes years of reform , and that both will survive without the need for the services of American doctors .
Two brief comments . The division of competences between the Member States and the Union must be judged not just on how efficient it is , but on how democratic it is .
Our citizens have every right to object to the abdication of power to the European Union , even if it makes sense technically , while this democratic deficit persists .
Secondly , the three levels : Union , Member States , regions .
We should remember what psychologists have to say about families with three children , about the child sandwiched in the middle which has a permanent identity problem and wonders , right into old age ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , not only on having succeeded , despite the conditions in which we find ourselves , in attracting a fuller House than we normally get at an evening sitting , but above all for the excellence of his report , for having successfully completed a very difficult exercise , and finally , for gaining tomorrow a vote which I believe could be to the honour of Parliament with regard to the quality of the support which the Lamassoure report will receive .


I believe that we are in a constituent phase .
At least , I hope so .
I believe that the contribution of the Lamassoure report should be duly taken into consideration , above all by the Commission , and then by the Convention .
The Italian radicals support most of the proposals contained in this report .
They see it as an important lever to enable our reflections to progress , so that finally we shall provide ourselves with institutions and a constitutional assembly which can enable us to complete an enlargement which , without such a structure , would run the risk of really turning us into a free trade area with no soul and no interest in taking part in it .
I believe , therefore , that we are showing the way , and that the other reports too , the other positions adopted by Parliament , will make it possible for Parliament 's delegation to make its voice heard .
That , at any rate , is what I am hoping .
We could have done more .
I believe that in the spirit of the Lamassoure report we shall be able to make progress in other contexts , on even more specific proposals , heading even more in the direction of a federally based Europe .
Mr President , I wish to begin by explaining to the House that the British Conservative delegation is going to abstain on Mr Lamassoure 's report , which , while it contains some excellent parts , also contains some parts which we cannot accept .
I must emphasise that I am saying this not to gainsay the quality of the rapporteur 's work or to underestimate the effort he has put in .
For the British , having no formal written constitution and having been a unitary country until quite recently , systematic analysis of the kind we are considering this evening is especially unfamiliar .
Having said that , as part of the essential process of making Europe 's political activities more clear , understandable , democratic and accountable and making Europe suitable for an enlarged Union , it is necessary that this work is done and done rigorously .
The very fact that we find that we cannot support some of its conclusions does not seem to me to invalidate the underlying exercise .
Europe 's constitutional arrangements need improving , clarifying and tidying up .
But that process must not be allowed to be the excuse for creeping Euro-centralisation .
Rather , it must be used to develop a Europe built around its nation-states , taking decisions together , according to evolving systems of decision-making , which make them suitable and appropriate to a 21st-century world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lamassoure , if he is listening , may perhaps take it as special praise when I tell him that rarely has a report been discussed as long or as vehemently as his , to the chagrin of our co-ordinator Richard Corbett , to whom we have given much to do .
Let me , though , make just two comments on it .
The first has to do with the subsidiarity issue and the relationship with the regions .
I was a member of a provincial government in Austria .
I know about the many advantages , and also about the problems , associated with the regions and with subsidiarity .
I would simply plead for us not to forget the political cohesion that the EU needs when we are taking all these steps towards a better relationship with the regions , and for us to look carefully when taking these steps .
That strikes me as being of absolute importance .
The second is that today 's debate is not taking place in a sanitised vacuum , and what is happening in politics , especially the elections taking place today in the Netherlands , insofar as we have any information about them , shows that a certain segment of the population has a growing tendency to vote and act by reference to European policy .
I nonetheless am of the opinion , with reference to item 20 , that the rapporteur and , I assume , we Members of this House ourselves when we vote tomorrow , will be quite right to stipulate that external and internal security in particular are among the EU 's own powers .
For the Members who , when speaking here , use the fears and criticisms expressed in these elections in order to argue against the strengthening of the European Union in these areas , are not speaking in the citizens ' interest .
It is they , the citizens , who have an interest in greater security at home and abroad .
If we were to ask them and perhaps explain this to them better , we would gain greater consent and support for the European Union having these powers .
So I would like to say loud and clear that the EU 's own powers , to which Mr Lamassoure clearly holds fast in his report , meet with our support , because we need more activities by the European Union , and better reasoning behind them , in the interests of our citizens ' security both in terms of foreign policy and of the area of freedom and security .
Mr President , the report of Mr Lamassoure is indeed a very important contribution to the much needed clarification of our European legal framework .
I can only echo what the rapporteur says about the position of the new players in the European game - the applicant countries and what he calls " regions with legislative powers " .
The report decides to entrust the main guidelines to the Convention .
But as long as every Member State sticks to its own selfish interests , the established rules will not permit stateless nations such as the Basque region to take part in the building of democratic structures .
We know that , under the new decentralisation process for the French Republic , many things will change - even in the Basque region .
However , much more will remain the same .
The most appropriate action at this time would be to pay attention to what the stateless nations are asking for ; that is to say the right to exist in a political link to Europe where all peoples will be present as such .
The Convention ought to take this on board and include it in the final draft for 2003 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to join those who have congratulated Mr Lamassoure on his excellent report , and , if time permits , to take up three points in it .

The first has to do with the subsidiarity principle and the monitoring of how it is adhered to .
I would have liked us to have granted right of action to those regions that possess the right to enact legislation .
I do not know whether we will find a majority in support of that , but I would think it right and proper , and a step in the right direction , to at least grant that right of action to the national Parliaments .
Taking the review clause as my second point , I consider it of extraordinary importance that Mr Lamassoure makes it clear that this can work in both directions .
I believe that future negotiations will depend on that to a very significant degree .
Thirdly , the report refers to improvement of the legislative process , which must , for a start , involve the legislative function being , as Mr Lamassoure proposes , more clearly demarcated from the executive - and that includes the terminology used .
It involves the EU 's lawmaking being relieved of the burden of technical details .
I would like to add that the agreements reached between the three institutions on the basis of the proposals in the financial services area are not yet adequate to deal with democratic control , but that they can at least serve to point the right way ahead .
Mr President , I believe that the best response we can give to the extreme right and to any fashionable populist discourse against the European Union is to build more and better Europe .
In my opinion , the Lamassoure report is particularly timely for this very reason .
We believe that , to solve the citizens ' problems , we need a Europe that has the appropriate competences and the institutional instruments required to manage them correctly and sufficient resources to implement them .
This will certainly take place , because the citizens demand more Europe .
I am one of those who believes that it is not true that citizens want to re-nationalise competences , nor do they think the European Union is some kind of giant whose voracity knows no bounds .
I believe that the Lamassoure report is appropriate precisely for this reason , and more importantly , that its general approach is correct .
We need to revise the competences of the European Union upwards , rejecting any kind of re-nationalisation , weakening or curtailment of those which already exist .
I also consider it vital for there to be increasing flexibility in order to develop the Community acquis and for this reason I agree that there should be no ' competence catalogue ' in the strict sense .
I also consider that if there are three areas in which the competences of the EU should be increased , these are in economic governance and social Europe , foreign policy , and legal affairs and the internal market .
In this regard , it is appropriate that there is a review clause , in the fashion of the current Article No 308 , and to establish a clear hierarchy of acts in order that what today is primary law continues to be considered in this regard .
I also believe that the regions , particularly those with legislative capacity , should have an increasing role in the future of the European Union , so that they can apply these very Community competences .

Mr President , Mr Lamassoure 's report is a good one both in terms of methodology and substance .
I would like to mention three points regarding the methodology : it examines the contradictions and weaknesses in the present system of competences in the light of intellectually honest criteria , presenting the history of our institutions ; it then goes on to clearly define a model for sharing competences acceptable to European public opinion and eliminating doubts about the absorption of competences by the European institutions , clarifying a debate in which there is an unfortunate display of demagogy and lack of ethics with regard to the European dynamic ; and lastly , whilst they are subject to discussion , certain proposals do not deviate from a viable model for the functioning of the European Union , without exaggerating the federalist orthodoxy or subterfuges in terms of European revisionism .
However , what really stands out is the hard core of specific competences .
Nothing has been lost here of the original model , of its adaptability to new circumstances and of the courage to propose new responsibilities with regard to the definition of foreign and defence policy , as regards the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , and even regarding the financing of the budget .
Furthermore , this report sets out the Union 's own responsibilities with regard to solidarity between its Member States and its citizens , especially on the question of cohesion and of structural policy .
So it is no wonder , Mr Lamassoure , that I am heaping such praise on you and that we are voting in favour of your report .
The Convention should make good use of it and reflect carefully on it if we are to be given an opportunity to have a modern treaty in which the European Union provides added value for its citizens , its regions and its Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , and Mr Lamassoure , to whom many thanks , people in my country understand things very well , as 53 % of them think that the European Union will become more important in the next few years .
At the same time , seven out of ten of them assert that too little account is taken of the interests of the individual citizen .
I attribute this tension to the fact that the realities of the decision-making and opinion-forming process not being sufficiently clearly and transparently communicated .
Mr Lamassoure 's report is helpful precisely because it very clearly highlights the mutual involvement and interaction between citizens , communities , regions , nations and Europe .
The EU is not somewhere else ; rather , we all make up Europe .
No decisions are reached without the agreement of the Member States , and therefore without the national parliaments , when they see themselves as monitoring what the representatives of their national governments do in the Council .
Clear competences lead to clear responsibilities and clear parliamentary authority and thus to the decision-making process becoming more transparent .
I also think , though , that we have to make it clear that differing competences must not be allowed to lead to the blocking or delaying of jointly-agreed objectives such as the four freedoms , the financial services action plan or the internal market .
Differing competences must not be allowed to lead to the Commission 's competence as guardian of the Treaties - in such matters as the Stability and Growth Pact - being nullified .
Not all the problems faced by our countries ' regions can be resolved through Europe .
Co-decision by Parliament leads to greater transparency , more democracy , better control and hence to greater proximity to the public .
Mr President , some of my fellow Members have complained that this debate is taking place at night .
I think that Mr Lamassoure , who is very knowledgeable on his country 's history , knows that some of the most important events have taken place at night .
I would remind him of the night of 4 August 1789 , when the French Revolutionary Assembly abolished all mediaeval and feudal rights .
I believe that we are in the midst of a revolutionary process and that Mr Lamassoure - perhaps without knowing - is starting a revolution .
We have become accustomed to a European Union that has been developing organically , and maybe this is the reason why Mr Inglewood was not very inclined to agree with the new process .
Now Mr Lamassoure is presenting us with a real alternative , that of heading towards a federal Europe .
The advantage of a federal Europe , highlighted by some of the previous speakers , such as Mr Karas , is that citizens , who at the moment are completely befuddled by all the Community jargon , will be able to understand it much more easily .
For example , if there is a clear distinction between the competences which fall to European institutions and those which fall to Member States , we can dispense with this word which , in any case , no-one understands - subsidiarity .
All we will need to say is that it does not fall within the competence of the European Union to deal with a particular issue because it falls within the national competence of the Member States .
Therefore , I believe that , on this point , I , like other members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , have to support the Lamassoure proposal , because it makes particular reference to the Council 's slogan this year , which is ' more Europe ' , a slogan behind my very election as a Socialist MEP , because , in effect , we believe that we need to construct ' more Europe ' and we believe that the way we can build more Europe is through federal procedures such as those proposed by Mr Lamassoure .
I believe there are some problems .
For example , I have problems with the special constitutionality appeal , which includes the famous subsidiarity appeal .
The Court of Justice already acts as constitutional court , including the famous subsidiarity appeal , and I am slightly concerned about this appeal that appears to be on the horizon .
We had it in Spain and we had to remove it because it was a means of blocking the process of Community development .
I fully expect that tomorrow this Parliament will support the Lamassoure proposal en masse and I hope that this will serve as a basis for work in the Convention and later in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , sometimes I feel that this House is so preoccupied with its own debates that it has lost sight of what is going on beyond its walls .
Across Europe voters feel taken for granted by their politicians ; they feel that how they vote makes little difference and that they have next to no control over their own futures .
Yet , our response is to offer them more of the same .
This report confirms and entrenches the progressive transfer of powers from national parliaments to the European Union institutions .
It sets out the areas where the Union should have full or partial control but it offers no commensurate list of matters to be reserved for the nation-states .
It offers a mechanism for the extension of EU jurisdiction into new areas , but no equivalent mechanism for the repatriation of powers .
While I fully respect the sincerity of those who support the report , it seems to me that their case is based on two questionable assumptions .
First , there is an implicit premise that the very fact of there being an international dimension to some policy area of itself justifies a common European approach .
This reasoning may be superficially plausible but I find it specious .
After all , the absence of a supranational policy does not mean that the Member States are unable to cooperate one with another .
It may well be that multilateral collaboration can produce better results than enforced uniformity .
Second , there is a reluctance to recognise any matter as being exclusively national .
But again , the fact that a nation has complete jurisdiction in a given field , does not preclude its working with its neighbours .
The nation-states must be allowed to define certain areas of policy as being essentially domestic in that they have no direct impact on the internal affairs of other Member States .
Further , they should have the right to guarantee this judicial supremacy in their constitutions .
Just as the European Treaties define the competences of the Union , so the national constitutions should be able to ring-fence certain matters of wholly national concern .
I do not have time now to elaborate a full list of these areas , although I have done so in a paper published by the SOS Democracy Intergroup .
The transfer of powers must be allowed to happen both ways : it is dogmatic and wrong to assume that action at Brussels level is inherently preferable to national action .
It is this attitude that is widening the rift between those of us in this House and our constituents beyond it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the present allocation of competences between the EU and the Member States seems almost made to measure for populists of whatever stripe .
Whenever someone in the Member States wants to evade responsibility for something that is important and necessary , but unpopular , they can , with a true ring of conviction , shrug off responsibility onto the EU .
' My dear fellow-citizens , I would far rather do it another way , but Brussels will not let me ! '
You can tell the voters anything you like , as they do not understand the allocation of competences .
In any case , the public are puzzled by the way powers are apportioned .
Never in the last fifty years has it been easy to understand , and today it has become incomprehensible .
The system of restricted prerogatives has become an unrestricted supermarket of European policies , an unworkable situation that we want to use the Lamassoure Report to fundamentally change ; it is all about making things orderly , systematic and comprehensible .
Much of it , indeed most of it , appears to be well done .
There is one topic that I consider especially important , and I am glad that the rapporteur has taken on board one of my suggestions .
This is to do with future prohibition of what is termed the misuse of legal form .
In the past , when power to enact regulations or directives was lacking , the European institutions all too frequently resorted to sleight-of-hand and invented an action plan , a measure , a pilot project and more of the same thing .
The missing competence thus ceased to be a problem .
If we henceforth block this gate of entry into national powers , we will be closing Pandora 's box , and thereby , I hope , making Europe a bit more straightforward and comprehensible , and therefore more acceptable in the eyes of its citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am actually also of the opinion that this report represents a genuine step forward in the debate on the competences of Europe - not only intellectually , but also politically .
I will thank Mr Lamassoure not only for thinking deeply , but also for listening intently during our debates .
Above all , I see this report as carrying two messages .
As MEPs , we also want to be given definite responsibilities .
Our defence against the charge of centralist interference is that it is clearly laid down what we are competent to do and what we are not competent to do .
The second message contained in the report is that we want more Europe in external relations , and more Europe in the worldwide representation of European interests , but that we are also ready to do without one thing or another in internal matters and leave detailed rules to the Member States .
It is interesting that a success has been made of decentralisation in recent years , not only in all the EU 's Member States , but also in the acceding countries .
Even enterprises that work on a global scale act according to the principle of ' small units and big networks ' .
Hence it is in our own interests that we should , as MEPs , concentrate on the core competences we possess and should also give that outward expression .
The Commission has been remarkably bold in this respect ; you , Mr President of the Commission , Mr Barnier , and your fellow-Commissioner Mr Vitorino too , have had something to say about this yourselves .
This report offers our citizens - even the Euro-sceptics - a modern , effective , and transparent Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the cultural diversity of Europe is reflected in , among other things , the political systems of the Member States .
Taking responsibility in Europe means mutual recognition of the Member States ' constitutional arrangements , which are many and varied .
I am from a Member State with a federal constitution and see this as a great advantage , especially in terms of the greater proximity of politics to the citizen .
This makes me particularly grateful to our rapporteur , Mr Lamassoure , for taking up the topic of the regions , especially of those that possess legislative powers .
Some of these regions are larger , in terms of surface area and population , than the small Member States .
This disparity in political arrangements will be made greater by the accession of more Member States .
Item 34 and the compromise set out in item 39 are very important , as they highlight a new way of having recourse to law in disputes concerning subsidiarity and the principle of proportionality .
Let me draw my colleagues ' attention to one thing , namely that , in its judgment dated 3 May 2002 in the Jégo Quéré case , the European Court of First Instance declared itself to be a constitutional court .
The clear delimitation of competences is of the greatest significance as regards the public 's consent to further internal integration and to enlargement .
What Europe 's citizens want is for the Convention , when working out its proposals for a European constitutional treaty , to be guided by transparently clarifying the tasks to be performed by the EU and by the Member States respectively .
The latest Eurobarometer surveys indicate that 60 % of the EU 's citizens take pride in describing themselves as Europeans , and that two-thirds of the current population of the EU - as many as 80 % in Italy - want a European constitution .
Mr Lamassoure 's fine report is an important contribution by Parliament to the arduous process of attaining that goal .
So , I thank everybody and hope that we will be successful in the Convention !
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , our lengthy debate today has demonstrated that one topic on which we are taking a very positive line is the role of the regions in the European Union , and this has now , of course , been recognised in the Lamassoure Report .
It is planned that a special report on the role of the regions should be introduced , but I do think that our long debate might also have the result that , tomorrow morning , we get together and reconsider whether what we have just said might yet , in rather more definite form - on which point various groups have submitted amendments - be incorporated into the report .
The second point I would like to address concerns the powers reserved to the EU .
Mr Lamassoure quite rightly pointed out that external economic relations certainly belong in this category , being a very important area , and one in which the state of affairs is such that the Commission can arrange things properly , with the Council of Ministers helping with the orientation , but Parliament , in utter contrast to the US Congress , has almost no opportunity to influence matters .
The practical cooperation that we engage in with the Commission is excellent , but I believe that things must not remain the way they are .
We need to come off better out of the dividing-up of these competences , as this is a matter of particular importance to this institution of ours .
Perhaps some consideration , which is certainly necessary , could yet be given to this topic as well in the Convention .
In any case , I think the regions are an important subject .
Let me thank Mr Lamassoure very warmly for his excellent report .
We are , though , in my opinion , a bit too timid when it comes to the regions .
We might be expected to do a bit more .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall try to make use of these few minutes of ' time out ' in this very late debate , which , incidentally , coincide , as I said to Mr Mendez de Vigo , with the last two minutes of time out in the famous football match that he mentioned .
According to my information , Real Madrid are still leading two - one , and their second goal was scored by Zidane .
This information that I am giving you has not , however , prevented me from attentively following the whole of this debate , which has been of very high quality , on the issue of competences , an issue which lies at the heart of the Nice and Laeken declarations .
The resolution that you are about to adopt will in effect constitute a central element in the debate which has started on the future of the Union .
This is a central theme , because it raises fundamental political questions .
At the same time , however , as your rapporteur is well aware , it also raises far-reaching technical problems .
The debates at the last meeting of the Convention , like the contributions that have already been submitted for the next meeting and the numerous expert opinions , bear witness to this complex situation .
I should like , first of all , to offer my thanks , first to Parliament which , at the beginning of 2001 , took the initiative and launched a sort of premonitory reflection session on this difficult issue .
I should then like to thank the various parliamentary committees , in particular the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for the quality of its work .
The resulting resolution retains a high degree of clarity in spite of the density and complexity of the subject .
May I thank , in particular , Mr Lamassoure , who had no hesitation in carrying out very wide-ranging consultations in order to complete his report , even though the time limits imposed on him were extremely strict .
He did this with his usual spirit of openness , and very high level of expertise .
Like him , I believe that this version will be the authoritative one .
The result of this collective step forward is undeniably constructive , because it leads to three important ideas , and I can tell you , on behalf of the Commission , that this is how we regard them , and I shall now comment briefly on each one .
The first idea is the clarification of the whole of the legal framework of the European Union .
This clarification is inseparable from any ambitious institutional reform .
It is therefore proposed that we should adopt a true Constitution of the Union , bring the second and third pillars within the Community sphere , make a clearer distinction between legislative work and executive work , establish a hierarchy of standards and define the relevant instruments better .
From this vast programme of re-establishing legal equilibrium , I have naturally picked out the key aspect , the provision of a Constitution for the Union .
The Commission would like the European Union , having integrated the Charter of Fundamental Rights , to have a text of a constitutional nature .
The second important idea in this report is the classification of competences into three categories : competences exercised as a matter of principle by the Member States , the Union 's own competences , and shared competences .
Of course I understand this interesting and useful attempt to describe the current organisation of competences .
It seems to me , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lamassoure , that we now need to calculate three risks .
The risk of the rigidity of watertight classifications , subject by subject , which several Members have already mentioned , could perhaps freeze the division of competences more than is required for the sake of clarity .
In future , the Union will have to have the means to respond to new challenges if necessary .
In this respect I would point out the attention which the resolution gives to maintaining the flexibility of the system by proposing a review clause as laid down in the Treaty .
A second risk seems to me to be the risk of abolishing certain legal bases , the so-called functional bases , if we make it obligatory to link competences to subjects .
For example , do we really want to abolish Article 13 of the Treaty , which makes it possible to combat all kinds of discrimination , whether on grounds of sex , race , religion , age etc . ?
I do not think so , and that is surely not the intention implied in this report .
A third possible risk would be the risk of ignoring negative competences , those rules which directly impose restrictions on the exercise of the competences of the Member States , for example the prohibition of measures restricting the fundamental freedoms of movement .
This is not merely a detail ; it is something whereby citizens acquire some of their essential rights in the European Union .
Overall , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a balance needs to be struck between , on the one hand , the necessary rationalisation of competences , and , on the other hand , the sui generis nature of the system of the Union , which we do not wish to attack .
Finally , this report contains a third major idea : we must invent new ways of ensuring that the subsidiarity and proportionality requirements are respected .
The question of strengthening controls to ensure that the division of competences between the Union and the Member States is respected forms a part of the most complex problems that we shall have to tackle .
The lively discussions which you have had , or so I am told , at the committee stage , demonstrate that there is no ideal political or jurisdictional solution which everyone agrees is needed at present .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in addition to these comments , which I was bound to give you , I should like to express my satisfaction , as usual , with the quality of the work carried out between our two institutions , and praise the contribution made by Parliament .
It comes a week before the Commission itself submits a major contribution of the European draft , in which you will find some of your ideas expressed .
It also comes , as you have pointed out , on the eve of a highly sensitive meeting of the Convention , at a time when we have spent a lot of time on useful discussions in debates of a general nature about the tasks of the Union , and are on the point of getting down to the heart of the matter , and when we are perhaps approaching a moment of truth .
That is why I believe that at this point , one week before the next meeting of the Convention , this contribution from Parliament is extremely important , and will provide crucial indications on the issue of the competences of the European Union .
Once again , it is absolutely crucial , even vital , that Parliament and the Commission should sketch out together the broad outlines of a common vision , in the service of their shared interests , of the revised Community model on which we are all working , and I will even say all working together .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0157 / 2002 ) by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the situation in Iraq eleven years after the Gulf War ( 2000 / 2329 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , it is an honour to present this report on Iraq to Parliament this evening .
I commend it for the vote tomorrow and I hope and believe that as many colleagues as possible will support it .
Iraq is a country that is riven by tragedy : it is fraught with trauma , and the pain of its people stretches across the world .
It is ruled by a tyrant , a predator , whose hunger for territory has led his army across into the Islamic Republic of Iran ; he initiated the Iran-Iraq war - a million people died .
Later , he moved into Kuwait , with the results that we all know so well and into the north of Iraq , where he chemically bombed the northern Iraqis .
And in the south of Iraq , he has drained the historic Iraqi marshlands .
The actions of one man and his regime have destroyed 5000 years of unbroken human civilisation , causing the worst humanitarian tragedy since the Second World War , according to the United Nations special rapporteur for human rights of Iraq .
He is a man of deep cruelty , he runs a reign of terror and , as a recent émigré who fled from Iraq said , he has made a modern concentration camp out of Iraq .
With such a situation , what can the European Parliament offer ?
We need to think how different Iraq could be .
Iraq has the capacity to be the wealthiest nation in the globe per capita with her oil and other resources .
She has the example , in the three governates of northern Iraq , of democracy and the Rule of Law .
Iraqi people are highly talented , most able and , until Saddam Hussein took over , they had a high standard of education and health and some democracy .
So what does the report recommend that is different , that adds value to this very long-running debate ?
We make a number of proposals that I commend to this House .
First , we recommend the establishment of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal .
That has been called for before - I called for it myself in 1988 .
What is different ?
We are recommending that it is set up to try not just Saddam Hussein but all of his officials who have carried out gross violations of human rights , both inside and outside of Iraq 's territory .
Since that is difficult to set up , we recommend strongly and powerfully that the European Union takes the initiative and sets up an office for inquiry into the huge violations of human rights .
We should be able to collect and prepare the necessary evidence and to produce an official register of the numerous violations perpetrated by the Iraqi regime .
We want this to be set up without delay .
We call upon the Commission and the Council of Ministers to facilitate this and to make it happen .
This would make a tremendous difference to the future of the Iraqi people .
Secondly , we call for the nomination of the Iraqi marshlands - drained down to the last 10 % now - as a world heritage site .
We believe that this could be done ; it could be restored .
We call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to take charge of the small patch of the marshlands still undrained that remains within its country .
Again we ask the international community and the European Union to take special note of the 3.5 million refugees who fled from Iraq in the last 11 years .
Those refugees are being given insufficient support .
None of the oil-for-food programme goes to help them and they get very little else .
We call upon the European Union , and the Commission in particular , to look at and review their programme and to provide good support for those refugees so that they can be retrained and can bring democracy back into the future Iraq .
So we are recommending a rehabilitation agenda .
I have ignored the comments , the amendments that talk about war .
This House has no competence over war or troops , so we are recommending that we should provide training and civilian support .
We should call upon everyone to put every possible pressure upon the regime of Iraq to let in the weapons inspectors and give them untrammelled access throughout the country .
We see the future for Iraq , and I call upon this House to support the report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's attitude towards the Iraqi Government is , unfortunately , moulded by the stance of that country 's rulers , which amounts to blackmail .
The policy of aggression pursued by Saddam Hussein and his accomplices has taken large numbers of their own people hostage .
The insidious thing about this situation is the way that genuine human and economic distress , much of it artificially made worse , is exploited for political purposes .
Generally , this hits the weakest members of society the hardest , but this should not lead us to confuse cause with effect .
It is not the sanctions that cause the sufferings of the vast majority of the Iraqi people , but rather the aggression , cunning and incompetence of the totalitarian regime that provoked these sanctions .
Every other approach and every attempt to dispel the facts from people 's minds has to be firmly resisted .
Every utterance focusing exclusively on the direct connection between the consequences of the embargo and the effects on the population falls dangerously short of the mark even when - indeed , especially when - it is well meant , for it thereby shifts and obscures the manifest political responsibility of Iraq 's rulers .
Anyone who talks about the ruination of the social and technical infrastructure , and about the lack of food and medicines whilst leaving the regime 's responsibility out of consideration , passing over it or keeping quiet about it , is behaving naively or irresponsibly , to say the least .
The right way ahead was shown by the UN Security Council at its meeting yesterday , when it resolved unanimously to step up the arms embargo and simultaneously to make it easier for Iraq to import goods for civilian use .
This is further evidence of the broad agreement that exists between , on the one hand , the report before us and Parliament 's resolutions to date , and , on the other , the resolutions of the Security Council and of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
This consensus should be emphasised , deepened and built on rather than being tested to breaking point by assertions about the alleged failure of the embargo .
Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne 's report also picks up and deepens a proposal made as long ago as November 2000 concerning the setting up of a tribunal to punish the Iraqi regime 's offences against human rights .
I am convinced that trials of this sort can have a deterrent effect - if not on every dictator , then on many of their willing accomplices - and contribute to destabilising their regimes .
I therefore unreservedly support the call for the establishment of an investigation authority to collect and assess witness statements and documentation and document evidence that will stand up in court .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as we are concerned , the Nicholson report is neither good nor evil - and we do not want , at this point , to fall into the trap of the dichotomy of the ' axis of evil ' speech - but it is clearly dangerous , because we cannot ignore its context .
The United States is openly preparing for a military intervention in Iraq and is searching among the opposition in exile for successors to Saddam Hussein .
It is neither the habit nor the task of Europe to overthrow regimes , and clearly we shall not be voting for the Nicholson report until there is no longer any doubt on this point .
Obviously , my group unreservedly condemns the human rights violations described in the report , but it is astonished that Baroness Nicholson has said so little about the humanitarian tragedy caused by the embargo and about the one and a half million deaths that it has caused .
My group also believes that the report 's insistence on the Iraqi exiles should not make us forget the existence of a civil society within the country , which is still surviving , and with dignity .
I have just returned from Iraq and I can bear witness to that fact .
Fortunately , these imbalances in the report can be corrected by the amendments tabled .
However , in my view the most important question is missing .
The most important question is the nature of the role that Europe wishes to play in this matter .
Is it a pacifying role , opening up the way to a dialogue with Iraq , or is it a detonating role ?
Depending on how the vote goes tomorrow , the outcome will be clear .
We Socialists will therefore be asking that the UN should play a vitally important role in seeking a regional peaceful solution , and that the economic embargo should be lifted as a matter of urgency .
Resolution 1409 of the Security Council of the United Nations , adopted yesterday , is still very restrictive , even though it has made the sanctions more flexible .
We are asking that Iraq should open its doors , without any restrictions , to the UN inspection missions , but that they should then serve as an example to Israel .
We are asking that Europe should become involved in the reconstruction of the country , provided that the Iraqi Government implements democratic reforms .
For heaven 's sake , let us not isolate Iraqi society .
For that society , and for the regions , the consequence of an armed conflict would be incalculable .
I am personally shocked by the proposals of a British diplomat at the UN yesterday , proposals which are published in tomorrow 's Le Monde , when he said that Iraq must be aware that when these talks with the UN come to an end the missiles will fall , whether or not Baghdad accepts the return of the inspectors .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , my reading of this report differs from Mrs De Keyser 's in that it is more positive .
However , I would like to preface my remarks with a comment directed at you , Mr Gomolka .
I believe we have to go a bit deeper still if we are to show cause and effect as they really are .
When I was a scientific consultant at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament , I saw how , in 1985 , the USA , the principal western European powers and the Soviet Union kept quiet when it was reported that the Iraqi army was using chemical weapons against Iran .
Policies like that , of course , build up dictators and facilitate their access to weapons of mass destruction .
The report is , of course , inconsistent .
There are contradictions in it .
I would , though , highlight three things about it . For a start , it criticises Saddam Hussein 's irresponsible policy towards his own people and towards the international community in a way that cannot be misinterpreted .
It draws up demands that are necessary .
Secondly - and it is this that I read in a quite different light - it raises what for me is the crucial issue of how the conflict is to be resolved , by emphasising , and I quote : ' the importance of achieving a multilateral political solution in the region , under the aegis of the UN , as the only means of guaranteeing stability and peace in the region ' .
There must be no war .
In this region of all regions , it would have the most menacing consequences , which would extend to every aspect of our relations with the Islamic and Arab world .
This report , thirdly , calls for the lifting of economic and trade sanctions , at any rate in all cases without military interest .
They are counterproductive and have catastrophic effects on Iraq 's civilian population , above all for children .
Hence , Baroness Nicholson , our esteemed rapporteur , I would like to thank you for this report ; even though it might sound strange coming from this side of the chamber , I did find it a report written in the truly fine tradition of liberality .
Mr President , Iraq has the potential of being rich and prosperous . In her solid report , Baroness Nicholson makes no bones about this .
Her first concern , in this connection , are the citizens of that country . In this she is in good company , in the person of the renowned Arab world expert , Professor Bernard Lewis .
Based on his own experience , Lewis sings the praises of the standard of Iraqi students .
The entirely inhumane regime of Saddam Hussein , however , has done terrible damage to Iraq 's national development capacity .
At the same time , the Iraqi autocrat 's inextinguishable vindictiveness and thirst for power continue to pose a serious threat , both for the region and for international order as a whole .
How else can his secret programme of weapons of mass destruction be explained ?
The same applies to Saddam 's open support for Palestinian suicide attacks on Israeli citizens .
The Nicholson report is outspoken about this destabilisation strategy .
It is therefore with force that I wish to counter Mr Sakellariou 's Amendment No 6 .
It is first of all not very sportsmanlike to belittle the Nicholson report as being " merely the rapporteur 's personal opinion " .
Moreover , the allegation is , in fact , altogether incorrect .
After all , this is a report that has been adopted by this Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy by a large majority , without any dissenting votes .
Finally , I can fully identify with the proposal on the issue of preparations on the European side for an ad hoc International Tribunal on Iraq .
The effectiveness of such a tribunal , however , does presuppose the fall of Saddam Hussein 's reign of terror .
And do the Council and the Commission , along with the Bush administration , really wish to face up to this wish ?
There is certainly no shortage of reasonable , nationally representative alternatives to Saddam 's entourage .
In that case , the sanctions could be lifted wholesale with immediate effect .
The country 's rich potential could then once again develop fully for the benefit of the Iraqi citizens and for the benefit of regional and global stability .
Mr President , we have today well-documented accounts , attested by experts , of the Gulf War and of the events that led up to it , which show that this war was preceded , or accompanied , by a massive campaign of disinformation .
The possibility cannot be excluded that various items of information on Iraq are still being disseminated for strategic reasons .
This should not be imputed to the rapporteur , nor is it a justification of Saddam Hussein .
We must not forget , though , that , until he invaded Kuwait , Saddam Hussein was a very good friend of the West .
Today , the people of Iraq need peace , and sanctions , as a senior UN official reported only recently , are leading to a kind of genocide in that country .
I dare say that the report in its present form will not help to alleviate the suffering of the people of Iraq .
The amendments tabled by Mr Wurtz and Mr Sakellariou are very much to be supported .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , odd coalitions are sometimes formed in this House , and not only in this House .
Any assessment of the situation in Iraq is of course difficult for two reasons .
Firstly , the internal structures of all dictatorships make them difficult to evaluate , and the second reason is certainly the attitude of the USA .
There is no doubt about that .
The USA once supported Saddam Hussein , the very same Saddam Hussein that they are now vigorously fighting against , and they did so vehemently , but the USA 's behaviour should not obscure the fact that here we have a regime at work that we must condemn with all our strength and might , simply because it oppresses its own people , whatever their social class or group .
I am thinking , for example , of the Kurds .
I have just returned from a visit , as part of a delegation , to the Kurdish part of Turkey , the object of which was to campaign for the rights of the Kurdish people , yet how much more must we make it our concern that the Iraqi Kurds are not wiped out !
Whereas in Turkey their language and so on are not , perhaps , sufficiently provided for , in Iraq , though , they would be exterminated , and the same is true of the Shiites and other population groups .
We can of course add to that the danger to the neighbouring countries - not just Israel , but also Iraq 's Arab neighbours , such as Kuwait or Syria .
These are plain facts that we must not forget .
All the same , there are a number of things that need to be changed .
As far as the sanctions issue is concerned , Mr Gomolka , both the things you referred to are in fact the case .
It is to do with the indiscriminate nature of the sanctions and , of course , their misuse by Saddam Hussein , who very deliberately uses part of the resources that he receives for himself and for his ruling elite rather than for the people , the result being that the people have to suffer even greater starvation .
We must nevertheless get back to sanctions involving those components that are really necessary , so as to bring the regime to its knees , and the unnecessary sanctions , those that tend to affect the people and harm them , must be lifted .
Secondly , we must support all the groups inside and outside Iraq that are working to change the regime and to bring about a decent situation .
Even though the analogy is not quite exact , I sometimes compare this with Yugoslavia , where we of course put everything into getting rid of Milosevic , and where we supported organisations in the country and also outside it in order to bring about a change of government .
The third point , which is of great importance to us Social Democrats , is that we do not want unilateral military operations that are not backed up by UN resolutions . We do not want war ; we want the UN to care as much about all the other activities as it does about sanctions .
That is our greatest concern .
We want to restore the United Nations ' authority and we want the United Nations to make it its concern that a change of regime should come about here .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the rapprochement we have experienced over the past few days , and I am indeed firmly convinced that , tomorrow , her report , with a few amendments , will be voted for by a large majority .
Mr President , I have visited Iraq all too often to have any illusions .
There is no doubt that the regime in Baghdad is a dictatorship based on terror .
At the same time , however , it is obvious that the West 's reactions and sanctions have failed totally , hitting civilians instead of the dictatorship .
There is a light in the darkness , in the autonomous Kurdish areas in the north .
The Kurds have no sympathy for Saddam Hussein .
They want a new regime .
On the other hand , they advise against military intervention as they know they would be the object of Saddam 's revenge .
I believe we should listen to them , and consequently we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are resolutely opposed to any large-scale American attack .
I believe that Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne 's report is , unfortunately , particularly characteristic of the type of misguided reaction to the Saddam regime that has helped him to be on the verge of celebrating his 35-year anniversary as Iraq 's true dictator .
It is not our intention , here , to adopt a stance towards Baroness Nicholson 's statement or her analysis , but towards the resolution itself .
I believe we will also be able to vote for the report following amendments from the Greens , providing , of course , that Article 7 remains as it is in the report and is not deleted as proposed in certain amendments .
Mr President , we all agree on the sort of regime over which Saddam Hussein presides .
What we need to discuss are the policies to be applied .
The European Union does not agree with the " axis of evil " policy . Nor does it agree with policies of violent , controlled crisis ; in the final analysis , they are not in its interest .
However , let us take a look at the results after 11 years of applying a specific policy .
Saddam Hussein and his regime still in place , a beleaguered nation and citizens whose problems were described earlier in the most eloquent of terms .
But then there are the side effects which we do not discuss here .
We have never discussed how many smugglers have benefited from the embargo , we have never discussed which companies here in the European Union are collaborating with the regime and snapping up every project on offer in Iraq on very good terms .
This being so , the various committees being proposed should include a committee to write a who 's who of Iraq 's financial and commercial trading partners so that we can see whether or not sanctions need to be imposed and , if so , where .
Apart from that , I just wanted to say that to describe certain circumstances as entirely Saddam Hussein 's fault is wrong .
Not every bad thing that happens is an opportunity to heap censure on a specific regime .
I would like to point out here that the well-known problem of the estuaries of the Tigris and Euphrates and the problem of the marshlands are not of Saddam Hussein 's making . The Ataturk dams are to blame , the 17 dams already up and running at the sources of the Euphrates and the Tigris , the purpose of which is to gain strategic control of water resources in the area .
This is another matter we have not discussed and , in 2 , 3 or 5 years ' time , it will be the main factor in political tensions and armed reckonings .
That is the problem . ? he problem is not a few arrangements downstream at the estuaries of the two rivers .
Let me first congratulate Baroness Nicholson for her excellent overview of the situation in Iraq eleven years after the Gulf war and the impact of international action over the past decade .
This is a good moment to take stock of the conditions in which the Iraqi population is living ; the way Saddam Hussein 's dictatorship is operating ; and the continued threat he poses to his own people , to the region and to the world at large .
I agree very much with the thrust of the report .
Our aim should be to focus international action , including sanctions , to maximise their impact on Saddam Hussein and his henchmen , and to minimise their effects on the people of Iraq .
The report highlights many serious problems in Iraq , including the victimisation of political opponents of the regime , the humanitarian crisis , the systematic refusal by Saddam Hussein to comply with UN obligations on weapons of mass destruction , and the destabilising influence of Iraq on the region .
Particular attention is rightly given to human rights in Iraq .
The report offers a horrific account of human rights violations .
There is widespread persecution of every kind of political opposition to the regime , as well as of the particular cases of the Shi 'ite inhabitants of the Lower Mesopotamia Marshland , of the Kurds and of other minorities living in the northern regions .
Saddam Hussein has built up a double system of power .
Alongside the regular army and the administration there is a sort of ' shadow state ? , supported by family and military forces under his direct control , exerting pressure through abuse of power .
It adds up to a permanent state of violence and unpunished illegality .
We can only acknowledge the weak results achieved by UN sanctions over the past eleven years .
Saddam Hussein is still firmly in power .
Indeed , he bears down on the Iraqi people more viciously than ever .
UN inspections have been suspended unilaterally by Iraq and there is good reason to suspect that the regime has re-started its chemical and biological weapons programmes .
The economic situation has worsened not so much as a consequence of the international embargo as non-cooperation of the Iraqi authorities with the ' oil-for-food ? programme .
It is clear where the fault lies .
Saddam Hussein has shown a reckless disregard , not just for his international obligations , but for his own people .
The suffering of the Iraqi people could end tomorrow if Baghdad would cooperate , credibly and constructively , with the international community , giving unrestricted access to the inspectors in charge of verifying the implementation of UN resolutions .
Iraq must also respect her international obligations on the protection of human rights .
The Nicholson report proposes an ad hoc international tribunal on Iraq .
This is an idea we need to examine carefully , also in the light of work under way in other relevant international fora .
I hope that this European Parliamentary initiative will help to identify common elements of a policy which could enable the European Union to play a more active role on this issue .
Coming to the specific recommendations the honourable Member will know the limits of our role and competence in the Commission , but I can recognise the case for effective freezing of financial assets of the Iraqi leadership and denial of access to Iraqi leaders .
There is also a strong argument for closer monitoring of human rights , making more information publicly available and for putting more pressure on the Iraqi regime for protection of the population and of minorities living in the country , in the framework of the UN .
As for the strengthening of democratisation measures in cooperation with the Iraqi exile community , I must say that in present circumstances I am unclear as to what the scope and impact of such measures might be .
The plight of Iraq 's population has highlighted the difficulty of dealing with a regime which is as ruthless as it is reckless .
I note and welcome the invitation in the report to explore every avenue for initiatives in favour of the Iraqi population and refugees , and to reinforce the present activities carried out in the field of humanitarian assistance .
We are ready to examine further measures to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi population .
Such action could also give encouragement for the organisation of opposition forces .
Since the Gulf War in 1991 the European Commission has been the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq with over EUR 270 million .
Over the last three years we have provided assistance of around EUR 10 million annually .
In this year we will provide some EUR 13 million .
But the impact of our help is reduced by the limitations placed upon it by Saddam Hussein 's regime .
We need to think harder about how we can help the population by lifting restrictions on trade in non-military and non dual-use goods , while ensuring that we deny the regime the potential for weapons manufacture and enrichment .
That is why we strongly welcome the agreement reached yesterday in the UN Security Council on a resolution for a ' smart sanctions programme ? , refocusing the present efforts of the international community .
I recognise that there is no chance of any serious improvement under the present regime .
A different regime - almost any other regime - would be better for the Iraqi population .
But we must not lose sight of our own fundamental values and principles in our quest to help the Iraqi people and to bring stability to the region .
That is why I am absolutely convinced that we must continue to operate within the framework of the United Nations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0118 / 2002 ) by Doris Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission report to the Council on the work of the EU / Albania High Level Steering Group , in preparation for the negotiation of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Albania ( COM ( 2001 ) 300 - C5-0654 / 2001 - 2001 / 2277 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today finds us dealing with a report that has been unanimously adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , thus showing that the Members on the Committee took the view that the approach I have proposed in it is the right one .
These ladies and gentlemen , though , had the opportunity in January to listen to a number of members of the Albanian parliament address the Committee .
They were able to form for themselves a conception of how mature this country and its politicians are .
I would rather not repeat what my colleagues said during that debate .
Unfortunately , though , I did not get the impression that my colleagues ' remarks , and my own , during that debate helped get all the region 's politicians at last to realise that they , whether in government or opposition , actually had to engage in politics for the sake of the whole of the Albanian people !
So I have already come to the conclusion that here we are submitting a report that is somewhat stringent , not stringent out of any lack of affection for the Albanian people , but because we perhaps care more for them than do some politicians in that country , who are less concerned with the well-being of the people than with their own pockets and their own positions .
I say this because I know the people there and because I also know their politicians , and so I do think that , rather than beat about the bush , we should actually say out loud that , last year , elections were held .
They were rigged .
We then allowed them not to be repeated , but then - as the election had been rigged to bring about a sufficient majority in the parliament , which was to elect the president in June - asked for the presidential election , at least , not to be held , but for politicians instead to unite and try to find a figure who could then be a president for all Albanians , rather than an Albanian president who owed his position to a stolen majority .
I am therefore very grateful that Members have followed me on points 4 and 5 , in which we asked the Albanians , before the Commission resumes negotiations with them , to at least comply with all the requirements of the OSCE / ODIHR election observers ' committee , allowing that committee to begin its work in the parliament , checking that new electoral legislation is also set in motion and that the political forces should give some consideration to who , in Albania , can lead that country in such a way as to unite it .
Now there are many who say that the opening of negotiations of course means that everything can be monitored much better .
That I do not believe !
We go there more than we do anywhere else .
Albania is the only country in the world for which there is a friendship association in which states and organisations join together and meet several times a year in order to help the country - and what has been the result ?
I know that Albania has had a worse fate to endure than any other country in Europe .
We know that .
Hoxha was no Tito , nor was he a Honecker .
Hoxha was Hoxha and he was appalling .
But Albania has now for some time been free of Hoxha , and so we could have expected things to get a bit better .
There are no end of things to do , though .
Albania does not do what it has to do because it has to draw closer to Europe .
Albania has to do these things out of the desire to be a proper democracy , because it wants the best for its citizens , and for that it needs decent jurisprudence , administrative practice and people to be enabled to have the property of which they were dispossessed restored to them , for which a proper infrastructure is required .
Albania also needs all these things in order to attract investors .
It needs the confidence of foreign investors , and for that it needs good policies .
I take the view that the Council would be well advised to seek advice from us , as it is we who will , at the end of the day , have to approve the Agreement .
I believe that the Commission 's thinking is basically along the same lines as our own - that we should not make a start until the Albanian politicians have , in some way , demonstrated their willingness to take a step forwards .
Then we will at once be ready to seek negotiations with them in which all the things they now have to work on will be sorted out .
Let me remind you that we go there several times each year and are trying everything to help Albania , and that what we are saying today is intended simply to help them rather than being directed against the people .
That is why I am very grateful that our vote in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy was unanimous .
I would be delighted if our vote tomorrow were to be so as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Pack , ladies and gentlemen , I not only must , but can and may again congratulate Mrs Pack on her report and also take this opportunity to indicate my group 's assent to it .
She has got to the heart of the matter with her wonted precision and customary acuity .
I have known Albania for many years , having gone there the first time while the revolution was still going on .
I love the country and have high regard for many of the people who live there , including many of its politicians , as do any of us who are concerned with Albania , but I neither can nor will accept that the leading political forces - two people at the top in particular , but also others quite unconnected with them - are incapable of putting their quarrels , animosities , and rivalries to one side and putting the country 's interests first .
I therefore agree entirely with the opinion expressed by Mrs Pack in the report , that there must first be a fundamental willingness to do this .
I am not so much concerned by details of the reforms that are certainly still needed in the justice system , in media policy , in security policy , and in the fight against corruption .
There is much still to be done in these areas , but they will not be done unless the political forces agree on a minimum consensus .
It is true that that is difficult , but we are all from countries which , particularly in the aftermath of crises - I am thinking , for example , of the post-World War II period - have managed to build bridges and work together despite civil war , or , indeed , because of it .
I was the rapporteur on the Agreement with Macedonia .
Much of the criticism levelled at that suggests that we voted on it far too early on .
I do not know ; perhaps we were wrong to campaign for the Agreement in the way we did , or perhaps we were right .
With Macedonia , though , there was a quite specific issue , that of the relationship between the ethnic groups .
There was even the willingness to make changes in that area - too little , too late , as so often in life , especially in politics .
But in the case before us now there is not just one issue - it is the fundamental issue .
That is why I share Mrs Pack 's view .
Unless the principal political forces in this country demonstrate the willingness to join together and put the country 's destiny first , I am against us opening negotiations on an Agreement .
I should like at the outset to thank the honourable Member for her excellent report on Albania .
It must be said that the views expressed in it are , to a very large extent , shared by the Commission .
The serious financial crisis in 1997 brought Albania to the verge of total collapse as a state .
However , in overcoming this crisis , Albania embarked on a period of relative stability .
This allowed Albania to start to implement reforms and to address a number of crucial problems .
Since 1998 , we have seen the adoption of a relatively modern constitution and legislative framework , an overall improvement in macro-economic stability and fiscal sustainability , the effective implementation of the privatisation process , a considerable strengthening of the customs and tax administrations and real improvements in terms of security and public order .
Albania has also been positively contributing to the fragile stability of the region .
Its position regarding the recent conflict in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , for example , has been pretty helpful .
This progress allowed the Commission , in June 2001 , to recommend , on balance , the opening of Stabilisation and Association Agreement negotiations with Albania , on condition , however , that it continued a consistent reform effort , including reinforcing democratic standards and administrative capacity .
Things have , alas , not gone nearly as well as we would have liked since June last year .
Although the 2001 parliamentary elections marked progress over previous elections , a number of isolated but serious irregularities were identified by international observers .
As a result of these irregularities , the opposition decided to boycott the parliament .
For several months , this decision impeded the proper functioning of Albania 's democratic institutions .
The internal conflicts within the ruling Socialist Party - very present since last autumn in the Albanian political arena - ultimately led to the fall of the Meta government in February .
These developments have not enhanced Albania 's case for early negotiation of an agreement .
For several months , the attention of Albanian politicians has been diverted from the essential task ahead : that of addressing , rapidly and efficiently , the many shortcomings identified in the June 2001 report by the Commission .
The reform process has slowed , there has been a loss of momentum and Albania is not in the position to afford this .
The Majko government needs now to refocus very rapidly on the needed reforms and accelerate their implementation ; to regain momentum and to guarantee a long-term commitment to reform .
This is the only way for Albania to ensure that it will be in a position to implement a future Stabilisation and Association Agreement in full .
The report before the House usefully underlines the points which the Commission has been making to the Albanians .
As a result of our shared messages , we have recently seen some attempts by the Albanian authorities to reinvigorate the reform process : important laws and bylaws are being passed . Initial steps for the implementation of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights recommendations have been carried out , the political environment appears to be becoming a little less confrontational .
But these steps need to be consolidated .
Albania must demonstrate unequivocally that it is committed to the path of reform .
This will be a crucial consideration for Member States in deciding when , and at what pace , to conduct Stabilisation and Association Agreement negotiations .
Albania needs to ensure long-term political stability as a sine qua non to tackle the difficult challenges ahead .
In this context , the forthcoming presidential elections are a key test .
The Commission shares the report 's recommendation that a new president elected in a climate of consensus would be , by far , the best way to preserve - and further strengthen - stability .
As I have just mentioned , the Commission views political stability as a pre-condition for meaningful reform .
This is why we believe that the manner in which these elections will be conducted and the potential impact of their results on Albania 's political stability should be factors to be taken into account when deciding to open negotiations .
The Commission 's views coincide with the Pack report as regards the issues considered as important for the implementation of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement . These include : reinforcement of the implementation capacity of the Albanian administration ; Albania 's judicial system should be substantially improved and freed from corruption and political interference ; organised crime and all types of trafficking should be vigorously combated ; energy sector reform should be rigorously implemented in order to prevent more serious consequences for the Albanian economy and so on .
I am sure the House will have noticed that the recent Commission report on the stabilisation and asociation process makes very similar points .
I want to make one final point on the draft negotiating directives which , as the House knows , are being finalised in the Council .
Firstly , I fully share the view expressed in the report that the negotiating directives to be given to the Commission must enable us to ensure that Albania will be in the position to implement all commitments it may undertake during negotiations .
I can assure the House that the Commission wants to carry out serious negotiations , and does not intend to finalise them until it is satisfied that Albania can effectively implement its obligations under a Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
Moreover , I can also confirm that the draft negotiating directives address the various subjects indicated under Paragraph 10 of the report 's resolution - such as human and minority rights , the Rule of Law and so on - and that proper attention will be paid to these topics during negotiations .
A final point : these negotiations , these agreements , are not a political fix , they are not a political gesture .
They are contractual agreements of very considerable importance and we cannot allow them to be determined by political lobbying .
They have to be decided by real action , real reform and real commitment on the ground .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0039 / 2002 ) by Willy Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with recommendations to the Commission on the drawing-up of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the fixing of book prices ( 2001 / 2061 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , the Legal Affairs Committee and - once this House has given its assent - Parliament as a whole , will be submitting to the Commission a complete proposal for a directive , a legislative initiative on the fixing of book prices in the European Union .
Why do we need this initiative ?
Early in 2000 , the Commission decided that the fixing of book prices across the German and Austrian border was incompatible with Community law .
We accepted this ruling .
Austria responded by enacting a law , Germany initially with a national contractual agreement , but even before this summer , a law on the fixing of book prices is to be enacted in the Federal Republic of Germany .
What are we working towards ?
If Member States do not want to fix book prices , then we do not want to impose it on them .
Each Member State is to be able to decide whether to accept this system or not .
That is most important , but the national system of book price fixing , which the Commission accepts , are in fact jeopardised by the importing of books , by the practice of exporting and reimporting them and by Internet trading .
As one can think of many ways of circumventing the law via these routes , Community law has to contain competition provisions to guarantee that the permissible national systems of book price fixing are not undermined .
National rules are also jeopardised by commercial enterprises that also deal in books and unceasingly cause these national systems to be attacked by national and European courts of law in the hope that they will one day actually collapse .
That is why there is a need for a directive to create a stable economic and legal framework for present and future national systems of book price fixing , without any associated obligation on those Member States that do not want such systems .
Commissioner Monti , by the way , when I was having discussions with him about this , recommended precisely this approach .
He was at that time responsible for these matters and said : ' If we , the Commission , have decided , then we should think up a directive that , so to speak , gives this decision long-term durability in the future . '
What is at issue is respect for the Member States that have decided in favour of these systems .
They do so for the sake of cultural diversity . Let me give just one example of this .
In any one year , more titles are published in the Federal Republic of Germany than in the United States , so let nobody try to tell us that this cultural diversity could be maintained if the national systems of price fixing were to be abolished .
That is the actual reason why the Commission has to ensure that we create this economic and legal framework to enable the Member States with these systems to retain them .
That is what this proposal for a directive is about .
It is not about making the fixing of book prices normative throughout the European Union .
That is not at all what it is about ; it is about safeguarding the existing directives .
Apart from that , I have set out detailed reasons why the existence of these systems alongside each other can lead to distortions of competition and why this necessitates a legal basis for the European Union to take action .
Mr President , some Members of the PPE / DE Group support Mr Rothley 's report and some do not .
I am one of the latter .
I would like to explain why .
The rationale behind the proposal that Member State governments will be able to allow publishers , artificially , to keep up the cost of " literature " as opposed to - as I understand it - airport novels , seems to me to be both silly and wrong .
In my own country the abolition of re-sale price-fixing for books has coincided with an increase in numbers of books sold and published .
No doubt this is partly the result of developments in technology , but to maintain that making literature more expensive than it need be is in some way in the public interest frankly stretches my incredulity beyond breaking point .
I should like to give an example .
As the House may know , the Commissioner has written a number of books .
There was one particular one that caught my fancy , which I thought I might like to buy .
The cover price was not that expensive but it struck me as being a bit on the high side , so I sucked my teeth a bit and did not get it .
But then I saw in a bookshop a discounted copy .
Before you could say " knife " I had opened my wallet , put my money on the table and had a copy of the book .
I was the beneficiary of the Commissioner 's wisdom and he had a small advantage of my money which otherwise would not have occurred .
Having said all that I am a believer in subsidiarity .
It seems to me that if Member States wish to introduce some kind of book pricing regime into their own country , it is not for me to stand in their way .
I say that subject to one proviso , and an important one : against that background the rules of the single market should apply in their entirety .
Books published elsewhere in the Community , in whatever language , should be able to be imported and sold according to the rules in force and the place of publication .
Those are exactly the same principles as apply in the case of satellite broadcasting , which is essentially similar .
Mr President , esteemed ladies and gentlemen , I feel that this evening 's debate is not only almost a birthday present - it really is one , of a sort .
When we started discussing this in 1999 - the business between Austria and Germany is sufficiently well known - I had just been elected to Parliament , and today , three hours before my birthday , we are going a bit further .
So I am very grateful that this debate is being held today of all days .
I also thank Lord Inglewood , who , in one sentence , conceded that we are right .
He said that he respects the decisions of other Member States and I thank him for that .
England and continental Europe differ in many respects , and it is these very differences that matter in our united Europe .
This debate also made evident and re-emphasised our respect for each other .
For that I especially thank Lord Inglewood .
My most especial thanks are due , of course , to Mr Rothley , and to all those who worked with him on this report .
The Commission , which has repeatedly argued that this EU of ours is above all an economic and monetary union , has changed a very great deal in the last twenty years .
A very great deal of interest in cultural aspects has been noticeable in the individual debates , albeit not enough in my view , but we have travelled a long way anyway .
Together with Parliament , the Commission made a wise decision in early 2000 , and if , by that wise decision , the Commission said ' A ' , then it is for the Commission to take the next step and say ' B ' .
Now , in a world that has gone digital , we have different demands from twenty years ago .
It is not only on behalf of my group , but also of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport that I can express overall support for Mr Rothley 's proposal .
Our current solutions to the fixing of book prices are not meant to represent an attempt at harmonising the European Union , but to give written expression to our mutual respect , and we have to get to grips with the digital requirements with which a new world presents us .
Many thanks for listening .
Mr President , I should like to wish the honourable Member many happy returns for tomorrow .
I have to say that I have just had my birthday .
I began speaking this morning at 9 a.m. , just after my birthday , and I am delighted - six debates later on - to be almost welcoming the honourable Member 's birthday .
Anyway , it is a pleasure to have begun the proceedings today and to be bringing the curtain down in this exciting debate , a debate whose excitement has been greatly enhanced by discovering that the honourable Member has found a remaindered copy of one of my books .
I hope it was not a signed copy , as well as remaindered !
But I can assure him that he could have got many cheap copies among those that were pirated in Asia over the last three or four years .
Let me turn to this very serious subject , which I know has raised great passions and has produced a great deal of intellectual energy over the years : the question of the systems of fixed book prices in the Member States , which , as honourable Members have said , has been around for some time .
The Commission shares the Court of Justice 's opinion that truly national book price-fixing systems are not contestable as long as they respect the principles defined by the Court and do not have a restrictive effect on trade between Member States .
The Commission maintains its position , based on the case-law of the Court , that it is not necessary to harmonise these systems .
This is consistent with internal market principles and the objectives of cultural policy .
Furthermore , as the House will probably know , the Commission has recently presented a proposal for a regulation on sales promotion which explicitly allows national fixed book prices .
At the same time , it provides that Member States should not impose a limitation on the value of sales promotion , except in the case of discounts .
This may address in particular some of the concerns expressed by the honourable Member in relation to matters related to culture .
I notice that the honourable Member 's resolution aims to provide a Community definition of " circumvention " of the national price-fixing system and that this can be extended to booksellers in other Member States .
This definition reflects too broad an understanding of the notion of circumvention .
It could undermine the free intra-Community trade of books , in particular via the Internet .
I also note that the honourable Member 's proposal gives no guarantee against any adverse effect it could have on trade between Member States .
There may also be a question of the legal basis .
The cultural provisions of Article 151 of the Treaty state that the Community can encourage cooperation in this area but not legislate .
The subsidiarity aspects of any such proposal would therefore have to be studied extremely carefully .
A further consideration is the Commission 's commitment to better regulation .
Any proposal to change a legal situation which has been dealt with by the Court must demonstrate clear benefits .
There is currently no evidence to indicate that the Court 's case-law has to be further clarified .
The Commission will examine Parliament 's proposed directive in the light of the case-law of the Court and will assess , in consultation with the Member States , whether or not an initiative is necessary and what form it should take .
At this stage however , there is little or no convincing evidence that legislative action is needed or is , indeed , appropriate .
The Commission will continue to observe the markets and examine their effects on potential circumvention of national price-fixing systems , taking into account the cultural diversity of the book market and the existence of clear case-law of the Court of Justice .
Thirty seconds early : Happy Birthday !
And so say all of us .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
The first item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0151 / 2002 by Mihail Papayannakis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and European Parliament entitled ' Ten years after Rio : preparing for the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 ? [ COM ( 2001 ) 53 - C5-0342 / 2001 - 2001 / 2142 ( COS ) ] ;
A5-0142 / 2002 by Paul Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions entitled ' Towards a global partnership for sustainable development ? [ COM ( 2002 ) 82- C5-0173 / 2002 - 2002 / 2074 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , the subject of this debate is sustainable development and the political message which Parliament wants to send out - both itself and via the European Union as a whole - to the Johannesburg Summit next August , ten years after Rio .
It would be very tempting to list the issues and problems of sustainable development and the future of sustainable development at length , but there is just such a list in the report and in the resolution proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
So I shall refrain from doing so . I mainly want to explain the logic behind the political message we want to send out .
So let us begin with the bottom line and the bottom line , ladies and gentlemen , 10 years after Rio , is clearly in the red .
With the exception of Kyoto , no progress has been made either with the environment per se - in fact there have been setbacks - or with the state of the world in general .
Poverty has not been eradicated or reduced ; on the contrary it is rising and we know full well that , with so many people living below the poverty line , there is no point in talking about protecting productive resources , renewable sources of energy and so on .
The bottom line is in the red but no one accepts any responsibility for it .
Perhaps they will do so in Johannesburg ; it would be a useful exercise because it might throw some light on what we need to do in the future , because the future is not looking too rosy .
The population on this planet is exploding , all the statistics say so . The pressure on resources is increasing as a result of globalisation and other factors , and both environmental and social cohesion problems look set to get worse .
So what should we be doing ?
What should we be talking about in Johannesburg ?
I think we all agree that whatever the definition of sustainable development , it must include development , social cohesion and environmental protection .
The to-do list is clear on this count , I think we all agree .
We talk about changing production and consumption standards , we talk about eradicating poverty , we talk about mainstreaming the environment in all policies , in farming , fisheries , industry , energy , tourism , water and air policies , but we have no objectives , timetables , indicators to tell us if we have reached our targets , mechanisms , capital , and the means to move and control the use of resources .
This is where the problems lie .
The report and the resolution contain numerous proposals on reducing poverty , on renewable sources of energy and on countless other points which all require resources , institutions , rules , proper local , national and global management , political management .
It is this management that will , I think , be the main problem in the future .
Reforming the international system of Bretton Woods institutions and of more recent institutions such as the World Trade Organisation , for example when their rules clash with environmental protection .
Reforms so that poor people can farm , agricultural reforms , for example , to give them water , energy , the rudiments needed to move to a modern perception of environmental protection and , of course , government action .
As we know , the United States are loath to make any kind of commitment .
They are also distancing themselves from those who have .
The role of the European Union is the sixty-four thousand dollar question .
The European Union will be able to play a part for quite some time to come , but not for ever .
And if it is going to play its part , it needs to put its own house in order .
It needs to do more to promote environmental protection and social cohesion policies .
To table commitments at international organisations in which it has enough clout to achieve some degree of success , to be a reliable partner , internationally and with the third world , so that we can hope for some sort of improvement post Johannesburg and so that , in ten years ' time , we do not find ourselves in the same situation we were in 30 years ago .
It was in Rio in 1992 that the international community established the concept of sustainable development .
There is no doubt that in the intervening ten years the language used in speeches on the environment and development has changed , and changed for the better .
Solemn undertakings have been made and conventions have been signed - if not ratified , at least signed - but we must also note , ten years on , that the situation on the environmental front has not improved , it has deteriorated , and that where poor and developing countries are concerned there has been no improvement there either .
The inequalities have continued to increase : today , more than 800 million people are still undernourished and a billion people do not have access to drinking water .
This is surely a state of affairs which cannot be tolerated .
Johannesburg , which will take place in a few months , will not only be a time for taking stock ; it will also be the moment of truth .
It is not enough to have a ceremonial preaching of environmental values , which would be a repeat of what was said in Rio .
Neither is it enough to have a chorus of lamentations : we need on the agenda a programme of ambitious political change for the next ten years .
That , in any case , is the message which the Committee on Development and Cooperation has asked me to pass on to you .
What we are proposing is that we make the overall priority the fight against poverty and hunger and the fair and sustainable use of natural resources .
The message that we are sending to this House , to the Commission and to the Council is focused on five chapters : the first is fighting poverty and promoting social development , and it contains a whole series of specific proposals .
The second is about harnessing globalisation .
What does this mean ?
It means quite clearly that sustainable development must take precedence .
Trade legislation , the rules of international trade and rules on investment must therefore be made subject to sustainable development criteria , and not the other way round .
The third is the sustainable management and conservation of natural resources .
This will require the development of new technologies and here I am thinking in particular , where energy is concerned , of renewable sources of energy .
The proposals that we make in this regard are both credible and ambitious .
The fourth chapter is related to something the Commission said itself in the first document it published last year , that it was necessary to change production and consumption patterns .
This is true , but it will require us to make some hard choices .
I think , for example , that as far as we are concerned , some European Union policies - and I am thinking in particular of the common agricultural policy , the fisheries policy and the trade policy - will need to be reviewed if we are to avoid their running counter to the objectives of sustainable development .
Furthermore , it will give us much greater credibility at international level , especially at the Johannesburg conference , if we put our own house in order before saying what needs to be done at international level .
Our fifth and final point is that we need to ensure that there is good governance at all levels .
The concept of good governance is often tainted with paternalism .
I believe that if it is applied at all levels of decision-making , and in particular at the level of international institutions , the use of this term will become more credible .
I think , for example , that the international economic institutions , such as the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation , need a serious facelift so as to introduce a minimum of democracy and a minimum of public and political oversight .
That , in essence , is the message which the Committee on Development wishes to see this House and the Commission - I turn here to Commissioner Nielson - take away with them , because in a few weeks ' time , there is a key date : the meeting in Bali , the last preparatory meeting before the Johannesburg Summit .
So far , we have no cause for optimism because there is still no document on the table and up for discussion which shows real ambition .
I therefore hope that our contribution will help the European institutions to play a leading role in this preparatory meeting , if there is still time , and in any case I hope that we will avoid giving the impression of thinking that handing over the responsibility for managing the problems related to sustainable development to partnership initiatives with the private sector is the way to resolve the problem .
It may form part of the solution , but it has to be in addition to the commitments made by individual States and by the international institutions and not instead of them .
This is what I wanted to say , Mr President .
Mr President , on behalf of the committee , I should like to warmly welcome both reports and thank the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
It is clear that the EU should be playing a leadership role in Johannesburg .
Our own treaty commitments oblige us to do so , and European citizens expect us to do so .
That means that the Council and the Commission must listen to Parliament 's views and respond to them , because it is clear that Parliament wishes to see measures that are both ambitious and more targeted .
The Development Council and the Seville Summit should therefore insist on a proper revision of the Commission 's communication in order to address existing gaps , add timetables for implementation and develop action plans for each measure .
We do not need any more monitoring of the problem : we are in danger of going down as the only species that monitors its own extinction instead of taking steps to prevent it .
We need bold , imaginative action plans and we need them now .
The Commission rightly identifies what it calls a global governance gap , with global market forces running far ahead of the ability of institutional mechanisms to contain them .
And yet the measures which the Commission proposes to close that gap are woefully insufficient .
In particular , the Commission 's disproportionate emphasis on free trade and investment as engines for development should be balanced with far stronger commitments to binding frameworks for corporate accountability .
As a first step we are proposing a directive on mandatory social and environmental performance .
WTO rules must also be reformed to allow governments to make the vital distinctions that need to be made between products on the basis of the way in which they have been produced .
How else can we move towards more sustainable production and consumption practices ?
It is hard to overstate the importance of urgent action at Johannesburg .
It has been estimated that if we continue with our current production and consumption patterns we will soon need an extra three planets in order to provide the necessary resources and absorb the wastes .
We do not have three planets ; we have just one planet , and it is already showing signs of major degradation .
Johannesburg has to deliver results .
Mr President , Commissioner , we cannot allow the Johannesburg Summit to be just an event to mark the ten years since Rio de Janeiro .
There is little to celebrate , anyway , since over these ten years the signs of unsustainability have got worse .
Rather , the Johannesburg Conference gives us the opportunity to start all over again , making a world-wide commitment to a development model that blends the economic dimension with both the social dimension and the environmental dimension .
In any case , there is a further difficulty associated with the Rio de Janeiro Summit .
This time , we shall be even more alone in the leadership of a global agreement .
The political agenda that the European Union defines will , therefore , be critical for the success of the conference .
I believe that both the Commission communication and the Papayannakis and Lannoye reports contribute to making this a good agenda .
There are , however , certain paragraphs and a few amendments that , in our view , take away some of the objectivity and detachment of Parliament 's resolution - I mean the Tobin tax and writing off the debt of the developing countries .
Even so , the PPE Group will vote for the final resolution .
We hope the following objectives will be achieved at the Johannesburg Summit .
First of all , it should mark the coming into force of the Kyoto Protocol . For this to happen , some countries need to speed up their ratification of the Protocol - Russia , Japan , Canada and Australia .
Secondly , the political conditions must be created for the United States to rejoin the joint effort in the environmental field .
Thirdly , an initiative is needed to green the economy by internalising environmental costs , dissociating economic growth from intensive resource use and focusing on cleaner technologies .
Fourthly , we hope that the Summit will provide joint answers to global problems and that , as happened in Rio de Janeiro , when the foundations were laid for the Conference on Climate Change , Johannesburg will also lay the foundations for protocols and new institutions in other environmental areas , such as water , for instance .
Fifthly , we hope a boost will be given to international governance and institutional reform .
It is not possible to create an Internet for sustainability if the nodes in this net are obsolescent .
Lastly , Mr President , we hope that this Summit will not content itself with vague intentions but will set out timetables , goals and policies .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the President and his colleagues for the fact that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has for once been allowed to see the light of day .
This is the first time , as far as I can remember , that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has been able to conduct a debate at a time that might be called in any way normal .
It is no doubt a sign that the wind of change is blowing through the Judicial Board for Public Lands and Funds , and we must hope that it continues to do so .
The wind of change also characterises the excellent reports prepared by Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye on ' ten years after Rio ' and ' sustainable development ' .
Were we to succeed in complying with these reports and taking the relevant decisions in this House on the model supplied by Mr Lannoye and Mr Papayannakis , then we should have done more than has been done in the last ten years .


The wind of change clearly died down when it reached the Commission , however .
There is no evidence of very much having happened there .
Certain breezes are perhaps detectable , but not much more .
Above all , the Commission is finding it incredibly difficult , just as it did last year when we discussed sustainable development , to engage in a dialogue with Parliament .
I do not know what kind of impediment it is that prevents the Commission from achieving proper communication and having proper discussions with Parliament on the subject of sustainable development .
Instead , we have to continue to tag along with our proposals and ideas .
A serious grass-roots debate on this issue is needed , and Parliament is an excellent forum in which to begin that discussion .
Parliament must therefore be taken seriously when it talks about this issue .
Ten years after Rio and five years after our having made a pledge concerning sustainability strategies in all the UN countries , we can of course see what has happened .
One sample figure that sticks in the mind is the fact that the four richest people on this planet own as much as the 48 poorest nations combined .
I think this says quite a lot about the way the situation now appears in the world .
For example , we allow 5 500 children to die every day because of polluted air , polluted food and polluted water .
Children , who are the most vulnerable , are being allowed to die because of the pattern of life we now have .
Just as Mr Lannoye said , we permit the rich world to over-produce , and waste , food at the same time as 800 million people are starving .
This is a policy and a pattern of life that cannot continue for very much longer .
There are nonetheless certain bright spots following Rio .
There are cities , countries , municipalities and regions that have done an incredible amount to change the situation .
Nevertheless , the overall result is disheartening and. something must be done .
I think we must repeat the message in precisely the same form we used before the Gothenburg Summit .
We need committed political leadership on the issue .
Political priorities need to be set .
I think it would have been good if at least one representative from the Spanish Presidency , which is to communicate this commitment of ours in the light of Rio , had been here in the House and listened to today 's debate .
We have heard what problems there are , and our documents contain the proposed solutions .
I hope that both the Commission and the Council will now listen to what Parliament has to say .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to devote my intervention to energy issues .
Without a clear and ambitious policy on renewable sources of energy there will be no development and no solution to the problem of the greenhouse effect either .
I would propose five avenues for the European Union to explore in the run-up to the Johannesburg Summit .
The first is a Marshall Plan-type programme for the two billion people who , even today , do not have sufficient energy resources and often live in rural areas or shanty towns .
Now that President Bush has blocked the G8 plan on renewables , the European Union - either on its own or with like-minded countries like Japan - should take the initiative and fund a programme for 500 000 decentralised units , to an existing design combining solar , wind and possibly hydraulic energy .
These units would be built in rural areas .
Information technology could also be incorporated , thus creating a real catalyst for development .
The second , which is probably the most simple and most economic way of combating the greenhouse effect , considering the levels it will have reached by 2020 , is to set minimum standards for millions of new household appliances - in China alone there will be 100 million new fridges in 2020 - for new engines and for millions of new computer tools .
If we manage to set minimum standards for these items , we will be taking the simplest - and by far the least costly - measure , and also the one which will probably have the greatest influence on international policy on the greenhouse effect .
Admittedly , this will not be very easy : we would need a secretariat at OECD level before we could proceed .
The third point actually consists of three sub-measures which I will outline briefly : first of all the European Union and the countries of the OECD need to lay down clear objectives on renewable sources of energy .
We then need to help developing countries to build and structure their energy markets so that they head in that direction .
Finally , EUR 350 billion in subsidies currently go to fossil and nuclear energies .
If this money were used for something else the economy would be healthier and so would the planet .
Mr President , a few years ago the Latin American writer Julio Cortázar wrote a wonderful article , which I still have , entitled ' The prostitution of words " .
He was talking about democracy and said that the word ' democracy ' had been used so much by those who were against democracy that the word had lost its virtue and value .
I think that the same thing is happening with sustainable development .
The term appears in all European Union documents , government documents and , more importantly , in the documents of those who wish to destroy sustainable development and foster unsustainable development and a model of consumption that is going to prevent us from leaving Johannesburg with clear priorities and mechanisms for action , although , of course , I hope to be proved wrong .
I entirely agree with the reports by Mr Lannoye and Mr Papayannakis .
The priorities have to be sustainable management of resources and changing production models .
We cannot allow the 25 % of mammals , 11 % of birds and 15 % of plants that are in danger of extinction to disappear .
Meanwhile , in terms of models of consumption , 86 % of global consumption corresponds to 20 % of the population .
That is unsustainable .
Regarding another priority , eradicating poverty , Mr President , the results of the Monterrey Summit were meagre .
Along with the World Bank , which has no members in our Group and which has calculated that in the next thirty years the number of poor people in the world will more than double , we have been saying for many years that unless action is taken to tackle poverty , marginalization , environmental degradation , conflicts , epidemics and migrations , there will be serious economic and political destabilisation at world level .
Eradicating poverty is therefore a priority , and the outcome of the last ten years is poor , as is the outcome of the Monterrey Summit , which gave 0.39 % development aid for 2006 .
I hope , Mr President , that the outcome of the Johannesburg summit will not be a poor one , and I therefore trust that the delegation from the European Parliament will strongly defend what we are saying here .

Mr President , I am able fully to endorse everything the rapporteurs , Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye , have said and , specifically , I should like to emphasise that the EU must put its own house in order in the areas of agriculture and fisheries if poverty is to be combated effectively .
The World Summit in Johannesburg will give us a unique opportunity to set an agenda for sustainable development over the next ten years .
We can be pleased about the very fact that the Summit has been called , but otherwise no progress has , in general , been made in the global preparations for the summit .
The negotiations at the UN 's preparatory meeting in New York did not lead to binding agreements , which is why the next and last chance for the global negotiations will be at the end of May in Bali .
There , it will hopefully be possible to produce a real action plan and political declaration which , for example , will be able to promote the implementation of various international conventions , something which , however , presupposes increased pressure on the part of Europe .
The United States has clearly expressed the view that it does not want to assume new obligations in connection with the world summit .
If the summit is to be a success , the EU must take on the role of political leadership and , as the country holding the presidency during the summit , Denmark has a big responsibility for leading the international process in the right direction .
The basis for Denmark 's proposal is the desire for a global agreement consisting , for example , of practical concessions from the wealthy part of the world , as only a global agreement can create the framework capable of translating the political declarations from Rio into genuine action in Johannesburg .
The EU has also undertaken to work for a global agreement but , as Mr Lannoye pointed out , the Commission wishes to concentrate more on global partnerships , which is far from adequate .
The EU will not , however , be deciding upon its contribution to Johannesburg until as late as the July summit .
It is unfortunate that only a few EU Heads of State have undertaken to participate in the world summit for , without such high-level participation , there are fewer possibilities of success .
We have had enough words . What we need now is action .
Mr President , of course it is depressing that so little has been achieved since the Earth Summit in Rio .
This excellent report confirms that .
I would like to highlight one aspect in particular .
I think Johannesburg must start here .
I think that in this House , we sometimes fail to recognise the opportunities afforded to us in this context by the Treaty of Amsterdam , namely the co-decision procedure .
We must wield this instrument with far more determination and vigour . Indeed , in my view , the greater our resolution in influencing the passage of European legislation on environmental matters , the greater our credibility will be in Johannesburg and , of course , at future conferences too .
We must recognise that we need rather more self-confidence here and must sometimes endorse more stringent yet feasible demands . We must also reject any notion that nuclear power has a role to play in future .
Mr President , time is running out for the earth .
In spite of a whole range of summits and conferences , few people can dispute that we are today a long way from achieving the objective of sustainable development .
We are now in actual fact still further from that objective than when the Brundtland report was presented in 1987 and when the Rio Conference took place .
The opposite ought , of course , to be the case .
The other day , the OECD , which is not , of course , an environmental organisation , pronounced that ' All major global ecological indicators are negative ' .
Things are just as bad when it comes to poverty and social development .
The number of poor people is increasing , not decreasing .
In the light of this , the Johannesburg Summit is very important , but , as has been indicated in this House , hopes are fairly low-key .
The machinery of negotiation is sluggish , and interest on the part of the American administration is also anything but lively .
As Mrs Hulthén said , the Spanish Presidency is unfortunately not represented in Parliament today , a fact which also does not indicate a particularly high degree of interest in this issue .
What are the reasons why we are still such a long way from achieving a sensible balance between economic growth , social development and consideration for the environment ?
There are two main reasons .
First of all , there is strong resistance to implementing all the measures which , in a whole range of conferences , government says it recommends : for example , doing away with subsidies to industries which are harmful to the environment ; incorporating environmental costs into prices ; establishing clear environmental criteria for our export credits guarantee boards so that we do not export non-sustainable systems to the developing countries ; and , in general , encouraging , rather than discouraging , activities that take the environment into account .
Economic regulations are not at present leading us in the direction we want to go , but we do little about this .
Mr Lannoye 's report , which I welcome , contains a series of proposals concerning the route which might be followed .
The EU must push ahead in this respect , as on a range of issues concerning the fight against poverty . Otherwise , there will be very little in the way of results from Johannesburg .
Secondly , development is proceeding slowly because , as I see it , we have models for both education and economics that are unduly top-down and reductionist .
We have chosen to organise our society by focusing on specialisation .
There are more than 20 000 different disciplines in our universities , and specialisation is , of course , good for solving a variety of individual problems .
There are , however , extremely few experts engaged in the solution of cross-border problems .
The Johannesburg Summit is now to try to solve all these problems .
Alongside the short-term measures , we must , then , also reflect upon the big picture and ensure that we learn to think better in terms of systems in our societies . In particular , we must help the poor , or developing , countries to develop research skills so that they are themselves able to develop strategies that are both more profitable financially speaking and more sustainable in environmental terms .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Lannoye on his comprehensive report , whose contents are excellent .
I would like to take this opportunity to say that as parliamentarians , we must consider whether in future , when we adopt a position on a key conference such as Johannesburg , we could do so with more brevity , conciseness and structure , especially as this then makes it easier to convey to the public what the European Parliament does and does not stand for .
The previous speaker referred to the Commission and everything that it has to do .
I would like to point out , on the basis of my own almost three years of experience , that even in this House , the majorities are not always in favour of sustainable development and sustainable solutions .
The three elements of sustainable development have been cited frequently : they are economic , social and ecological development .
Here , it is important that in future , GDP growth does not remain the only key indicator of social progress .
GDP growth has nothing to do with sustainability .
We therefore urge the Commission to bring pressure to bear in Johannesburg so that new social and ecological indicators are adopted to calculate a country 's well-being in future .
We cannot talk about a global partnership for sustainable development without highlighting the link between poverty and environmental destruction .
Poverty breeds population growth .
It is estimated that by 2015 , the global population will have reached 7.5 billion .
This means more pressure on natural resources and more pressure on the environment .
In this context , I would like to stress the importance of greater efforts to ensure women 's legal equality and their right to protection of their reproductive health , and to strive for progress in these areas .
I should also like to touch specifically on the proposed amendments .
My group will not vote for the Greens ' Amendment No 5 to delete paragraph 26 .
However , I should also stress that we are working from the French original .
We would delete the German version as it stands as well .
I should also mention that my group does not support Amendment No 12 which seeks to introduce a Sachs tax , i.e. tax-deductible contributions for charitable purposes .
Personally , I have problems using the adjective " charitable " at all .
When we refer to sustainable development as the challenge of the century , this has to do with the fact that we need to change our own production conditions ; it has nothing to do with charity .
I also see a further problem , namely that we would be deducting tax revenue for developed countries which need this income for their own sustainable development in future .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye and congratulate them on their important reports .
The Johannesburg World Summit is another outstanding opportunity for tackling head-on the vast , complex problems facing the human race , most especially those people who live in the poorest countries .
We look forward to it with inevitable expectation and grant it the importance due to an event that may or should lead the international community to draw up an agenda effectively aiming at the sustainable development of the planet , the improvement of living standards and the eradication of poverty , rooted in the agreements reached at the Rio Earth Summit .
We should like to be optimistic , even though there are plenty of reasons to hold a different or even opposing view : the enormous delays in complying with the gains made at Rio , the North-South divide , the perpetuation of poverty and the debt itself , the insistence on unsuitable and unfair economic recipes , the lack of political will on the part of the rich countries - especially the United States - to alter guidelines that they themselves determine and to make available the resources needed for world-wide change , which , after all , would benefit everybody .
Even recently , Monterrey , despite its last-minute decisions , was yet another reason to dampen our much-needed optimism .
Under these circumstances , we must now urge the Member States and the Commission once and for all to adopt a position in keeping with the scourges that affect the world and to push for guidelines , measures and the means needed for fair and sustainable development , linking environmental protection to the eradication of poverty .
They must also commit themselves to an ambitious agenda for the next decade that will prevent the unacceptable failure that some already think is bound to result from this World Summit .
During the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 , we agreed to take sustainable measures for the environment and development via world-wide cooperation .
We had high expectations in those days .
We are now 10 years on and the Summit in Johannesburg is around the corner .
This is an opportune moment to take a critical look at what has happened during that time .
Unfortunately , there is little reason to be cheerful .
We can only conclude that the high expectations of a decade ago have not been materialised .
What is more , the environment has now disappeared from the public eye , and hence the political eye , while the strain on the environment has only increased .
It is high time we did something about this .
If the EU wishes to continue to play its pioneering role , it is of major importance for it to find resonance with the people .
And at the moment , people are particularly concerned with issues such as security and health .
It therefore goes without saying that we should take advantage of this .
Indeed , if we continue to neglect the environment , this will irrevocably lead to yet more floods , forest fires , pollution and poor health for a large number of people .
In short , without sustainable development , not only the environment will be damaged , but issues that concern people , including a lack of security , disease and death , will also enjoy an upturn .
By referring to these issues , we can galvanise public opinion and thus wake up the politicians responsible in these areas .
Only in this way will the environment be given the attention it deserves and will the political will be created in order to take legally binding environmental measures at international level and to actually implement them .
Mr President , the concept of sustainable development is first and foremost the expression of an accurate instinct , that there are fundamental balances at global level that have to be respected .
Nevertheless , we need to beware of this concept being hijacked and used with overweening ideological verbosity , encroaching on new areas and being intoned in support of questionable technical proposals .
The extreme diversity of the areas of activity addressed in the Lannoye report underlines this risk of distraction .
In fact , if it is to be put into practice , the notion of sustainable development has to be applied to clearly identified priorities .
The first of these would appear to me to be the need - which the rapporteur stresses - not to resign ourselves to the persistence and indeed the increase in poverty , the eradication of which must remain an absolute and constant priority in our work .
To this end , we need to contribute to striking a healthy balance between public aid , which remains essential , and developing international trade , which must not be systematically caricatured as a scarecrow .
Obviously , there is no question of considering ODA as a substitute for international trade , but as a necessary addition to it .
Current circumstances do not in any case allow the latter to be a catalyst for development on its own , for the very simple reason that we cannot pit economies and states in competition against each other when they have completely different structures in terms of production costs .
It is absolutely vital to avoid perverse scenarios , such as food-producing crops disappearing because of cheap imports of agricultural products and , as a corollary to this , developing countries gearing themselves up to export cash crops - which do not foster local development - or raw materials , which are an unreliable basis for sustainable development because of the huge variations in price .
If we consider it essential not to rely solely on the workings of international trade to reduce poverty , then it is vital to halt the cuts in ODA .
Here , the countries of Europe have a particular task to fulfil , both together and separately .
The Member States need to resist the temptation of relying exclusively on Community aid and abandoning bilateral cooperation , as the distinctive contribution and specific expertise provided under these auspices are of irreplaceable value .
It is not enough , however , to halt the decline in ODA by respecting global guidelines on rate rises .
It is essential to redirect this aid towards reinforcing national State structures in developing countries , which in many cases are still fragile , and towards developing the rural world , which has to be a top priority .
Public money has a decisive role to play in halting the scourge of the rural exodus and people 's descent into poverty when they reach the large cities , which leads to their emigrating out of despair .
Developing food crops and fundamental public services , particularly in the areas of health , education and social protection , is the most likely way that poverty will be reduced because it will create jobs in rural areas .
When disbursing public aid , we need to recognise the particular role played by decentralised cooperation , organised through local authorities such as districts , counties and regions .
These authorities have local expertise , they tailor projects to real needs , they ensure that they are monitored rigorously and they foster warm and lasting relationships between the people of the North and South .
This form of cooperation should be strongly encouraged .
Of all of the issues mentioned in the Lannoye report , Mr President , these are what I believe our priorities should be if we are to ensure that the concept of sustainable development makes a genuine contribution to poverty reduction in the world today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , five years ago , in 1997 , the Rio + 5 meeting took place in New York .
Unfortunately , the delegation representing the European Parliament on that occasion was very small .
I was honoured to be one of its members .
At the time , the developing countries went as far as to push for the term " sustainable development " to be omitted from the final declaration and merely for the phrase " sustainable economic growth " to be used instead .
I understand this position in some ways , because poverty is of course the key issue for the developing countries .
When we talk about environmental protection , what we say sometimes lacks credibility .
Nonetheless , as the EU , we should keep both aspects - economic and social development , but also environmental protection - in mind , for they are of course connected .
For example , the World Bank calculates that if we fail to act on the issue of climate protection , there will be a 1 % - 2 % drop in GDP in the industrialised countries in the coming years as a result of climate change , but a 10 % fall in GDP in the developing countries . This makes it clear that the environment and social and economic development cannot be played off against each other , but are inter-linked .
However - and the developing countries are right in this respect - we must demonstrate that it is possible to organise economic growth and prosperity without doing so at the expense of the environment .
In the climate process , for example , we must thus reduce our own emissions before we can impose any obligations on the developing countries .
I therefore believe that the time has come to practise what we have always preached and actually implement , in the European Union , the measures which we have consistently called for in our resolutions .
There is a great deal of room to criticise the Commission 's proposals , for example on emissions trading , and they can certainly be improved upon , but we must pursue this basic approach .
We must now act locally if we are to convince the developing countries that sustainable development is possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye .
I think that the two reports complement each other and really do contain some innovative and very interesting proposals .
I think that people 's awareness regarding the environment has increased a great deal , as have the political measures taken by Heads of State and Government on the issue .
However , I believe that the raising of awareness and the political measures taken have both been inadequate , if not nominal .
As far as awareness is concerned , we are well aware that natural resources are being exhausted , that there are mammals , birds and plants that are in danger of extinction , that there is a growing population dying of hunger and suffering from poverty .
We know all of this and we are environmentally aware , but we keep increasing consumption , and we in the developed world , which represents 20 % of the world population but uses 80 % of its resources , are the ones responsible for it .
I say that the political measures are also nominal because the majority of them , following international agreements , are not carried out or are inadequately carried out .
The Kyoto Protocol has still not been ratified by the majority of the countries , after ten years of debate .
The United States are not going to sign it and , to give an example of a country that has agreed to it , my country , Spain , has increased emissions by 33 % compared with what it had agreed to do .
I think that this is how things stand now , and at present , after the Barcelona Summit and Johannesburg , in which the issue of the environment was not sufficiently dealt with , I would not ask for the ambitious programme that too many people are asking for here .
I think that if in Johannesburg we manage to fulfil all the previous commitments , if we manage to ensure that at least a percentage of international transactions are used for those poor countries , and if we manage to change the values that are currently damaging us , we will have achieved a great deal .
Mr President , I have rather mixed feelings about this debate and about the Johannesburg Summit .
It is encouraging that the Environmental Summit is in actual fact to take place and that both rapporteurs have done a very good job when it comes to expressing the European Parliament 's misgivings , hopes , proposals and demands prior to the summit .
I want to thank both rapporteurs for the sterling work they have done .
I feel disappointed and frustrated , however , about the fact that the world 's leaders do not appear to take the situation in the world seriously .
Just a few months before the summit is to be held , the world 's leading politicians have not even said definitely whether or not they intend to be present at the meeting in Johannesburg .
The EU 's sustainable development strategy and statement prior to the world summit have also come very late , given that the matter is about our future and concerns everyone .
There ought , however , to have been more respect for democratic debate and for the opportunity for civil society to take part in the debate .
I would also point out , as other speakers have already done , that the Spanish Presidency is not represented in this House .
That also indicates the lack of respect for this important issue of sustainable development .
Nor do I think that the EU has attached appropriate importance to the Johannesburg World Summit .
The Barcelona Summit , in which the EU 's position was to be firmly set out , was also a disappointment .
In Johannesburg , the EU must show clearly how it intends to reform , for example , its agricultural and fisheries policies , which have major global consequences , especially for the poor countries .
We in the EU must also show that we have a credible sustainable development strategy to enable the world summit to obtain the result that is required if today 's growing environmental crisis is to be averted .
The EU must play a pro-active role in this respect .
I think the EU countries have a specifically moral and economic responsibility for showing the way to sustainability .
Many seem to rely upon voluntary undertakings by industry and major companies , but these alone will not lead to the pledges of ten years ago being fulfilled .
Voluntary undertakings can help , but what is required is for a world environmental organisation within the UN to ensure that human rights and environmental regulations are complied with .
The international environmental and human rights conventions must also take precedence over the WTO 's regulations . The situation should not , as at present , be the other way round .
This is a policy which must be pursued by ourselves in the EU and by all who take part in the Johannesburg Summit .
Mr President , I can only support the reasons adduced in this report , which is , by the very facts that it cites , an indictment of the current economic system .
What is this economic organisation which forces half of the world 's population to live on less than two dollars a day ?
An economic system which on the one hand subsidises set-aside and destroys or stores food so as to prop up prices , while on the other leaving 826 million people undernourished , 16 million of them to starve to death , is an absolutely criminal system .
But the harsh reality of this statement only serves to underline how pathetic the conclusions are , especially the solutions proposed .
While huge private interests pillage the planet , taking advantage of the poorest , and widening the gap between the rich minority and the poor majority , the European Parliament adopts powerless resolutions , knowing full well that summits such as those in Rio , Monterrey or Johannesburg will not change anything about anything .
The European Parliament , like all representative institutions , is reduced to the role of a fig leaf , covering up the scandals which drive people to seek profits at world level .
While agreeing with many of the statements made in the report , the Members of Lutte ouvrière will abstain in protest at the immense hypocrisy which characterises the activities of the European Parliament when it claims to be combating poverty .
Remaining silent about why an economic system based on profit is so damaging , and remaining silent about the responsibility of the major industrial , commercial and financial groups for the extreme poverty , hunger and impoverishment of the majority of the world 's population , is akin to remaining a passive bystander of crimes against humanity and thus to acting as an accomplice to them .
Madam President , our colleague and friend Laura González began her speech with a quotation from the Argentinean writer , Julio Cortázar , about the prostitution of the words democracy and sustainability , but this House has not forgotten where Chernobyl is and is aware that Mr Castro 's Cuba is full of democrats , as we all know .
Mr Lannoye is proposing a report that has two-fold merit in that it seriously and vigorously tackles the problem of sustainable development , but without fundamentalism and with the necessary flexibility to accept the majority of the amendments tabled by the political groups .
The amendments that I tabled , which were incorporated into the rapporteur 's text , aim to improve the efficiency of the management of funds contributed by the Union and to achieve greater transparency and , all in all , better use of the available resources .
I would like to highlight the most important aims in the report as being combating poverty and fostering sustainable development , providing channels for globalisation that has a human , rather than a virtual face , a commitment to rational resource management , all within the context of the necessary promotion of democracy , the rule of law and combating corruption at all levels , not only in developing countries , but particularly in the Western world .
With this report , the European Parliament is making a clear commitment for the issues that are still unresolved since Rio to be resolved in Johannesburg , and for that summit to rectify the mistakes made at the Durban Summit , scarcely a year ago , when bitter and futile controversy meant that the desired progress could not be made in achieving the objectives that had been set .
Madam President , Members of the Commission and the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the media informed us this morning that another section of the Antarctic icecap had come adrift ; this is where 90 % of the earth 's reserves of fresh water are stored .
Floods and ecological catastrophes are becoming ever more frequent ; desertification is gathering pace , and it is against this background , with time running out , that we will go to Johannesburg in September .
Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye have produced very good reports , and if they really were implemented soon , in spirit and letter , both in Europe and in other parts of the world , they would make it possible for us to look to the future with greater confidence .
But these texts are our consciences talking , and sustainable development will remain an ideal for as long as we are unable to bring sufficient pressure to bear on the world 's economic and financial systems .
Ten years ago in Rio , we already identified commitments together , commitments which it has not been possible to keep .
Today we see that liberal economic policies have widened the gaps between countries , making the rich even richer and the poor ever poorer .
And all the while , we have been generating more and more wealth .
The European Union has adopted some courageous positions and it now remains for us to put them into practice and add to them .
It is this model that we will be taking to Johannesburg , in the hope that as many delegations as possible will draw inspiration from it .
To succeed , however , we will need more than speeches and documents .
We will need tools , and these tools are political , economic and financial .
The political tools will require a new form of international governance , which must incorporate sustainable development policies .
The financial tools obviously include more substantial aid from rich countries , but also taxation of financial transactions so as to give developing countries the resources to improve their social and democratic standards .
Today we are being asked to consider the future development of our planet .
We cannot afford to delay any longer in fulfilling the promise of a world which lives in greater solidarity , when the pressure on all our societies and the lack of prospects for large numbers of people are exacerbating their fears and causing them to seek refuge in isolationism .
Madam President , today we have before us reports that are among the most important this week .
They provide a brief for the EC representatives of a Community that is espousing the world 's leading programme of sustainable development at the Johannesburg Summit , the purpose of which is to get closer to the optimistic prospects that first saw life at the Rio Summit in 1992 .
We must be able to mesh economically and socially stable development with a high level of environmental protection in such a way that these factors do not hold each other back but together give a greater boost to welfare and prosperity than either one could do alone .
The draft report is rather pessimistic in its assessment of developments to date .
Obviously it takes time even to slow down the negative development that is so rapidly on the increase .
Only then will positive developments start to become visible .
We , nevertheless , have to take care that we do not try to respond to exponential negative development with a linearly developing policy , in which case we would always be lagging behind reality .
In Rio an important principle was agreed to foster cooperation with grassroots civil society .
The principle is already close to the ideals of the EU in the first place , but it is also important in that it could break the rigidity and inertia of traditional politics .
Partnership projects are built on the principle that good models are easy to copy .
The social , economic and ecological development of societies and democratisation are closely connected as we have seen many times in adverse situations .
A new report out on the UN 's development programme says that only a very small minority of the world 's companies bear sufficient social responsibility .
However , there are good examples too .
It is of vital importance how we in the European Union treat our responsible companies and those that are aspiring to responsibility .
It is more important than ever to pitch Community policy in such a way that companies are able to comply with it and so that it is also more advantageous for them to do so .
Similarly , we must make a consistent effort to prevent social and ecological dumping in global markets with reference to the rules agreed in the WTO .
A recent example is emissions trading : we must be able to fix payments and tariffs for products from third countries that do not participate in the scheme to compensate for the additional burden for companies that do .
Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lannoye .
I share his view that the Commission communication is too long on description , but too short on action .
I should like to make two points .
The first point concerns the section of the communication on trade for sustainable development .
The Commission is still too willing to make the unthinking assumption that trade liberalisation is an aim in itself , rather than a tool to serve the greater purpose of sustainable development .
Contrary to the Commission 's assertion that most causes of global inequality are unrelated to globalisation , the widening gap between the rich and the poor has developed precisely because unregulated markets and free capital mobility have tended to favour the countries , companies and individuals most able to harness these forces for their own benefit , at the expense of those with fewer resources or less political and economic influence .
Accelerated environmental degradation over recent years has occurred as a direct result of the increase in resource consumption and economic activity generated under globalisation .
Secondly , coming from Parliament 's rapporteur on corporate social responsibility , the Commissioner will not be surprised to be told that his commitment to simply promoting the OECD guidelines for multinational enterprise is wholly inadequate , in Parliament 's view , as the European Union 's contribution to developing global corporate accountability .
In today 's global economy there is mounting evidence that multinationals registered in the north , the majority of them within the European Union , are actually causing harm in developing countries .
Transgressions include abusing workers ' rights and causing them bodily harm , destroying local lands and livelihoods , promoting harmful products to consumers , breaking national laws and undermining local democracy .
That is why we will support Paragraph 59 in the resolution .
The EU should use its development assistance and other external powers to pursue the objective of binding minimum standards with respect to the social and environmental performance of companies .
Commissioner , you can make a good start by making a clear and unambiguous commitment in your response to support the proposed framework convention on corporate accountability at the Johannesburg Summit .
I look forward to your answer .
Madam President , rapporteurs , thank you for your excellent work .
I would like to thank Commissioner Nielson too , who is always sensitive to issues concerning developing countries .
The world summit due to take place in less than four months ' time in Johannesburg in South Africa is certainly an opportunity for the entire international community to give practical effect to its efforts and keep its promises in the field of sustainable development .
Although considerable progress has been made in a number of areas in recent years , I am afraid that a great deal still remains to be done .
Addressing and attempting to provide a credible , sustainable response now to the issues which can no longer be put off - such as combating poverty , including the fundamental question of the debt which we debated during the last part-session in Brussels too , the huge social and health problems afflicting the poorest countries of the globe and , last but certainly not least , environmental protection , trade and access to international markets - would be a clear , coherent signal which the European Union itself , as the principal donor of aid , should be the first to give , in line with its recent undertaking to increase development aid by USD 20 billion by 2006 and by a further USD 7 billion from the year 2006 onwards .
On the other hand , it will be essential for the beneficiary countries to really get down to work with genuine development policies in the context of a regional integration process .
Indeed , a unilateral approach not bound by a practical commitment on the part of the governments and the local authorities with adequate management and sound internal policies would serve little purpose .
The first positive signs which , despite everything , give us hope are the undertakings given at Barcelona - and , before that , at Laeken , Gothenburg and the G8 Summit in Genoa - to work towards providing the planned 0.7 % of GDP in aid to the developing countries .
This is a positive trend : we need an intermediate goal , which is what the level of 0.39 % of Member States ' GDP is , to help us reach our objective as soon as possible .
In other words , I feel that , with reasonable deadlines and a precise timetable , we will succeed in halving poverty by 2015 .
Madam President , the notion of sustainable development is nothing new in European Union policy .
It is clear from the messages we receive on a daily basis that we can no longer satisfy our requirements by borrowing against the future of our children and future generations .
The Union played one of the leading roles at the Rio summit on sustainable development , making commitments on important issues without hesitation , although we must admit that several of these commitments were not honoured .
Today , 10 years on , we are preparing for the Johannesburg summit and we need to take stock and take a critical look at all the decisions which fell by the wayside .
This is the only way we shall improve our odds of meeting the new targets , i.e. economic development geared to social progress which takes serious account of the environment .
The Union needs to make a decisive contribution to this endeavour , in the form of proper political decisions , followed by proper practical application .
The Union must also recognise the right to development of developing countries , by taking initiatives and setting a proper example on all aspects of sustainable development and ensuring that non-governmental organisations are involved in all development plans .
We need to focus on issues relating directly to the eradication of poverty and applying a macroeconomic strategy will help here .
Of course , all this and all the other questions raised by the rapporteurs in their reports require funds as well as political will .
I should like to close by thanking and warmly congratulating both rapporteurs on their very important reports ; I hope they will be applied in practice and will not just remain dead letters which merely express our wishes .
Madam President , people are getting somewhat tired of summits , because their practical results are so poor .
However , each summit on development and the environment has marked a turning point in the relationship between man and his environment .
The Stockholm Summit led to a general increase in awareness about the major threats to our environment .
The Rio Summit defined a new arena , that of sustainable development .
However , the concept of shared but differentiated responsibility has not gained the necessary support from the wealthiest countries .
World leaders cannot , of course , be satisfied when they are reminded that the Rio commitments have not been fulfilled .
In the ten years between Rio and Johannesburg there has been a significant change of scenery to a globalised society in which social and economic inequalities seem to be closely linked to environmental problems and to the governability of all countries .
Eradicating poverty is a world priority , because it is the only way that we can manage the processes of globalisation in positive and fair manner .
However , trends show that those living in the wealthiest countries wish to maintain their standard of living , while the other 80 % of the world population needs to attain a dignified standard of living .
As a result , the only hope for global sustainability is to change methods of production and consumption .
We are aware of the key elements required to achieve fair growth in this globalised world , but we are not being determined enough in applying them .
Transparency and openness in the markets , knowledge management , innovation management and the transfer of technology , efficiency in our processes and products and accepting and practising social and environmental responsibility in all sectors are some of the most important elements .
The European Union has given clear signals that it is capable of leading that process .
I hope that in Johannesburg we will be capable of defending our courageous , generous and worthy positions , which confirm us as leaders of a new world order .
Madam President , I should like first of all to thank Commissioner Nielson and also express my thanks for two commendable reports .
A clear agenda for sustainable development was set as long as ten years ago in Rio but , since then , developments have , however , largely been in the opposite direction .
Poverty is spreading , and the gulf between rich and poor is growing every single day .
The use of natural resources is increasing every day , there has been no reduction in humanly induced climate change and , every day , species of animals and plants disappear forever .
There really is a vital need for us in the EU to assume a global responsibility at the World Conference in Johannesburg .
What needs to be prepared is a global agreement with a practical work programme for sustainable development over many years to come , stating a number of precise objectives and precise deadlines .
Allow me to specify some individual and crucial features .
Partly through giving the developing countries real opportunities in world trade , we should conduct a pro-active campaign against poverty and hunger in order to fulfil the pledges to the UN concerning development aid .
We should break the link between economic growth and increased environmental damage , namely through the increased use of renewable energy and cleaner technology .
We should ensure that , in all policy areas , we give consideration to sustainability , whether we are talking about legislation , trade agreements , investment or development aid .
We should ensure that we have better and more reliable methods of implementing the international environmental and social agreements .
Finally , I think it important that we establish more specific objectives for the proper use of natural resources and for safeguarding the diversity of the natural environment .
It might be said that , with the lack of preparation so far for the world conference and with a Bush administration in the United States , there is every good reason for fearing a fiasco in Johannesburg .
We Europeans face an enormous task in securing a positive and binding result in Johannesburg .
Madam President , I too must say to Ms González Álvarez that it was the vile Communist regimes which bandied about the word " democracy " most frequently , and the worst environmental disasters have occurred in Communist countries - just think of Chernobyl - in other words , in states where there is no grasp of either economics or ecology .
Rio was a milestone .
Yet here we are today , feeling very depressed because we have nothing to show for it .
I ask you this : who else , apart from the European Union , should take the lead role here ?
Who else has the opportunities , the awareness , and the skills , knowledge and economic scope ?
Without a strong economy , environmental protection is impossible .
Yet Johannesburg will soon be upon us , and we have to face facts : the preparations are way off course .
Let me say a few words about this New York preparatory conference , which took place from 25 March to 5 April .
I am told that progress was far too slow and there was far too much bureaucracy .
We have not even begun negotiating yet .
The forthcoming preparatory conference in Indonesia has now been extended , and will now take place from 24 May to 7 June .
If we do not make progress this time , Johannesburg will have failed before we get there .
Let me mention one issue which is very important to my own country , namely mountains .
At the preparatory conferences , Switzerland and Austria have called for a separate mountain chapter containing strong commitments , and this demand was endorsed by the European Union .
Yet here too , it was impossible to make progress during the preparations .
The countries which we represent here have all signed the Alpine Convention .
Yet there is absolutely no movement on ratifying the protocols .
If we want to have a strong presence at an international summit and demand measures which will benefit our mountains , we must start by doing our homework in our own countries .
I ask you all to urge your governments to ratify the relevant protocols of the Alpine Convention as quickly as possible .
Madam President , I want to take a little time to talk about corporate social responsibility and sustainable development , not from the Left but from the Right of this chamber .
Unless the corporate social responsibility issues are understood properly , this will become another sort of shibboleth for the global economy .
Global economy requires global rules .
If you do not have global rules to sustain the development of our planet , we are going to end up with a problem where the rich get richer and the poor get poorer , the environment will get worse and sustainable development flies out of the window .
Sixty thousand people will be wasting their time in Johannesburg in September .
The last time there was a semblance of any sort of global economy was during the period of the empires , when the British , the French , the Italians and the Spanish empires went out and created economic activity .
But even the British East India company had social corporative responsibility : they built schools ; they cleaned up Bengal ; they built railways ; they put infrastructure in and they created offset investments .
That is how the inter-dependency between economies of the poorer and the richer countries developed .
Today , corporate social responsibility requires us to recognise that if you take the top 200 largest multinational companies , their combined turnover is greater than the combined GNP of 172 countries .
So the 200 chairmen of these companies have enormous social responsibility .
We need to enjoin them to forge a partnership for development ; not carp about what they do , but help them , because shareholder value depends hugely now , even in the City of London , on whether companies behave ethically .
I have seen time and time again that companies with proper environmental and development policies have higher shareholder value than those companies that engage in looting and raping the other places .
So I am asking colleagues on my Right , not colleagues on my Left who are already there , to understand that inter-dependence requires us to look at our own economic and enterprise development and tell our companies to be partners in this development process .

I would like to thank Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye for their comprehensive and very inspiring reports .
It is a sad fact that progress towards the goals established at Rio has been slow and in some respects conditions are worse today than they were ten years ago .
Against this background it is meaningful and hopefully also useful that Johannesburg actually takes place .
It is a way of attracting the world 's attention back to these issues .
We certainly want to make the best use of this opportunity .
I agree with Parliament that the preparatory process for the World Summit is not going as well as we would have liked but the increase in development spending announced in Monterrey should facilitate progress in Johannesburg .
At least having the debate on the financing of development behind us with some real result makes it more probable that Johannesburg will be able to focus on sustainable development .
However , we also have to be more creative in finding innovative means of implementation and financing .
We still have a lot of work to do to ensure that the last preparatory meeting in Bali at the end of May produces results .
This is not certain .
The debate is not concerned with objectives , as there seems to be a consensus that poverty eradication and sustainable consumption and production are the overriding goals of the Summit , which - as a general feature - is further guided by the commitment to achieve the Millennium Development Objectives .
As always , the question is how to achieve these goals .
The Union is in the process of identifying a series of key priorities for common action derived from our Sustainable Development Strategy .
The Commission will promote specific initiatives for partnerships in the following areas .
Let me note that it does not make much difference whether we talk about partnerships or deals .
These partnerships we are promoting together add up to something that can meaningfully be called a " global deal " .
Concerning water - with a view to better resource management and improving access to safe drinking water and to adequate sanitation , we will launch an initiative , based on integrated river basin management .
Concerning energy - the Commission will propose an initiative to improve the provision of adequate , affordable and sustainable energy services .
The core of the initiative will be the provision of technical assistance to developing countries to put in place appropriate energy policies through the development of partnerships .
Concerning health - the Union will increase , over the next five years , the volume of development assistance targeting improved health outcomes and will invite recipient countries and the international community to join in such efforts .
Particular attention will be paid to maternal health .
WTO members should resolve differences on compulsory licences and work to ensure that pharmaceutical products can be made available to the developing world at the lowest possible prices .
I remind Parliament that a year ago we untied the procurement of essential medicines for AIDS , malaria and TB globally as far as the Commission is concerned .
Concerning education - the Union will also increase , over the next five years , the volume of development assistance in education and invite recipient countries to develop supportive policy frameworks and appropriate national budgets .
We will support the World Bank ' Education for All ? fast tracking initiative , and strengthen partnerships especially with UNESCO to build capacity and monitor progress ; we will also give priority to primary education and the closing of the gender gap .
Concerning trade - making globalisation work for sustainable development requires timely progress on the work launched in the Doha Development Agenda , and concrete trade-related initiatives going beyond it .
The Union will argue for levels of access comparable to Everything But Arms to be decided by all OECD countries in favour of the least developed countries .
Concerning forests - the Union will effectively contribute to the strengthening of international cooperation to fight illegal logging and trade in timber .
Here we need more than monitoring .
We need policing .
Concerning fisheries - the Union intends to contribute effectively to maintaining biodiversity , while securing the long-term viability of the fishing industry .
We will fight illicit , unreported and unregulated fishing , and support sustainable fishery policies in developing countries in the context of poverty reduction strategies .
At present we are in the process of renegotiating the traditional fisheries agreements with a large number of countries in Africa and elsewhere .
This renewal process is essential if we are to move in this direction .
Concerning governance - the Union will contribute to the strengthening of global governance structures and institutions in the economic , social and environmental fields as well as their respective linkages , so as to ensure policy coherence , integration and increased effectiveness .
In this context we will also actively engage in the emerging debate on global public goods and will explore innovative mechanisms for international financial solidarity and for incentives for reducing externalities .
We will propose setting up a task force open to all actors to identify and discuss the appropriate supply of relevant global public goods .
This was one of the elements that we missed in the Monterrey consensus but which the Commission and some of the Member States took up during the week of discussions in Monterrey , making sure that what was not included in the Monterrey consensus was in fact re-injected in the international debate during the conference .
We want to use Johannesburg as the platform for moving these items up on the international agenda .
All these initiatives will be implemented in the framework of the national and regional poverty reduction strategies of our partner countries which form the basis for sustainable development .
In the implementation of these initiatives , the Union will pay special attention to Africa and African countries ' own efforts to achieve sustainable development .
Regarding the contributions from Mr Howitt and Mr Deva , together they make up a balanced presentation of the challenge .
I will continue to listen carefully to both sides in this House on this issue .
I agree with both of them so , in principle , this should not be impossible .
The big issue is moving forward to create real international governance .
This is also the main sticking point between Europe and the United States .
We find it natural and necessary to move forward in creating global governance on a large number of issues , where the US Government , which is less multilateralist , favours a different course of action .
This has to be discussed .
We see these international conferences as useful arenas for pushing these views forward .
Several speakers , from all political groups in this House , have mentioned that we need to make progress in reforming the agricultural policy and the fisheries policy in Europe in order to be able to present ourselves in a credible manner internationally in these areas .
I could not agree more .
These are two elements which will take up a lot of attention .
The reform of these two areas is as important as any other contribution by Europe to global development , as far as international consequences are concerned .
Preparations for Johannesburg will be one of the main items for discussion at the Seville European Council in June .
Let us ensure that the European Union plays a leading role in achieving an ambitious and action-oriented outcome at Johannesburg .
Some speakers have mentioned the lack of clear decisions concerning participation from the highest levels of government .
Let me use this occasion to inform Parliament that it is clearly the intention of the President of the European Commission to take part in the Johannesburg Summit .
A number of other Commissioners will be there , making sure that our different areas of responsibility are given the maximum attention during the negotiations .
The European Parliament has always been an advocate of sustainable development and its integration in all Union policies .
Your efforts help bring a sense of urgency to the preparations for Johannesburg .
This is needed .
I thank Parliament for the contributions today .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 p.m.
The next item is a statement by the Commission on the World Food Summit ( FAO ) .
Mr President , at the World Food Summit in 1996 participants , including the European Commission , pledged their commitment to halving the number of undernourished people by 2015 .
This target has been confirmed by the Millennium Declaration adopted by the United Nations in September 2000 .
Current information indicates , however , that although considerable efforts have been made in many countries to reduce poverty and improve food security , hunger is not yet being reduced fast enough to meet the World Food Summit Plan of Action .
In a world of increasing prosperity and plentiful food supplies , it is unacceptable that close to 800 million people still suffer from hunger and malnutrition .
Eliminating hunger is one of the most important challenges facing humanity , and can only be achieved through concerted action by national governments and the international community .
This has led the FAO to convene Heads of State and Government to the World Food Summit five years later to review the progress made in achieving the 1996 goals and to reaffirm the political commitment to fighting poverty .
The Commission has made considerable efforts in line with the 1996 commitments and its Plan of Action .
Poverty reduction has become the overall objective of the Community development policy , and food security objectives are being tackled by a broad range of policies and instruments .
The forthcoming World Food Summit provides an opportunity to renew the Commission 's commitment , to present our views and to report on progress made .
The Summit is to be seen in the broader international context of a series of high-level events , such as the least-developed countries ' conference in Brussels , Doha , Monterrey and Johannesburg , providing fresh impetus and new opportunities to make progress towards sustainable development .
Food security is a major dimension and indicator for poverty reduction and is a key element in this context .
The Summit will be able to build on the commitments and results of the various international processes and should integrate food security objectives more firmly into the broader poverty reduction agenda and strengthen the links to sustainable natural resource management and through this to sustainable development .
Food security / rural development is one of the six focal areas in the overall development policy .
The outcome of the Summit will be a political declaration , negotiated among the FAO membership .
The Commission and Member States are preparing a joint position .
The declaration will call for a strengthening of political will and for the identification of adequate measures to accelerate the implementation of the Plan of Action .
The concluding negotiations with FAO members will take place during the Committee on Food Security before the actual summit .
As a last point , I would like to reiterate the political will of the European Community to support realistic and sustainable recommendations at the World Food Summit to meet the challenges of the fight against hunger , both at national and international level .
This Summit will provide another political opportunity to pursue our dialogue with the developing countries and to demonstrate our solidarity with the less-developed countries and poor hungry people everywhere in the world .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the Commissioner for his statement .
However , let me say to him that I hope the outcome from Rome will be more than a statement : I hope it will be a programme of determined action .
The public 's perception of hunger is very often the televisual one of famine .
However , over the last 25 years that has been largely identified with conflict situations , and the real problem is malnutrition .
Poor water leads to disease and disability and to death and , of course , the loss of a productive workforce .
That in turn leads to low-income countries , which leads to malnutrition , and that is the cycle we want to break .
It is exacerbated when humanitarian aid undermines local farmers and local economies .
We feel good giving our food surpluses to low-income countries , not realising that can do more harm than good to the producers of food in those countries .
It is exacerbated again when we close our doors in Europe to their agricultural exports , on the perfectly understandable grounds of hygiene and food safety .
There is a spiralling problem here .
It means that we prevent them from earning enough to afford to meet our standards .
When I was in Cape Town for the ACP , it was absurd that local producers were asking me to help them .
They wanted their high-quality springbok meat to be served in Europe as in their top-quality hotels throughout Africa but , because of the rules on slicing meat , they could not afford the equipment and could not enter the market .
That is the sort of thing we must guard against .
To get back to the basic challenges .
It is a quarter of a century since we set our targets .
We said we must solve the problem and , then , in 1996 , we identified 800 million people undernourished .
We aimed again to halve that number by 2015 : that means over 20 years , a reduction of 22 million a year .
But we are reducing at 6 million a year , and five years on we are not going to meet our target .
The target will not be reached until 2030 .
The paradox is that world food production has outpaced population growth : the 5.8 billion in the world today have , on average , 15 % more food per person than the 4 billion 20 years ago .
But per capita food production has not increased in the high-debt , low-income countries , especially in sub-Saharan Africa .
That is where our attention should be focused .
In 2000 , out of 5.8 billion people , 826 million people were still hungry .
By 2015 - our target year - 580 million will still be hungry at the present rate .
I ask the Commission and all of us to remember that the United Nations Development Programme estimates that it would take just USD 13 billion a year to solve this problem .
USD 13 billion a year is what we in Europe and America spend on cosmetics .
I ask them to think that in the last 50 years almost 400 million worldwide have died from hunger and poor sanitation .
That is three times the number of people killed in all the wars fought in the entire 20th century .
Lastly , I ask you remember that every year some nine million people die from hunger .
That is 24 000 deaths a day ; it is one life lost every 3.6 seconds ; it is 50 dead in the three minutes I have been speaking .
Those are the things we should be thinking about when we are in Rome on 10 June , and that is why I ask for action and not just statements .
Madam President , Commissioner , no one can fail to be moved by the problem that we are debating today , famine in the world , and since it is still so very acute we are called on to show greater political will , in particular at the forthcoming World Food Summit .
It is therefore vital that at this summit the European Union participate fully in this battle to gain recognition of the fact that the right to food is a fundamental human right .
It is true that famine may seem to be the consequence of bad distribution of food between over-nourished and undernourished countries .
Nevertheless , the solution to this problem does not lie solely in establishing better trade between regions of abundance and regions of poverty .
The priority has to be to find and promote solutions where the problem arises , if only to keep in step with the food culture of the people concerned and to consolidate the rural economy .
From this point of view , the fight against hunger and poverty certainly requires us to cancel debt , support education and vocational training , increase technical assistance and encourage investment in these countries which are lagging behind .
It also undoubtedly requires good use of water and the preservation of biodiversity , and we are expecting these to be declared ' inalienable public assets ' by the international community .
Above all , however , we cannot forget that it requires us to exploit fisheries and promote the development of food-producing agriculture on a sustainable model .
In this sense , promoting agricultural practices which are adapted to local conditions , processing food products locally , developing local markets and ensuring that developing countries have freedom of choice when it comes to new technologies are priorities which are just as important in regions stricken by famine , and this means that the WTO 's provisions on special and differentiated treatment will need to be reinforced .
I would therefore ask our Commissioner to defend the ideas contained in Parliament 's joint motion at the forthcoming World Food Summit .
Madam President , the statement which the Commissioner made a moment ago is one that is not likely to attract a great deal of criticism .
It contained general statements .
My only criticism is that it is a timeless speech .
Had the Commissioner for development and cooperation given this speech fifteen , or ten , years ago , the content would have been identical .
My main point of criticism is : what are the specific improvements which the Commission proposes ?
Firstly , and this has been said before , the Commission should , in my view , focus on Africa .
Agricultural production on the African continent lags behind the growth in population .
What should the Commission do ?
In my view , the Commission should , in the first instance , ensure , via the delegations and the Member States , that those countries adopt a sound price policy for agricultural products .
Farmers , wherever they may be in the world , are prepared to produce adequately if the circumstances permit this , provided that the prices are sound .
It is always necessary to strike a balance between the interests of the people in the towns and the people in the country , but it is a sure thing that if the prices for agricultural products are not sound , farmers will stop producing and the population will become increasingly dependent on imports and food aid .
Both often have fatal consequences for the local food production .
I believe food aid is distributed far too easily by the Americans , among others .
Europe might have the opportunity of having a heart-to-heart talk with them in the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
In addition , Europe must , in my view , also be cautious when it provides food aid .
As far as the prices on the world market are concerned , we cannot influence these , but we can enter into a dialogue with the governments in the countries in question to adopt a clear price policy , thus ensuring that imports from the world market do not adversely affect local food production .
I should like to make two other points .
We often think that we can solve this problem by throwing money at it and that if we gave some money to the public information services , it may be possible to solve this problem .
I do not think so .
If we gave money for five years , the problem would recur in five years ' time .
In my view , the dialogue should also be extended to include the way in which the public information services , together with the veterinary services , can become more financially independent .
How can they be funded to a large extent by the local population itself ?
I am mainly thinking of the veterinary services , for cattle , in particular , plays an important role in Africa 's food production .
Vast areas that cannot be used for food production at the moment can then improve in future thanks to veterinary facilities .
The Commission must play a central role in this dialogue about self-sufficiency and financial independence , and this is a far better solution than giving money alone .
Obviously I welcome the adoption of a European Parliament resolution on the FAO World Food Summit .
After all , it was my group that requested it .
Five years after the first summit , it is clear that the progress made - a fall of 40 million in the 800 million who are suffering from hunger - is very small compared with the objective of halving the number of undernourished people by 2015 .
The resolution contains some interesting paragraphs , such as the one about the need for the new WTO round to focus on development and food security and the need for concomitant reforms of the common agricultural policy and common fisheries policy .
Overall , however , the commitments made are very weak : the resolution does not recognise the supremacy of the right to food , or to sovereignty over food supplies , and neither does it tackle the structural factors which generate food insecurity .
In fact , as we are well aware , it is not the quantity of food available in the world that is the problem , but the way that it is distributed amongst those who live there .
The new technologies on reproduction , in particular genetically modified organisms , will not change anything either ; quite the opposite .
Thanks to these seeds and genetic technologies , small farmers and the people who live in the South are even more at the mercies of the multinationals .
Not only are these firms tightening their grip on farmers by selling them their magic seeds ; they are also encouraging them to produce food for consumers in the North , to the detriment of their own needs .
This explains why three quarters of the people suffering from hunger in developing countries are small farmers .
The time has come to put an end to unfair commercial rules and practices where trade in agricultural goods is concerned .
The European Union should not delay in scrapping its export subsidies .
It is not enough to talk about joined-up Community policies ; this principle also needs to be applied in practice .
The objective of the millennium is to halve poverty by 2015 , not to protect our farmers , our fishing fleets and our agri-food industries ; that is why we will be asking you to support our amendments .
The best way to fight famine is actually to give access to the earth , access to water and access to genetic resources back to the people of the South , and to protect their farmers and their own markets .
The right of everyone everywhere to a healthy and adequate diet should be recognised and respected in practice throughout the world .
It is a fundamental human right .
The preparations for the World Food Summit should in fact make it possible not only to affirm this , but also to put it into practice once and for all .
The time is over for expressing wishes and making declarations , too few of which are followed by action , when there are 826 million people in the world who are still suffering from hunger - almost 800 million of whom in developing countries - and when there are 2 billion people who are badly nourished .
No one can be unaware that in such cases the most vulnerable are women and children .
The commitment we made six years ago was already to halve the number of people suffering from hunger by 2015 , but a quick calculation shows that at the current average rate of reduction of 8 million a year we will not be able to meet this objective .
It is therefore a matter of urgency to address the consequences of this tragedy by of course providing financial aid , contributions and programmes , but it is also vital to tackle the root causes of this situation .
The liberalisation policies encouraged by the WTO to open up the markets of developing countries pose a serious threat to countries that are already weak , as does the ever present reality of debt .
Wars , policies of establishing hegemony and of seeking outlets , at whatever price , for products from the North , and the quest for profits , even when it means privatising the South 's natural resources , all threaten food security .
Making trade a priority over development can only widen still further the gap between opulent wealth and extreme poverty and make it harder for the South to gain sovereignty over its food supply and have this respected .
Nevertheless , every country has the right to choose freely how it is going to supply itself with food .
Access to adequate food and the means of producing it and access to resources are the best ways to guarantee the right to food and make it a reality .
A trade policy which respects local production , the income of small farmers and the needs of the local people and where cooperation is based on a relationship between equals is the only possible way to find a lasting solution to the problem of food security in the world .
Madam President , large numbers of malnourished people still deserve our concern .
The speed at which malnutrition has been falling over the past decade is disappointing .
At this rate , the objective to halve the number of malnourished people by 2015 will not be achieved .
I wholeheartedly support a more dynamic approach .
This dynamism is not evident from the level of development aid .
If the rich countries carried out their pledges of Monterrey , aid would rise up to 0.24 % of the OESD 's joint national income in 2006 .
This is still a sharp drop compared to the 0.33 % of the early ' 90s .
A greater effort is what is required here .
For structural improvement , a sound trade system , in addition to aid , is vital .
According to the FAO , trade liberalisation is beneficial to all countries .
Let us in this connection not overlook the fact that developing countries are forced to open their markets , while rich countries quite often display a reluctant attitude .
Partly in view of the poor countries ' need to protect themselves against cheap food imports , the FAO must make a case for gaining more insight into the functioning of institutions , such as the WTO .
Moreover , where does self-sufficiency fit in the package of often export-oriented measures ?
In short , I urge Member States to make every effort to commit to good food , which is fundamental to human life , not only simply out of self-interest , but because it is within our remit and because we have received the resources for this purpose .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , given that 826 million people worldwide suffer from chronic malnutrition , I welcome the fact that this House is aware of the situation and is adopting a resolution on the forthcoming World Food Summit in Rome .
At the World Food Summit in 1996 , four priorities were set : food security , international agricultural trade , sustainable management of natural resources , and rural development .
These commitments by Member States should now be reaffirmed and action taken to achieve the goal of halving the number of undernourished people by 2015 .
A further key point will be the approach to , and management of , water resources .
The EU must continue to focus in particular on poverty reduction and sustainable development .
Democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights , a sound economic policy , gender equality and environmental aspects must be at the forefront of development .
There is a clear link between hunger and poverty , and hunger can be both the cause and the outcome of poverty , conflicts and war .
The development of entire regions , and rural regions in particular , depends on this .
Then , of course , there are natural disasters such as draught and floods , which simply deepen poverty . The international community has a responsibility to provide relief in these situations .
Commissioner , the EU 's policies should be shaped in a way which enables us to move away from short-term food aid towards long-term support which provides farmers with the necessary technology and know-how at local level .
Our goal should be to promote agriculture in the developing countries vigorously so that it is capable of sustaining its own population and is no longer dependent on international food aid .
In this context , I should like to mention the EU 's trade restrictions and export refunds which are often sharply criticised .
The European Union has developed an agricultural model which is designed to establish framework conditions for all farmers in Europe , regardless of location - even in less-favoured and peripheral regions - to operate effectively with a secure income .
The job of the farmers is not only to produce food ; they also play a key role in protecting and preserving natural resources and landscape .
With its multifunctionality , all its specific features and social significance , our European agriculture model could set an example to others .
Agriculture is not directly comparable with other economic sectors .
Given that the EU is also the world 's largest importer of agricultural products , I do not think we can continue to voice criticism of the CAP in this way .
I would therefore urge the critics to adopt a more creative approach .
Madam President , the World Food Summit , which is to be held in Rome next month , is part of a series of meetings that are setting the parameters for contemporary international relations , but I do not think that this is just one more summit : the World Food Summit concerns the most important fundamental right , the right to life or survival , which regrettably , hundreds of millions of people are currently deprived of .
Eradicating hunger and guaranteeing food security are essential conditions for development , but this development is hindered by malnutrition .
Moreover , food security affects other aspects of development and of North-South relations , such as the sustainability of agriculture and world trade .
For these reasons , the Socialist Group has worked particularly hard on this resolution and we have introduced the fundamental right to food security , the principle of food sovereignty and freedom of choice of agricultural and biological technologies , considering water and biodiversity as inalienable public property , the need for coherence among European policies , particularly among development and trade policies and the common agricultural policy , and the principle of proximity of production , processing and sale of food products , including food aid .
By introducing these elements , we have managed to moderate both proactive tendencies and the zeal for liberalisation .
We think that the Rome Summit should be a success that revitalises the objectives of the millennium , including reducing hunger and malnutrition by half by 2015 , an objective on which we are behind , because as has been said it is decreasing at a rate of 6 million people per year when the figure should be 22 million per year .
We would particularly like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that in September negotiations begin on the economic association agreements with the ACP countries , and to the absolute need for coherence between development policy and the position it takes within the WTO .
There are six amendments to this resolution , all of which were tabled by my colleague Didier Rod , which we agree with and are going to support , and we are only going to leave voting free on Amendment No 5 , which aims to introduce a new paragraph 14a .
Let me start by saying that what Mr Bowis said is something I can agree with from one end to the other .
Real starvation , in most cases , relates to conflict situations .
These are the low points .
But it should also be possible to reach the goal of halving the food problems because those conflicts are man-made .
We are now studying the situation very carefully in Zimbabwe .
Our analysis is that even if it is true that there is a drought problem in the region , by far most of the problem of access to food in Zimbabwe is man-made .
It is a politically created , negative situation .
That will not keep us from carrying out our humanitarian mission .
We have to be clear what we are facing .
Strangely enough there is some optimism to be found in the notion that conflicts are one of the main causes of starvation .
Mr Mulder mentioned the need for a correct pricing policy in the developing countries and the need to concentrate on Africa .
I agree .
One of the reasons we want to move more towards giving food aid in the form of cash is to stimulate the development of adequate pricing structures and market situations in these countries .
Mr Mulder also mentioned that giving food aid , as such , can be problematic .
He mentioned both the European Union and the United States and the agricultural policies here as part of the global problem .
Once again , I could not agree more .
Let me quote part of the editorial in the Herald Tribune yesterday with the headline " An awful farm bill " : " George W. Bush signed a farm bill on Monday that represents a low point in his presidency - a wasteful corporate welfare measure that penalises taxpayers and the world 's poorest people in order to bribe a few voters .
Bush said he was pleased to do this and delivered a brief statement suggesting that he is either dishonest or utterly ignorant of what he has just done . "
These are strong words .
For Europe complacency is also a real risk .
We have some soul-searching and some reforming to do ourselves .
In Monterrey , the World Bank , IMF and WTO top management were in fact the ones pushing and really arguing that the global distortion of agricultural policies in the rich world is a core problem .
The figures are the following : we give about USD 50 billion a year for development assistance globally , whereas we are spending more than USD 300 billion on subsidising agriculture in the US , Japan and Europe .
These are figures that are used deliberately by the management of those institutions to inject some realism , seriousness and proportion into the global discussion of North / South relations .
This will also be an important theme at the World Food Summit in Rome .
Clearly , we in Europe need to draw the right conclusions .
Finally , on the need to move towards food security and long-term development instead of continuing old fashioned food aid , again I could not agree more .
Ethiopia , a few years ago , was , hopefully , the last case where we were more or less hijacked into pouring in wheat instead of attacking the roots of the problem .
For this reason also I hope that the meeting in Rome will produce real results .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
I have received six motions for resolutions
Mr President , on a point of order , in case some of you are too polite to mention it , you may be aware that there is a very nasty smell around the building .
I just want to reassure you that the College of Quaestors is taking care of it .
It is believed that something rather nasty may have died in the works - a large rat or even a small mouse - but we hope that by this afternoon it will have been cleared up .
All Members are therefore invited to look for the body .
It is my great pleasure , on behalf of our President and the entire House , to welcome members of a delegation from the Uzbek Parliament , who are seated in the official gallery , to the third meeting of the EU-Republic of Uzbekistan Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , which has just been held in Strasbourg .
The delegation comprises seven members and is headed by Mr Erkin Vakhidov , a member of the Uzbek Parliament committee for international affairs and interparliamentary relations .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , Amendment No 1 in the English texts opens with the phrase ' Considers that there is a continuing democratic deficit in the European Union ' , and goes on to say that , ' we should democratise the institutions therefore ... ' .
In some language versions , the English word ' continuing ' has been translated as ' permanent ' which , for example in Spanish , gave rise to some distress .
English is the original text .
Could the translation services please get it right in the other languages .
Mr President , I wanted to indicate that personally I am in favour of this amendment , but on the important condition that it be considered as an addition rather than as a deletion , in which case we would say that Parliament , ' wishes to see a simple and precise distribution of competences ' , where ' and precise ' is the amendment and the rest is the original text .
Mr President , on Amendment No 6 , I should like to draw the attention of the House - and particularly of all those who support the general philosophy of the report and intend a priori to vote in favour of it at the end - to the fact that this amendment stands in total contradiction to the rest of the report .
If therefore you support the philosophy of the report , as your rapporteur I strongly recommend that you reject this amendment .
Mr President , the first sentence of paragraph 19 is translated incorrectly in the German version .
What our rapporteur Alain Lamassoure actually says in his own language is that the Union 's own competences must remain small in number .
In German , it says here that the Union 's own competences must remain limited .
That means something different .
If the Union has a competence in the area of customs policy , this competence is full and not limited .
The German version should therefore state : " .. takes the view that the number of own competences of the Union must remain limited " .
I would ask for this correction to be made .
I can assure you that the translation service will check this .
Mr President , could the same correction be made to the Spanish version , as it is different from the original ?
All of the language versions will be checked , I assure you .
Mr President , I hope I am not too late .
I asked in a note for an oral amendment to insert the word " by " , so that it would read " or by the Committee of the Regions " , and that would make a considerable difference .
Mr President , I have an oral compromise amendment to recommend to the committee , which updates paragraph 14 .
Two days ago there was a new United Nations Security Council resolution on Iraq .
My oral amendment would delete paragraph 14 and take account of Amendments Nos 12 , which would fall , 13 and part of 15 .
I recommend that it becomes a new paragraph 6a , as the PSE Group requests : " Welcomes , as long as it does not lead to an increase in military expenditure , the adoption by the United Nations Security Council of a new resolution 1409 ( 2002 ) , creating more streamlined procedures for goods to be purchased for Iraq , which removes most restrictions on non-military and non-dual use trade and investments , while maintaining the arms embargo .
Passed in order to ameliorate the humanitarian crisis in basic needs .
Urges the United Nations to tighten controls on Iraq 's ability to import weapons and weapons-related goods and to remove all other related remaining sanctions ; "
Our rapporteur is proposing a fairly substantial oral amendment , reflecting recent events , which would replace several amendments and paragraphs .
Mr President , we are in favour of this oral amendment , albeit as a supplementary amendment .
We definitely want to retain our Amendment No 12 .
Mr President , I recommend a vote against Amendment No 12 .
We have placed this amendment in 6a in order to respond to the PSE Group request .
This is a sensible amendment which covers the entirety of the requests from the PSE Group .
I would vote against Amendment No 12 .
Mr President , depending on the outcome of this vote , I reserve the right to request the Chairman of the Committee to delete the explanatory statement in accordance with Rule 161 of our Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , our Rules of Procedure specifically state that the explanatory statement shall be the sole responsibility of the rapporteur .
This always applies , and it would therefore be unusual and incorrect to reject it here .
It would contravene the Rules .
Mr President , I wanted to ask : has a vote now been taken on the oral amendment or not , because we have to vote anyway , even if no objection is raised ?
As a rule , when fewer than 12 Members object to an oral amendment being accepted , it is deemed to be included in the vote .
Having said that , if the House really does insist that we put this to the vote , I would be quite happy to do so .
There did not seem to be any objections though .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two amendments to Paragraph 22 .
The first is one which I tabled on behalf of my group to take account of a proposal made in the committee by the rapporteur for the EPP , Mr Wijkman .
The intention was to add a reference to a worldwide tax on CO2 emissions .
The EPP amendment seeking to delete the paragraph is acceptable if it is an addition , but if it deletes the paragraph I cannot accept it .
In my opinion it completely distorts the meaning of the original text .
I would request , if the EEP agrees to accept it as an addition , that we vote first on my amendment , which was in fact tabled at the EPP 's request , and then on the EPP 's amendment as an addition , provided that the EPP agrees .
Mr President , I am aware that this explanation of vote is likely to be lost amid the general confusion , but perhaps it will be enough for the record .
The adoption of Mr Rothley 's report on the fixing of book prices puts a temporary end to what is sometimes a very unwelcome development .
We owe a great debt of thanks to Mr Rothley and , indeed , to all those who have contributed to this process and ensured that despite our adherence to competition , culture is still considered an important asset and - prompted in this instance by the fixing of book prices in Germany and Austria - enabled a sensible rule to be established in future in this area , which has now been copied by France as well .
The attempts by this Commission and its predecessor to give far more priority to competition than culture have fortunately been shelved recently , and in this respect , I think we can claim to have taken a positive step .
. ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report as did all of my colleagues from the CPNT party .
The substance of the report , which defends the system of fixing book prices , for which the Member States are free to make provision in their national legislation - as is rightly recalled and stressed - is beyond reproach .
On the other hand , it is sad to see that we need to be reminded of a position which is plain common sense and that a directive , which at the end of the day is relatively cumbersome , is going to have to be drafted to counter the whims of competition policy and its enforcement by the Court of Justice .
Nevertheless , there is no cause for triumphalism , because during yesterday 's debate the Commissioner said that the current case law was quite sufficient and because , confident of their unacceptable monopoly on the right of initiative , the Commission seems determined to ignore this request based on Article 192 , which is used only extremely rarely .
This confirms that it is better to restrict the scope of Community action to what is strictly necessary upstream rather than having to repair the damage afterwards .
It also explains my group 's actions in respect of the Lamassoure report on the division of competences and the adverse vote which resulted .
Further to the vote on the Rothley report concerning the fixing of book prices , I should like to say the following .
Most countries already use some method or other for fixing book prices , or they are considering introducing this in the foreseeable future .
In its resolution of February 2001 , the European Council drew attention to the book 's special cultural value and the importance thereof for promoting cultural diversity within Europe .
He has therefore asked the European Commission to take this into account when applying competition rules and rules on the free movement of goods , and only to act if existing national fixed price systems are deliberately being circumvented and if this has an adverse effect on trade between Member States .
In its agreements with the German book industry on 22 March 2002 , the European Commission clearly took this on board .
It thus appears that the book justifies its existence as a cultural entity and falls within the remit of Article 151 of the Treaty .
On this basis , I conclude that I have to vote for Mr Rothley 's report , in which he points out that every Member State shall be entitled to introduce fixed price systems for books , but that agreements must be reached at European level in the case of cross-border trade , and particularly in the case of national price fixing schemes being deliberately circumvented .
What is important is that all market operators involved obtain legal certainty via a stable , economic and legal framework , but also , and this is just as important , that the cultural diversity , of which the ' book ' as an item of cultural value forms part , is respected and promoted .
. ( FR ) The 2002 broad economic guidelines are less attractive than the Commission suggests .
In several Member States , including France , we are seeing a renewed threat of inflation ; this may cause the European Central Bank to raise interest rates , which would have adverse consequences for growth .
And growth remains weak , because the recovery is a long time coming in Europe , while it has already arrived in the United States .
On both of these aspects the euro has had a mixed or unfavourable impact : the changeover of notes and coins does indeed seem to have caused an upsurge in prices - let us hope that it is only a temporary one - and as for growth , we are still waiting for the ' doping effect ' which monetary union , according to its champions , was supposed to unleash .
In this unfavourable climate , France is caught in the trap of the budgetary heritage left by the Socialists .
The Commission 's warnings to the new Raffarin government , seeking to reduce its margin for manoeuvre still further , ought to demonstrate to all French people that the uniform straitjacket of the Stability Pact may , in some cases , be contrary to the national interest .
We are facing the disastrous , but logical , consequences of the agreements that we signed in Maastricht and thereafter .
. ( FR ) With the Council and the Commission representing the governments , the European Parliament is called upon to embody democracy and express the concerns of the public at large .
However , Mr Trentin 's draft report is the perfect illustration of the fact that , although Parliament is elected by universal suffrage , the interests that it represents are solely those of employers , and are contrary to those of the Union 's working classes .
The modifications requested by Parliament 's rapporteur will all lead to a deterioration in workers ' terms and conditions .
The report calls for employment to be more flexible .
It recommends what it has the cheek to call ' active ageing ' , which amounts to making people work for longer and pushing back the retirement age .
If it mentions social policy at all , it is to affirm with brutal cynicism that it has to be ' a productive factor ' .
If it envisages having , for example , a policy of ' lifelong learning ' , it is to provide employers with a mobile workforce that has the right qualifications to meet their needs .
As regards ' restructuring processes ' - in fact mass redundancies - it merely , ' promotes preventive consultation of employees ' .
The only social measure in this report is therefore the obligation to inform workers that they are going to be made redundant !
We will therefore be voting against this text , which has been drawn up for , and on behalf of , employers .
. ( FR ) When a large number of parties on the extreme right start gaining power in Europe , or come within a whisker of doing so , it is high time we considered why this is happening and what disastrous consequences it will have for our democracies .
Nevertheless , the traditional political parties continue to follow their own agenda , without questioning what they do , while sharing out the top jobs amongst themselves .
Nevertheless , economists , governments and the European Commission continue their relentless pursuit of ever more liberalism .
Economic ' rigour ' is not the right response , despite it being one of the conditions of having a global policy which is closer to the people .
Liberalism could have advantages to offer in some sectors , but only if it is managed and regulated .
Above all , today 's broad economic guidelines need to be completely revised if we are to eradicate unemployment and poverty .
I do not recognise this objective in the documents we have before us .
Our vote against shows our opposition both to the guidelines of the economic policies based on the Stability Pact and to changes contained in the report that also point in the same direction .
Unfortunately , the Community institutions , particularly the European Parliament , insist on keeping to the course of the macroeconomic policies despite all the evidence and the need for growth and employment in the European Union .
We should be moving in the opposite direction , with more investment , particularly public investment given the period of economic slow-down , the risk factors persisting on an international scale and the growth in unemployment .
The Trentin report calls for fulfilment of the Barcelona strategy , confirming the liberal trend of Lisbon . It calls for greater flexibility in the job market , and accepts wage moderation , despite introducing the possibility of growth based on productivity , and forgetting that the move from wages to profits did not result in more investment or more jobs .
It also calls for worker flexibility and mobility and wants higher quality jobs , which is a contradiction .
There will only be more jobs if there is more investment , and higher quality if the jobs are not temporary , insecure and poorly paid , which the report unfortunately does not confirm .
Even certain positive aspects that it addressed were voted down in plenary .
.
( FR ) The Solana report which will be presented to the Seville European Council in June sets out reforms of the Council 's working methods which we consider to be judicious .
In particular , we support the measures to increase transparency ( making Council debates public when it is meeting in legislative formation ) , to refocus the role of the European Council on providing impetus for the Union 's development , to increase efficiency by separating the current General Affairs Council ( GAC ) into two formations : a General Coordination Council ( with the national ministers for Europe ) and a Foreign Affairs Council ( with the ministers for foreign affairs ) .
Furthermore , the rapid rotation of national presidencies may admittedly be to the detriment of the continuity of the Council 's work , but it also heightens the institution 's profile and contributes to its high public opinion rating .
In our opinion , it is possible to reconcile these two aspects 1 ) by extending the presidencies of all of the technical councils ( to say three years ) entrusting the task to the country best qualified for the job in each case , but also 2 ) by continuing the rotating presidency system for the European Council and perhaps also for the new General Coordination Council , and - why not ? - with even more frequent changeovers ( every three months ) so as to take account of enlargement .
The resolution adopted today in the European Parliament follows the federalist line , an example of which is the attempt to make the operation of the Council , in its legislative capacity , more like that of a parliament , bringing it closer to being a second parliamentary chamber at European Union level .
Basically , however , the important thing to stress is that it bypasses the central issues that the Council is debating today , particularly the model for rotating the presidency or the working languages , amongst other matters .
Indeed , in the speech he gave at yesterday 's sitting , Javier Solana again stated that it is not possible to keep the current system of rotating the Council presidency every six months , based on the false argument of the enlargement of the EU . This raises the possibility that other models may be introduced , particularly an election model , which would strengthen the influence and power of the large countries to the detriment of full and effective equality of rights among the Member States , a situation we firmly reject .
The same can be said of the working languages , an area in which the principle of equality among the Member States is at risk , which is a situation we also reject .
On the other hand , it is significant that the proposal presented at the Barcelona Council by Javier Solana on Council reform has not been publicised ( and we may wonder why this is so ) . This is an item on the agenda for the Seville Summit to be held in June .
British Conservatives are abstaining on this resolution .
We have consistently championed the cause of greater transparency , openness and accountability but this is a separate matter from calling for the precedence of the Community method in every area of European Union decision-making .
Mr President , let me say , first of all , that the Lamassoure report comes within the context of Treaty reform and that the hypothetical approval of a European Union Constitution is a demand arising from the historical success of the integration of the European Union . This context must not be upset by circumstances inherent to the immediate situation that have nothing to do with the European institutions and everything to do with certain kinds of chauvinism and extremism and with the negative and , above all , ongoing abandonment of the welfare state as a guideline for national policies .
The Lamassoure report responds to that demand and provides the Convention with valuable ideas on the crucial matter of the division of competences between the institutions of the European Union .
In my brief speech , I should like to point out that , in its initial draft , under the concept of partner regions of the Union , the report attempted to institutionalise the presence in the European Union 's institutions of territorial units with legislative competence , that is , constitutional nationalities and regions , Länder , federal states that have a constitutional and , in certain cases , an historical and political identity as nations , which cannot be ignored or denied in this Europe of unity in diversity .
In the final report adopted today , however , this appropriate and necessary concept does not appear .
Nevertheless , it clearly welcomes the need to recognise the role of territorial units , pointing to the part they should play in implementing Union policies and encouraging the Member States to let them participate in those Union decisions that particularly affect them .
I think it is particularly significant that the Lamassoure report should ask the European Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs to draw up a special report as a way for territorial parliaments with legislative powers to participate in the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy .
My Group , which includes representatives of nations without their own State , such as my country , Galicia , ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , last night , like many of us , by invitation of the mayor of Strasbourg , I attended the usual annual asparagus festival , and this was an extremely successful event for which I would like to thank the mayor and the Strasbourg municipal council .
Well then , during this very enjoyable event , I wondered to myself how I should vote on Mr Lamassoure 's important report on competences .
An excellent idea came to me : I should say that I consider the matter extremely important and so I have decided to vote for the motion , not least as a call for the European Parliament to be given sole competence on some issues , at least .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo .
We take note of your proposal to make the city of Strasbourg responsible for asparagus .
The Lamassoure report ( A5-0133 / 2002 ) concerns the division of competences between the European Union and the Member States , something which constitutes one of the most basic issues for the Convention .
Significant parts of the report confirm and clarify the current situation , but the report also includes other important features , such as a demand for open coordination necessarily to be accompanied by parliamentary control .
We support all the essential features of the report and the ambition it expresses to create a constitutional document which , without hindering the future development of European integration , clearly states in which areas the EU has exclusive competence and in which areas competences are shared with the Member States .
On certain points , we cannot , however , concur with the report .
We do not believe that the pillar structure can just simply be removed in the way the report may be interpreted as recommending .
We do not believe that the funding of the EU 's budget , its foreign and defence policies and the whole of the third pillar should be made competences of the EU .
We also object to the European Parliament 's distinguishing between different regions by giving regional parliaments with legislative powers the opportunity to participate in the European Parliament 's committee work .
We disagree with the report when it demands the right for the EU institutions and Member States to call upon the EC Court of Justice to give rulings on legislation concerning the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
It is very important that these principles be complied with and respected , but they are political rather than legal in nature .
We wish to emphasise that including funding of the EU budget under the EU 's own areas of competence should not , even in the long term , lead to the EU 's being given its own right of taxation .
We voted against the Lamassoure report for the reasons given in our replies to the Convention questionnaire on the Union 's missions .
This report takes no account whatsoever of the numerous amendments which we tabled but which were rejected by the federalist majority in committee .
Most importantly , we launched a specific appeal in our amendments in favour of a basic treaty which would recognise the prime role of the national democracies and draw logical conclusions for the Union 's institutions , especially the need for proper control of subsidiarity .
The members of the French parliament have outlined this basic treaty , which is available for public inspection at our secretariat .
Similarly , we called for the treaty to create an interparliamentary pillar , between the Community pillar and the intergovernmental pillar , under which European decisions would be taken by networked national parliaments .
This pillar would have strict respect for national sovereignty and would be responsible for numerous national matters which require exchanges at European level , such as coordinating social legislation .
It would also be the main forum for discussing all matters relating to the movement of people and immigration , some of which would be taken up by the Community pillar .
The French delegation in my group has no intention whatsoever of endorsing the conclusions of this own initiative report .
The current system for division of competences is horribly complex , it is true .
We agree with the rapporteur that the Member States ' must have competence under the ordinary law and the Union must enjoy only the competences allocated to it ' .
And , we cannot deny that there is a widening gulf between citizens ' expectations of Europe and the issues it actually deals with .
However , there is no justification for rules clarifying the division of competences to be introduced in a ' European constitution ' which the people have given neither Parliament nor the Convention a mandate to draft .
Even if we clearly need to define a hierarchy of Community rules , this does not mean that Parliament 's legislative competences should increase as a result .
The democratic legitimacy of the Union derives solely from the consent and from the participation of the people in the process under way .
In other words , it resides within the European Council , the Council of Ministers and the national parliaments .
Finally , we reject this report because , on the pretext of improving the division of competences , the rapporteur is merely seeking to increase the Union 's and Parliament 's competences ...
( Explanation of vote shortened pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr Lamassoure 's report to Parliament is extremely low on social content and , far from correcting this omission , the votes cast this morning have basically exacerbated it .
The report says nothing about a guaranteed high level of social protection for one and all , nothing about the implementation of a coordinated approach to pay rises , nothing about quantified , verifiable objectives in the fight against poverty and exclusion .
The majority vote therefore takes no account whatsoever of the demand - the broad-based and rightly exacting demand - of our citizens for the social situation to be improved and for real economic and social government to be created in the Union .
The European Parliament barely even defends what is an unsatisfactory social status quo and has confined itself to perpetuating the image of a bureaucratic Europe in the pocket of major financial interests .
In doing so , it is sending out a revolting signal to the Convention on the Future of Europe .
My colleagues and I refuse to have anything to do with this despicable exercise .
From the perspective of the UK Independence Party , it is not possible for me to entertain any formalisation of the division of competences between the European Union and Member States .
Our view is that there is no room in a stable , prosperous Europe for the type of supranationalism represented by the European Union .
We do not agree that , in order to live in harmony , there is any need to vest powers in a central authority which transcends the nation-state - which we regard as the bedrock of democracy .
Rather , we are totally in favour of the type of intergovernmentalism represented by the Council of Europe and the Commonwealth , where independent nation-states freely co-operate on issues of common interest .
Here , we believe the United Kingdom should be driven by the ethos of being a " good neighbour " , respecting the rights and independence of other nation-states and taking a responsible role in the global community .
On this basis , therefore , the attempt in this report to circumscribe or better define the competences of the Community - however well motivated - breaches our fundamental view of how nation-states should work together .
For this reason , I have voted against this report .
. ( ES ) As part of the work of the Convention and in thinking about drawing up a Constitution that will enable us not only to successfully complete the enlargement process that is in progress but above all to provide the European Union with a democratic and effective government that responds to the challenges and concerns of the world in which we live , dividing competences between the European Union and the Member States is essential .
In order to ensure that the Union functions properly we need to define the responsibilities of each of the institutional levels within it .
And for those of us who advocate a federal model , that division of competences means that we can establish a federal rather than a subordinate relationship between the Union , the Member States and the regions with legislative powers , which is the foundation for a federal Europe based on the principle of subsidiarity .
That is why this excellent report by Mr Lamassoure is so important and why I have voted in favour of it .
It is a shame that the proposal to create a status for a region associated with the European Union was ultimately rejected through the opposition of those who do not wish to understand that the European Union is a global entity that does not end at the borders of the Member States . But it must be said that the Lamassoure report has taken a step in the right direction .
The fundamental texts of the European Union cannot continue to ignore the existence and functions of the regions with legislative powers as a result of , in cases such as Catalonia , an irrefutable sense of collective identity , because those regions are responsible for managing a large proportion of Community policies and because Europe cannot be built behind the backs of the people that are part of it .
The proposals included in this report arise from and develop the process begun at Maastricht , which defined federalism as the direction for today 's ' European integration ' .
The report contains proposals that undermine the national sovereignty of the European Union Member States , and we reject them , notably the proposal that foreign policy and the definition of the legal basis of a ' common area of freedom and security ' should become the exclusive competence of the EU . These proposals are extreme compared with others that have upheld shared competences .
Another proposal that stands out is that the funding of the Community budget should be exclusively an EU responsibility , with the consequence that instruments like a ' Europe tax ' would be created , something we also reject .
In general terms , the report aims at the constitutionalisation of the Treaties , placing them above the national constitutions in fundamental competences .
Even in the case of competences shared between the EU and the Member States , the definition places the EU as the one that ' lays down the rules ' , ' coordinates ' or ' intervenes in a complementary or a supplementary fashion ' .
The nation states would virtually be left with just the transposition of rules or the implementation of guidelines using the budgetary and tax resources available to them , as in the significant example of the attempt to renationalise the costs of the common agricultural policy .
We do not at all share the views presented in this report .
Paragraph 30 of the draft report states ' that the exercise by the Union of its competences , whether exclusive , shared , additional or coordinating powers , must no longer be thwarted by paralysing ( no power of initiative , unanimous decision-making , ratification by the Member States ) ? procedures ' .
This means that , by majority decision , it will be possible for the EU to take initiatives in all the areas in which it sees itself as called upon to act , without the Member States being able to curb initiatives or seek the opinion of their national parliaments or the people of Europe .
In spite of the fine words about the EU 's having to draw closer to the people , the latter are still not to be asked for their views when the EU 's political projects are developed .
The report would introduce employment policy into the EU constitution .
That would entail the centralisation of labour market policy in the long run and a shift towards unilateral economic policy .
We believe that this is not the way to go in order to achieve the EU 's goal of full employment .
It needs to be possible to adapt employment policy to local needs if it is to be effective .
The open coordination process that currently applies in the employment sphere allows policy to be adapted in this way , with a secure basis in the conditions experienced by local players . This process should therefore be strengthened and not , as proposed in the report , dismantled so that it disappears from Community policy .
I did not vote in favour of the Lamassoure report because it anticipates the work being done by the Convention .
We cannot call on the representatives of governments , national parliaments and the European Parliament to redefine the future architecture of the European Union and , at the same time , try and draw up plans for the house of Europe on our own .
If we need to define who does what in Europe and why as clearly as possible , the European Parliament cannot do so alone .
- ( DA ) This report shows with frightening clarity that the European Union is progressively being turned into a federal state , with disastrous consequences for national independence , including Danish democracy .
No less frightening is the report 's demonstration that the EU 's dominance of the national democracies is , in theory , boundless .
Irrespective of the fact that we are able to concur with many of the points of criticism tabled by the minority on the committee , we have also voted against the amendments tabled by , for example , Mr Bonde .
We protest against the fact that these proposals have been tabled on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , because the proposals have not been debated in the group and because quite a few sub-groups , including the People 's Movement , cannot support the idea of an EU Light constitution , which is what the proposals are substantially about .
Current European legislation is a patchwork of stand-alone treaties , regulations and directives , alongside a separate constitutional rights charter without a clear status .
Some of the allocation of responsibilities to the EU appears rather indiscriminate and goes further than is the case in federal states .
Furthermore , some of the presumed responsibilities of the Member States are , in practice , exercised by federal states , often boasting their own language and culture , and with the ambition of becoming a fully-fledged Member State of the EU themselves .
It is therefore justifiable , for the benefit of the public at large , to map out what has been decided in the past , what the intention was of these decisions and whether these can work in a coherent and acceptable manner .
Unfortunately , Mr Lamassoure wants a great deal more than what his clear instruction manual stipulates with regard to democracy .
What he refers to as ' diplomatic instrument ' , he would like to replace by a constitution for a European superstore .
Is this an attempt to lay down the outcome of the Convention on Europe 's future before the event , or an instruction to vote for the MEPs who form part of this Convention ?
If that is the case , this is a premature and non-transparent exercise which does not receive my support .
I cannot vote in favour of Mr Lamassoure 's report for reasons that include the following .
The report is clearly supranational in character .
I support intergovernmental cooperation , but not the supranationalism advocated by the rapporteur .
Nor is public opinion in favour of a federation , something clearly shown by the last EU elections .
I also object to the demands that the common foreign and security policy be made into a Community issue , that a special chamber be set up within the Court of Justice with responsibility for an EU constitution and that the principle of unanimity be done away with in the Council of Ministers .
Nor do I accept that the regional parliaments with legislative powers should be given the opportunity to participate in the European Parliament 's committee work .
Nor can I accept compulsory coordination of budget and finance policy .
In presenting its views to the Convention , Parliament should instead concentrate on the changes that are required if decision-making in an enlarged EU is to be coped with successfully .
This report on the situation of the Iraqi people eleven years after the Gulf War makes depressing reading and we cannot but share its views .
However , it does not even call into question the responsibility of the imperialist powers either for the war itself or for the awful long-term consequences of it for the Iraqi people , a people suffering under the double whammy of a vile dictatorship and punishment by the superpowers .
Worse still , the report uses this dictatorship as a pretext for planning and justifying renewed military intervention , just as soon as it is sanctioned by the United Nations .
And , as we know , the Iraqi people will be the first to suffer from any such intervention .
The humanitarian terms in which this report is couched are an embarrassingly thin and hypocritical disguise for the barbarity of the superpowers and the world order which they impose on people .
We voted in favour of the only amendment which opposes this premeditated barbaric warmongering but we rejected the report , which merely seeks to justify it .
Our abstention on this report on the situation in Iraq is basically the result of the contradictions that remain in it . Two main reasons stand out :
The first concerns certain positive aspects of the report , namely support for the decision to lift the sanctions on Iraq , except for the arms embargo , but in a mitigated manner .
The terrible conditions of life there , however , mean that every effort must be made to put an end to the economic and trade sanctions , for humanitarian reasons .
The second has to do with the negative aspects , revealing the European Union 's difficulty in freeing itself from its dependent position vis-à-vis American interests , an example of which is the House 's rejection of the amendments we tabled , namely the proposal to hold an international enquiry into the health and environmental consequences of American and British bombing in 1991 , due , specifically , to the use of depleted uranium weapons .
A further negative point is the clear lack of condemnation of the bombing raids that Iraq still suffers periodically .
The ? icholson report voted on today by the European Parliament basically adopts the American argument on Iraq ( criminal state etc . ) , thereby providing practical cover for the intervention planned by the USA .
It is unmoved by the dramatic consequences of the embargo against the Iraqi people and fully justifies the imposition of it .
It admits that the ultimate aim is to topple Saddam Hussein and the terms and conditions which it sets for lifting it are tantamount to not lifting it .
The text is riddled with provocative proposals for crude intervention in the internal affairs of another country , overlooking the fact that interventions to date have basically strengthened the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein .
An example of the ? U 's feelings towards the long-suffering Palestinian people is given in the reference to the campaigns by suicide bombers , which it calls " the very worst acts of Palestinian terrorism " .
Communists know all about crude violations of democratic rights and persecution and freedom fighters and Communists were the first to fall victim to the Hussein regime .
But we believe that the fight against undemocratic regimes is a matter for the people suffering under them .
International solidarity also plays an important part , but that seems to be the last thing on the EU 's mind .
It is for these reasons that the least we can do is to vote against the report .
Ever hopeful that the scissors of censorship wielded by certain officials on the means available to those elected by universal suffrage to make their positions known to those who democratically elected them to represent them at the European Parliament will not cut this explanation of vote to complete shreds , I should like to point out that the Nicholson report would certainly have gained in credibility had it posed the question of the advisability of maintaining the embargo against Iraq more clearly .
Having quite reasonably recommended that most economic and trade restrictions should be lifted but that the arms embargo should be maintained , why not justify this recommendation by making a full appraisal of the failure of this general embargo to achieve the fundamental objective which it was supposed to achieve , i.e. to prevent Iraq from regaining sufficient power to threaten the security of other states ?
At the same time , why not recognise the various nasty and very serious effects which the embargo has caused and which are likely to foster dangerous frustration , such as the food shortages and health problems among the civil population , the destruction of the economic fabric and infrastructure and the emergence of an unhealthy economy which thrives on circumventing the embargo ?
This is no longer a policy ...
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , after pointing out an error in the agenda one day , Mrs Doris Pack was referred to as the ' Stability Pact rapporteur ' , for we all acknowledge her competence in this matter of the Balkan regions and the Stability Pact .
Moreover , it might not be so very silly to call Mrs Doris Pack ' Mrs Stability Pack ' - I am sure she will not be offended .
Puns aside , I would , in any case , like to stress the importance of this document , which seeks to help Albania regain its proper role in the new Europe .
I always wonder , Mr President , whether it is right that discussions on sustainable development in the world never include mention of the fact that one very important aspect of the lives of men and women in Europe is the quality of life they enjoy during the various stages of their lives .
There are many of us who are extremely well off , both in economic terms and in terms of health , when we are young and while we work too , but when we grow old , we find that we no longer have the same standard of living .
Why do we not also do something to reduce the disparities between the economic and social standards of living we enjoy during the different stages of life , that is when we are young , when we are middle-aged employees and when we grow old ?
This report raises the question of the future of our planet from the point of view of pollution in brutal terms .
Ten years after Rio , things are not looking too good .
The progress made is out of proportion to the problems and the natural development prospects of emerging countries are sure to aggravate the situation from an environmental point of view ( just imagine how much pollution a country like China will produce once it is has caught up with us ) .
I do not know if the European Parliament will avoid the final catastrophe , but its intervention is bound to do some good .
Mr President , there is a reason why Mr Lannoye was appointed rapporteur of this proposal , which seeks with this global partnership to achieve sustainable development in the world , for I am sad to say that many people - and there are a great many - live in poverty .
The hope and the desire behind this appointment is that Mr Lannoye , who , as we know , usually draws up reports on foods such as chocolate , butter and marmalade , which are constantly available to us , will succeed in doing as much for the developing countries .
Let us hope so !
This joint resolution makes depressing reading : 1.2 billion human beings survive on less than a dollar a day , 815 million people suffer from chronic malnutrition and so on and so forth .
The signatories to this motion are careful not to mention what and who is to blame for the under-development and misery in which three-quarters of humanity is kept , in other words , the major industrial and financial groups and their imperialist government lackeys , which rate the economy of our planet and , in the final analysis , the existence of its entire population below the profit motive .
Although we voted in favour of the amendments which condemn some of the individual consequences of this race for profit , we did not vote in favour of the joint resolution which , even when it comes to aid , contains irresolute promises rather than specific undertakings and the whole purpose of which is to make a society dominated by the capitalist profit motive and its sole beneficiaries look like some sort of patroness .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0128 / 2002 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament entitled ' Building an effective partnership with the United Nations in the fields of Development and Humanitarian Affairs ' [ COM ( 2001 ) 231 - C5-0396 / 2001 - 2001 / 2154 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , we may not be many , but I am sure we are good !
Commissioner Nielson , I believe we are in complete agreement on the need to forge an effective partnership between the European Union and the United Nations , especially in the fields of humanitarian affairs and development .
This became evident in the debate and the vote we held in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and I hope it will happen again now .
Anything else would be incomprehensible , given the universally declared aims in these fields , especially the challenges and goals of the Millennium Declaration , and , at the same time , the glaring lack of coordination in putting them into practice and the obvious scarcity of resources available thus far .
It is a pity , however , that the Commission did not take an all-inclusive , integrated approach to this partnership right from the start and has left the questions of security , peacekeeping , conflict prevention and crisis management until a later date , all the more so since these aspects are known to be connected with the issues behind this communication .
Even so , I think the general sense of the communication is positive , especially when the United Nations is taken as a basic reference and pillar for the pursuit of the Community 's aims and policies in these fields .
It is important , however , to go beyond the contradiction which is quite obvious today , in that , on the one hand the Member States play a major role in the United Nations , especially in terms of their financial contributions to its various activities and its budget or the large contribution made by the same Member States and the European Union itself to the various United Nations funds , whereas , on the other hand , they clearly both have relatively little political influence , particularly in the specialised agencies .
This situation must change , and it must be based on greater coordination among the Member States themselves and greater involvement by them and the European Union in the various stages of United Nations programmes . Above all , they also need to be more involved in the drawing-up of development strategies and in the planning and performance of activities to be carried out in this field .
This will ensure that their respective impacts are optimised and more coherent .
With a view to achieving the stated aims of this partnership , the Commission Communication points out the need for administrative arrangements : the ongoing negotiations on the so-called ' verification clause ' , which would ensure there is sufficient information on the use of available Community funds , must be brought to a quick and satisfactory conclusion ; the 1999 EC-UN framework agreement should be renegotiated with a view to changing to an approach oriented more directly towards co-financing operations , output-based budgeting , and upstream programme financing .
We share these concerns and these positions , but we also stress that the pursuit of an effective partnership and the achievement of compatibility in structures and procedures must be promoted on three fronts : through strengthening strategic political dialogue in order to define policies and programmes ; through strengthening cooperation on the ground in developing countries so as to ensure complementarity and coherence at an operational level ; and through the creation of a stable financial framework , with consistent rules and principles in the two institutions , as well as the above-mentioned new framework agreement , of course .
As mentioned in the Commission Communication , however , the first step in this cooperation has to be selection of the most suitable partners within the United Nations system . It is equally essential , at Community level , to bring the processes of decentralisation and deconcentration of management and decision-making to a swift conclusion and to ensure that social movements and so-called civil society in general are democratically involved .
We shall not get far if we do not put our own house in order first .
Achieving practical results in our current reforms is therefore essential in this field too .
Finally , because of our commitment to this partnership and our desire to see it put into practice , we ask the Commission to keep us suitably and promptly informed of its progress , and , in particular , we suggest that the Commission should include specific information on its progress in its yearly report on cooperation policy .
Mr President , my group is going to vote in favour of Mr Miranda 's report on building an effective partnership between the European Union and the United Nations in development and humanitarian aid policies .
I would personally like to congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for incorporating all the amendments that my group tabled for the original draft .
In his report , the rapporteur advocates the need for more effective participation from the Union in coordinating its initiatives with the United Nations , not only on political matters and in decision-making , but also from an operational point of view and in managing projects and specific activities .
In one of our amendments , which were incorporated into the text , we asked for that operative intervention to take place from the very start when selecting projects , so that the general direction of aid coincides , as far as possible , with the European Union 's objectives in terms of development aid .
This should happen even more given that the economic and financial contribution from the Union is significant in terms of quantity and that its contribution in terms of material and human resources is just as significant in terms of quality .
This coordination must take place through increasing multilateral institutional political dialogue and through greater cooperation to improve the criteria for ensuring that development aid , whether bilateral or multilateral , is supplementary and complementary .
That would not be possible without establishing a stable financial framework for relations between the European Union and the United Nations .
In this respect , I would like to highlight the achievements of the recent Monterrey Summit , to which President Fox referred .
It is true that in some respects the results of Monterrey can be described as inadequate , but it is just as true that there were steps forward , especially on the part of Europe , as specific commitments were reached on quantifying aid and on a timetable .
However , I must say that we are far from the 0.7 % that we committed to and which we cannot give up on .
With the resources available it will not be possible to achieve the objective of eradicating poverty in the world by 2015 , which we are committed to , and that is unacceptable .
I would like to finish , Mr President , by saying that some of the amendments tabled by my group are aimed at making aid more effective and at better management of procedures and greater transparency in the use of resources , as advocated by the Spanish President of the Council when he spoke to the Committee on Development and during Mr Aznar 's speech at the Monterrey Summit .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although we recognise the need to move forward in consolidating the partnership between the European Union and the United Nations , we must keep in mind a series of general principles that should guide our policy towards the UN and point out the inadequacies that we currently see in establishing it .
The first thing identified and criticised in the report is the unjustifiable gap that exists between the substantial financial contribution from the European Union and its Member States to UN actions and the meagre political influence that the European Union has in terms of defining and implementing those actions .
The contributions from the Member States of the European Union represent 47 % of the UN budget and more than 40 % of its spending on peace-keeping operations but , with the addition of direct contributions from the Union , our contributions exceed 50 % of the resources for the various UN funds and programmes focused on development and humanitarian and food aid .
However , the status of the Union in comparison with that of the United Nations is insignificant . It has a very small amount of political influence and the visibility of our action is minimal .
All in all , here too we are continuing in the unacceptable role of paying but not playing .
The Commission Communication gives us a sense of a change towards more ambitious strategies and objectives that are more in keeping with what the European Union should represent on the international stage , and Parliament agrees , perhaps in even stronger terms , with the direction advocated by the Commission .
We are thus reaffirming our conviction of the need for a multi-polar international order , governed by the rule of law , so that the United Nations , with greater powers , greater credibility and also greater resources , will simply be essential .
With this report we are also expressing the urgent need to establish the legal personality of the European Union so that it can cooperate effectively with the United Nations and its various agencies .
Finally , the Resolution establishes objectives , such as fulfilling the commitments made in the Millennium Declaration in this field , in which the European Union must be a coherent and powerful influence in order to promote the role of the UN as an agent of peace and a guarantee of solidarity , international social cohesion , justice and progress for humanity .

Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Miranda , who is presenting a report that has the significant aim of strengthening consensus between the EU and the UN and agreeing an approach that will produce the best return on the resources used .
This should basically be easy , as the UN and the EU are natural allies .
They have the same objectives and priorities , as was seen in connection with the Millennium Declaration in the autumn of 2000 .
The report quite rightly reminds us that progress in partnership and above all in the attainment of goals is only achieved to any significant degree on the basis of careful analysis .
It is not enough , however , to assess the results achieved so far in the partnership , which are obviously extremely important also .
We should also analyse the irreplaceable values of democracy and people 's opinions , which are essential for development .
In fact , we are remarkably unaware of those values , which have also served as the basis of the EU 's own development from a Europe that in many ways had been knocked about by wars to the world 's leading political and commercial player .
The EU at present is a very important negotiator at the political table .
There is , however , one area where the UN is a quite indispensable partner : it has solid grassroots respect around the world and the EU does not command that same level of respect even in some Member States .
If I may use commercial language , the UN is actually a brand .
As an important provider of finance , the EU must be especially interested in the value of this UN brand .
The respect and trust the UN has at grassroots level is a resource that cannot be measured in terms of money or replaced .
The EU and its Member States are making significant use of resources in matters of development .
Although the sums are huge , they are nevertheless meagre compared to the problems .
For that reason , any sort of rationalisation is also welcome .
One such way of making the use of resources more efficient would obviously be common representation in the UN and its special organisations .
From 2004 , when the number of EU members will be much greater than now , this will be more essential than ever .
Moreover , as regards our aid donation - 0.7 % of GDP - that must continue to be considered a humane target to achieve . Nothing else will do .
We will probably have a lot of time this afternoon .
So far , the speakers have not used up their speaking time .
It is generally the other way round , but today , you are almost too brief , ladies and gentlemen .
However , you are quite correct .
Mr President , in the parliamentary tradition from which I come , we were not confined to minutes , we were very often asked at a short notice to run down to the chamber and talk for an hour or so , on every sort of insignificant subject .
Here we have a different situation .
I am happy that I am able to contribute on this subject because , while I am not a member of the relevant committee , nevertheless , it is a subject that I have thought about .
This morning when we were discussing the Lamassoure report on the competences of the European Union and defining the competences , I thought that we should from time to time re-examine the various competences of the Union .
Perhaps we have given ourselves excessive competences over the years and taken on excessive responsibilities in areas where it was not all that fruitful and , indeed , could be an irritant to the citizens of the Union .
However , I have often thought that development cooperation is one area in which we could improve our cooperation .
I should have said that I want to congratulate Mr Miranda on his report .
His explanatory memorandum sets out what exactly we are doing and , in his motion for resolution , he has drawn up a strategy for more effective policy cooperation between ourselves and the United Nations .
There is point at which we have to arrive before that cooperation can really become effective .
In the European Union we devote something like 0.3 % of our resources to development cooperation as a whole .
As the previous speaker pointed out the ideal is approximately 0.7 % .
I think only Sweden and Denmark have exceeded that , and the average European State produces something like 0.3 % , so we have arrived at half the ideal objective .
Within the European budget itself , we produced something like EUR 4.6 billion in this year 's draft budget .
This seems like a very small amount of money , but we have the experience of being unable to dispense the money which we provided for many reasons .
Nevertheless if there is one objective we should set ourselves in this area , it is to use our economic trading strength and our economic resources for the betterment of the Third World .
If we look at what we are discussing here , the problems we have in the Union today , the rise of the Right or whatever it may be , the slowness of economic growth , the unemployment which we have in parts of the European Union , we find that these are not serious problems at all .
And we should not hesitate to tell our people who live in Western Europe today , that they have better lives than any previous generation anywhere .
What is our responsibility as a result ?
The greatest responsibility we have as a European Union - and this was mentioned by the leader of my party , Mr Bruton , when he addressed this Parliament as President-in-Office - is to extend our good fortune to less fortunate peoples throughout the world .
If we could develop a single policy , if we could pool our resources and if we could achieve that target of 0.7 % , we would have something like EUR 70 billion to dispense throughout the world .
In dispensing that money , we could offer to the children of many Third World countries something like the hope that we can give to our own children , something like the life expectancy and opportunities for education .
We could revolutionise the world .
We should not forget that .
I was looking at some figures a few days ago .
One hundred and twenty years ago there were 1.6 billion people in the world .
Europe was one quarter of the entire world .
Today there are 6.5 billion people in the world and Europe makes up only 9 % of it .
We are becoming a smaller component of the entire world .
There is the risk that we could become irrelevant .
If there is any thing we should do while we still have power and influence in the world , while we still have riches beyond the dreams of the vast majority of people who live on this earth ; if there is any objective we could set ourselves which would be a historic achievement for a united Europe , it is to help along the less fortunate peoples of the world .
While every individual State in this Union insists on going its own way and designing its own policies for foreign aid , we will not have the political influence , or the material effect on the wellbeing of the people to whom we extend aid .
Pooling our resources is an ideal proposal on the part of this House .
We do not necessarily have to administer it all from Brussels .
We can tap into the expertise of the various nations in the various regions of the world .
We can distribute responsibility around the various Member States , but we must have a coordinated policy .
We must not be competing with each other and we must not be dependent on the United States - or any other country which makes a far lesser effort than we do - to design the policies to which we will contribute .
Mr President , this is a subject we could fruitfully discuss for a long time yet .
I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity at least to stretch my thoughts a little bit further than I have ever been allowed to do in this House before .
Mr President , if we had known that this afternoon speaking time was duty-free we would have all taken the opportunity not only to speak for longer but to express ourselves in a more detailed and precise way , worthy of the subject .
In my group we are against the inequalities between the North and the South .
We are also against the inequalities between the time that one group or speaker has and the amount of time which others have been given .
For the future I urge the presidency to confer with the groups if another heaven-sent opportunity like this appears , so that everyone has an opportunity to profit from the generosity of the presidency .
Mr Martinez , you see , I have not cut short anyone 's speaking time this afternoon .
This only occurred at midday because the debate on the reports took longer .
If you recall , the vote did not start until 12.15 p.m.
The extra quarter of an hour from this morning 's debate , which was timetabled until 1.15 p.m. instead of 1 p.m. , is now added on to this afternoon .
I am also considering our many guests : if we suspend the sitting now , it will be less interesting for them .
This was why - without having an opportunity to inform the very high-carat groups - I decided to handle everything quite informally .
No one was cut off and if anyone wants to add anything now , he or she may do so .
I see that is not the case .
In a spontaneous parliament in a Western democracy , there is sometimes more time available than anticipated .
Is anyone else able or willing to rise ?
No .
Then I invite Commissioner Nielson to take the floor .
I do not want to say that you have unlimited time today , but you do not have to be quite as brief as usual .
Mr President , I shall begin by addressing some of the points raised this afternoon .
Firstly , Mr Miranda 's wish that Parliament be kept well informed about progress in our relationship with the United Nations family and that this be included in our annual report .
I agree completely .
I am grateful to Mr Miranda for referring to the annual report , because it requires something of an effort to produce it , and so I am very touched to hear it mentioned .
It may also be useful from time to time in direct discussion in Parliament 's committees .
Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo wanted more emphasis on the operational side , even at the level of project selection with UN organisations .
Basically , the way in which we prefer to work with others is project selection or the formulation of sector programmes , something rooted in the policy of the host government .
The consequence will be that we and other donors provide some sort of basket funding enabling a government to carry out its education policy , its health sector policy , or whatever , rather than donors together deciding on a project .
It has to be flexible to meet all kinds of circumstances , but basically this more problematic way of planning things is also what we are discussing with the UN family .
A big problem today is that the restrictions on how we can spend money in the existing Financial Regulation force the Commission to fund specific projects only one by one , through UN organisations .
This makes us an inadequate and even sometimes unwelcome partner because we lack predictability and a more long-term perspective .
On top of this , we are obliged , on the basis of existing rules and regulations , to insist on having reporting , accounting and auditing on funding through a UN entity carried out under our rules .
We are not allowed to accept their way of reporting , unlike our Member States . This is the core of the changes that we presented nearly two years ago to Member States .
I will come back to this .
Mr McCartin , it is absolutely true that we still have a problem about the rate of implementation .
However , at the end of 1999 , when this Commission took over , it took 4.6 years to spend what was committed at the then rate of spending .
The following year this was down to 4.1 years and , at the end of 2001 , the figure was 3.6 years .
So we are eating into the mountain of unspent commitments .
We have not finished yet , but things are moving .
On the question of the development of a single policy , we have an overall development cooperation policy statement . It was adopted unanimously by Member States in November 2000 and Parliament has also endorsed this policy unanimously .
We are very pleased with that .
The main effect of this policy is to focus more clearly on poverty reduction or eradication as the guiding principle for whatever we do .
We have never had anything like this before .
It covers our global activities , so we have a guide as to what Member States should do .
However , reality can be different .
Let me applaud the positive and constructive report of Mr Miranda .
We welcome the support given by that Parliament to the Commission 's approach to building a more effective partnership with the United Nations .
I liked the positive tone this afternoon in all the speeches .
This has not always been the case .
It is a sign of maturity and of healthy self-confidence on our part in Europe that we now approach this in a more active manner .
The United Nations , due to its global mandate , its unique legitimacy and , in a number of areas , its operational strengths , provides an irreplaceable framework to address global challenges confronting the international community .
Enhancing dialogue and cooperation to build a strategic partnership between the Community and the United Nations will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of development cooperation and humanitarian aid , thereby strengthening the Community 's contribution to poverty reduction and human security .
There is , however , a limit to how far we can go .
It is , after all , called the United Nations - it is not called the " United Commissions " .
Our Member States are the real owners of the United Nations as an organisation .
But there is large scope for improvement and a very strong interest on both sides to move in that direction .
A more active and visible presence of the Commission in the UN also has a positive effect in enhancing the ability of the European Union as such to act and speak with one voice on global matters .
This is a very important , and also a very real , aspect .
We saw this demonstrated in Monterrey , and it is the intention of the Commission to continue along the same lines .
We aim at concrete outcomes at policy and operational levels .
At policy level we will strengthen the involvement of the Community in the upstream policy dialogue with the different members of the United Nations system .
At the operational level we will work towards a transparent , financially credible , predictable and easier to monitor strategic partnership with selected UN agencies , funds and programmes .
The follow-up to the Communication we are discussing is already well advanced .
Bilateral meetings have been conducted with a number of UN agencies : funds and programmes and the strategic programming dialogues established by ECHO are examples .
For the country strategy papers , consultation with UN bodies present in the country is now obligatory .
This is where the type of cooperation I mentioned in my response to Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo applies .
We are discussing further steps with the UN Secretariat .
A broad fact-finding exercise on mandates and capacities of potential UN partners was launched in November 2001 to determine how their key capacities match with our priorities .
The first results of this will be available by June .
A more effective partnership with the UN requires an adequate enabling legal and financial environment :
We are negotiating the revision of the 1999 EC-UN Framework Agreement , with a view to concluding all this by the end of the year .
However , recasting the changes in the Community 's Financial Regulation is still , as I said before , under discussion in the Council .
This work will have to be completed fully to realise the intentions of the Communication .
This is the real bottleneck .
The United Nation 's response , called " A Vision of Partnership " , supports much of the Communication and proposes to go even further .
The Commission is drafting another communication that will address the EU-UN relationship at a broader level , as your resolution also suggests .
In preparing this communication we will take account of the points made by Parliament in this debate .
We look forward to working hand in hand with Parliament in strengthening our influence in the world through this process .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
We have now reached the point which I was concerned about earlier - we have to interrupt the sitting for 20 minutes .
Mr Posselt wishes to speak on the Rules of Procedure .
I know what he is going to say , as the issue has been raised before .
Mr President , two things : firstly , I really would urge the groups to ensure that their speakers are actually present .
There were many speakers , also in our group , who would have liked to rise during this important debate - and I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his excellent statement - but who were not granted speaking time , while the Members who were granted speaking time left afterwards .
I really would ask for this point to be addressed formally to the groups for once as criticism from the Bureau .
The second point I wish raise is this : I really would ask for more sensible timetabling in future . We had to cut our topical and urgent debate this afternoon from three hours to 90 minutes .
Now we find that there is to be a break , and that we will be voting at 5.30 p.m. instead of 6.30 p.m. as originally planned .
We would have had plenty of time from now until the original vote at 6.30 p.m. to accommodate three hours of the topical and urgent debate , which is actually what is required by the Rules of Procedure .
I would ask you to draw this point to the attention of the Conference of Presidents and the Bureau as well .
There was absolutely no reason to cut short the debate .
Of course , if no one has anything to say , there is no point in continuing the debate , but when there is too little time available , as was the case with the topical and urgent debate here , there really is no reason why the full amount of time until 6.30 p.m. cannot be used , especially as the people who are here now will also be here tomorrow and the others have already left anyway .
Mr President , I wish to endorse Mr Posselt 's comments .
On the one hand , we have a packed agenda for Tuesday and Wednesday .
We have night sittings and virtually no opportunity even to meet the visitors ' groups who come here .
We have very little opportunity to do any of the paperwork which still arises during the week of plenary .
On the other hand , we have the scrappy arrangements on a Thursday afternoon , when time is wasted .
If I look around , I see far more visitors in the galleries than Members in the chamber . There are empty seats everywhere .
I believe that it will damage the reputation of this Parliament if we continue with such uneven timetabling .
I would urge you to give this matter very careful consideration when drawing up the timetable for next year . I have a draft copy in various versions and it seems to me that we should be dealing more efficiently and more economically with the time available to us .
I would very much appreciate it if you could give this matter serious thought and take it into account during planning .
Secondly , I would like to address a question to Mr Nielson , with your permission .
Mr Nielson , you were just talking about the budget arrangements which are the basis for your endeavours in the field of food aid .
Of course , I would like a little more explanation on this point , if I may .
I have been dealing with the budget in the committee which I represent for months .
We know that it is still with the Council at present , but Parliament , too , has a number of items which it would like to include in the budget .
We see that it is taking time .
Nonetheless , perhaps you could give us a clearer idea of what this means for you and your area of work .
I think that would be helpful for us .
Commissioner , perhaps I could look first at the two issues concerning the Rules of Procedure .
We will gladly pass on this timetabling problem , although we cannot guarantee that it will work out precisely every time .
I explained this earlier , Mr Posselt , before you arrived in the chamber .
At midday , we finished at 12.14 p.m. instead of 12.00 noon .
This meant we had fourteen minutes less this afternoon .
This afternoon , for the first time since I took office , each of the speakers on today 's list - I am not sure who did not appear - spoke for a shorter time than he or she could have done according to the speakers ' list , except for Mr McCartin .
If you add all this time together , you arrive at the sixteen minutes out of the twenty-two .
On the other hand , the night sitting was scheduled to last until midnight , but ended at 11.20 p.m.
We cannot always get it right .
By the way , according to the participants , last night 's sitting was of extremely high quality .
There were very few guests , but the debate was extremely high quality , I am told .
I now invite Commissioner Nielson to respond to Ms Theato 's question .
Quite independently of that , we will take account of the criticism of the Thursday timetable .
The main problems in the existing financial regulation are the constraints on how we are allowed to spend money .
We asked to have this modified when working with the UN family and the Red Cross , but not others .
We do not want to engage in core funding because we are not a nation .
But we want to do multiannual programme-based funding - up to three years , say - and to have the accounting and auditing done in the same way as the Member States when channelled through the UN or Red Cross .
This will make it possible for them to make better use of us .
Sometimes we are not invited to participate in a consortium because of this problem and end up doing less interesting things . That is a real problem .
It would also make more sense for reasons of efficiency , not to mention in terms of influence .
There are other problems , including the very large number of budget lines and instruments that we have with the absolute dividing-line between European Development Fund resources and budgetary sources , which cannot be mixed .
This has created enormous problems in our decision-making and reporting back to Parliament .
For instance , when we are funding the agriculture research network , which is working globally , we have to find some of the money under the EDF , and some in the budget .
This is legally and technically incredibly difficult .
The same applies to our contribution to the global health fund on Aids , malaria and TB .
Our colleagues cannot understand why we are so difficult to work with .
This is why we have asked Member States for the changes in my area of work .
I do not know why progress with the Member States is so slow .
This has been slower than I could ever have imagined , and I do not look forward to celebrating the two-year anniversary in July .
I know Parliament is supporting the Commission on this issue , and we have to make an effort to get it sorted out with the Member States .
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Mr Morillon , Mr Bowis , Mr Posselt and Mr Gemelli , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group on the situation in Madagascar ( B5-0289 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Sylla and Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Madagascar ( B5-0290 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Rod , Mrs Maes and Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Madagascar ( B5-0301 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the political situation in Madagascar ( B5-0302 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Fruteau , Mrs Kinnock , Mrs Carlotti , Mr van den Berg and Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Madagascar ( B5-0305 / 2002 ) ;
The situation in Madagascar is getting worse , despite efforts by international organisations and the successive promises made by the two leaders .
The country has now been divided and its capital is in danger of being cut off from the rest of the country , with all that implies for the people .
This situation takes me back ten years , when I faced the beginnings of the drama which , for four long years , was to make the life of the people in Bosnia-Herzegovina hell , with barricades going up everywhere to mark out territories and the gradual partition of the country into zones in which warlords reigned supreme .
And today we are watching as this island is caught in the grip of the same hellish spiral .

That is why I call on Mr Ratsiraka and Mr Ravalomanana from this House to each agree , before it is too late , to make the concessions needed to avoid the worst .
The European Community does , of course , support the efforts being made by the Organisation of African Unity and by President Wade within it .
The resolution on which Parliament is shortly to vote therefore calls on the two parties to apply all the terms of the Dakar agreement of 18 April which , unfortunately , has yet to be implemented .
In the same spirit , it calls on the Commission and the Council to do whatever they can to ensure that negotiations resume including , if necessary , sending a field mission of mediators and negotiators .
Mr President , as Mr Morillon has just reminded us , Madagascar is in dire economic and political straits .
Unbelievable poverty , inter-clan fighting and ethnic tensions , compounded by corruption at all levels in regions entertaining vague notions of autonomy and partition are its overriding features .
The political situation following the first round of presidential elections in Madagascar has exacerbated the breakdown in social cohesion and now looks set to plunge the entire country into total isolation , just like the capital .
Serious internal unrest with dramatic human consequences and galloping recession has deprived the people of Madagascar of any real chance of choosing a president .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think there are three points which need to be highlighted in the resolution before Parliament today .
The first is political support for the efforts of the OAU .
In fact , it is only by supporting all the initiatives being taken by the Organisation for African Unity , calling on the leaders to find a peaceful solution to the conflict , that we shall reach a settlement .
I should add , as our motion states , that a settlement will only come about if no other state unilaterally recognises the legitimacy of either leader .
We have seen what happens in such cases in other regions of the world .
It is not therefore up to the European Union to decide between the corruption and nepotism of the one and the self-proclamation - unacceptable in the eyes of international law - of the other .
However , it is our duty to express our full and total support for the decisions taken in the Dakar agreement on 18 April 2002 with a view to setting up a reconciliation government and , more importantly , making provision for fresh consultations , this time , undeniably , with the Madagascan people .
The only way to normalise democratic relations , let us not forget , is to put a stop to all forms of violence and violations of human rights .
The second important point is that we need to guarantee emergency humanitarian aid in order to alleviate the awful conditions under which the people have been living for several months now .
Finally , the third point I want to make is that it is also our duty and our responsibility to take any financial or political action needed to encourage the resumption of economic and social life , as this is the only guarantee of development in Madagascar which can respond to the real needs of its people .
So we must keep our aid and cooperation programmes in place .
I think , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that this is a role to which the European Union is eminently suited .
Mr President , in Germany there is a sea shanty which begins with the words : " We were lying off Madagascar and had the plague on board " .
Looking at the state of the country at present , you have the feeling that the whole island of Madagascar has the plague on board .
Not only is the humanitarian and economic situation at least as catastrophic as described in the motion before us ; it is also mired in a bloody civil war and power struggle which threaten to split the country .
To make matters worse , floods have hit Madagascar in recent days .
Since yesterday , there has been massive flooding in Madagascar . It really does seem as if the country has plague on all sides at once .
That is why we have an urgent humanitarian duty towards Madagascar , an ancient kingdom with a rich history , immense cultural diversity , and a natural beauty which is unique in the world .
I think that firstly , we should supply emergency relief to the flood victims and , secondly , take immediate action to alleviate the critical shortage of medicines .
Thirdly , we have a duty to provide help for economic reconstruction following the wholesale collapse of its industry , and finally , Mr President , we have a duty to mediate in this civil war and above all to support the efforts of Senegal 's President Wade within the African context .
The Commission shares the concerns of Parliament on the situation in Madagascar .
It deplores the dramatic impact that the current crisis is having on the population and is alarmed that the political dispute may degenerate into ethnic conflict .
The Commission is monitoring developments in Madagascar closely .
It supports and welcomes the mediation efforts of President Wade of the Organisation of African Unity and of the United Nations to encourage a democratic dialogue between the parties with a view to achieving a peaceful , global and lasting solution to the crisis .
In line with this objective , the Union has welcomed the agreement signed by the two leaders in Dakar on 18 April , aiming at national reconciliation .
The Commission deplores that , notwithstanding the Dakar Agreement , the confrontation continues .
The Commission is convinced of the importance of a comprehensive dialogue between the two leaders . It considers that only an agreement between the parties , and national reconciliation , will make it possible to resolve the present crisis and to preserve the integrity and unity of the country .
The Commission is convinced that the Dakar Agreement remains the appropriate framework for a democratic dialogue and for the achievement of a solution .
We welcome the renewed efforts of President Wade and of the OAU to organise a new meeting between the two leaders in order encourage the implementation of the objectives of the Dakar Agreement .
The Union is prepared to offer political and technical support in order to restore civil peace and the principle of democracy and to find a political solution to the crisis .
Moreover , the implementation of the substantial Community co-operation programme will help resolve the economic crisis facing the country .
The Commission has already envisaged the re-establishment of the free movement of essential goods and persons through the rehabilitation of roads and bridges .
Moreover the Commission has taken measures , together with some Member States , in order to supply food and medicines and establish a food safety net .
Furthermore the Commission is considering the ' urgent budget support programme ? on the basis of a World Bank analysis of the current situation and in cooperation with the Bank and some Member States .
In addition the 9th EDF foresees EUR 327 million for co-operation with Madagascar which is an important resource as a basis to meet priority needs in the future .
At this stage the organisation of relations or a referendum does not seem appropriate .
I agree with what has been expressed here that we must be careful not to be one-sided .
Only a political solution and national reconciliation can restore civil peace and enable economic activity to resume .
My analysis may not appear very strong or active , but can be summarised as follows : no matter how one examines the issues of an election referendum or the decision of the High Constitutional Court , efforts must focus on conciliation .
This is a meaningful message for us to stress at the moment .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.00 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Bowis , Mr Posselt and Mr Sacrédeus , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Belder , on behalf of the EDD group , on Moluccas ( Indonesia ) ( B5-0288 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Di Lello Finuoli and Mrs Eriksson , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Molucas and Aceh ( Indonesia ) ( B5-0296 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Moluccas and Aceh ( Indonesia ) ( B5-0297 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Menéndez del Valle and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Molucas ( Indonesia ) ( B5-0306 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Wuori and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Indonesia ( B5-0307 / 2002 ) ;
Mr President , Indonesia is a massive country , both in terms of population and area .
It is also a multi-ethnic , multi-religious and multi-region nation , and any Indonesian Government has our sympathy and goodwill in its efforts to hold its disparate regions , religions and cultures together .
To do so , as our motion suggests , it must face up to the causes of disunity and confront those of evil intent .
I was recently in East Timor as the EU 's chief observer .
I saw for myself the aftermath of the depths of depravity to which an out-of-control situation in that part of the world can sink with militia terror , destruction and murder , with the military standing by .
I hope that Indonesia will now both set an example by holding out the hand of friendship to the new nation of Timor Loro Sae as it becomes independent on 20 May , but I also hope that it will learn from Timor in dealing with other parts of Indonesia , particularly the Moluccas , Papua , Sulawesi and Aceh .
Laskar Jihad is a threat to the first three of these .
Laskar Jihad 's website used to boast of links to Bin Laden terror groups .
We know that 5,000 Moluccans have died .
Another 12 Christians died recently on the same day that the leader of Laskar Jihad , Thalib , launched his renewed jihad .
On 4 May we heard that he had been arrested .
That is almost one year to the day since he was previously arrested - and what happened ?
There was no trial , no sentence .
He was quietly released when the world stopped looking .
We have , Mr Commissioner , to make sure that the world does not stop looking on this occasion and we want to make sure that action is taken .
We want the authorities there to investigate links to the military .
How did Indonesian army weapons and ammunition - I have the photographs in front of me - come to be in the hands of Laskar Jihad ?
How is it that in Papua six members of the army 's special forces are now accused of involvement in the assassination of a Papuan leader ?
Who gave those orders ?
We are proud to be friends of Indonesia , but we can only be friends of a country that genuinely strives for justice , reconciliation , peace , security and the trust of its own people .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when President Wahid took office in Indonesia , Europeans that we are , we dared hope that the political climate in this country would improve under a president who defended human rights , was opposed to any form of sectarianism and supported the religious neutrality of the state .
Despite a certain amount of progress , despite encouraging signs which there is too little time now to list , there is terrible violence in Indonesia today and the country is caught up in a spiral of insurgence and religious conflict .
Today the European Parliament needs to reach a real consensus on its proposals which cuts across its political divides and groups .
In fact , Mr President , Commissioner , violence in northern Sumatra , in the province of Aceh , in Papua and in the Moluccas , as my fellow member has just reminded us , and repeated massacres between religious communities , with calls for crusades on either side , from Muslim and Christian extremists alike , have been going on since 1999 .
These massacres and exactions are intolerable and Parliament has already denounced them .
In the new resolution before us today , the European Union reiterates four main points .
First , we must support the call by several authorities , especially the religious authorities , for the Secretary-General of the United Nations to come to the assistance of the Indonesian government in order to prevent further massacre .
Secondly , we must welcome the arrest of the warlords openly calling for civil and religious war as evidence of the will of the Indonesian authorities to support a peace process in all the regions involved .
We must support the efforts of these authorities .
Thirdly , these initiatives only make sense if the economic situation in the archipelago really can be improved .
Consequently , we need to intervene , including at a financial level , in order to help reconstruct a civil society which really respects the human rights , especially the religious rights , of the people of this country .
Without political and financial aid on our part , there is a risk of the walls closing round the contradictions of the Indonesian experiment , which would probably put an end to the democratisation process which , all said and done , is still in its infancy .
And fourthly , in these situations of extreme confusion , we need to get to the bottom of all these exactions .
Only an independent inquiry by international human rights experts can do this .
We call on the Indonesian government in our resolution to set up just such a committee of inquiry .
Mr President , in the shadow of the conflict in the Middle East , terrible events are being played out in Indonesia , more specifically in the Moluccas .
The terrorist group Laskar Jihad - for it is nothing less than a terrorist group - is digging the grave of anything that might be called religious life .
The group is a grave-digger for Islam and has shown that it does not stand for anything other than hatred , violence and the undisguised killing of the Christian population in the Moluccas .
I wish to appeal to the Commission , here in the presence of Mr Nielson , as well as to the Council , not to let the conflict in the Middle East mean that a veil is drawn over the ethnic and religious cleansing of Christians in the Moluccas that is now taking place .
Instead , this should be placed in the spotlight . Vigorous action should be taken to ensure that the Indonesian Government gives the Christian population every form of lawful protection .
I also wish to emphasise that many Muslims in the Moluccas have been badly affected by this invasion by the terrorist group , Laskar Jihad .
Christians and Muslims have previously lived together in peace , and now soldiers arrive spreading hatred , violence and death in the name of Allah and God .
Between 5 000 and 10 000 people have been killed , and 25 000 seriously injured .
Of the Moluccas ' 10 million inhabitants , 350 000 are refugees .
Four hundred churches and 80 mosques have been burned down .
I have met the Catholic bishop , Monsignor Mandagi and the leader of the Protestant churches , the Reverend Hendrix .
I have looked directly into their eyes and seen their suffering .
Mr Nielson , let the EU do everything it can to ensure that Indonesia becomes a region of peace .
Find out who is funding these terrorist warlords .
No person , or state , can simply shake off its own past .
This also applies to the Republic of Indonesia .
To this day , its struggle for independence is making itself felt in national politics .
Parties continue to employ the tried and tested guerrilla tactics .
Physical force is used as a big stick .
According to Western standards , this is an insurmountable obstacle for a constitutional state .
It gets even worse when prominent politicians maintain close ties with extremist groups .
The attitude of the Indonesian Vice-President , Mr Hamzah Haz , only adds fuel to the religious fire of the Moluccas .
According to Mr Haz himself , he endeavours via the parliamentary route to set up a sharia state in the archipelago .
His personal contacts with leaders of the Laskar Jihad , however , are more symptomatic of a double political agenda .
This provocative attitude places a time bomb under the Malino II agreement .
This is why we would ask the Council and the Commission once again to urge the government in Jakarta quite emphatically to promote this difficult peace process to the best of its ability .
This requires firm government action against all agitators , irrespective of their religious affiliations .
The Indonesian army plays a crucial role in this respect .
Sadly , there is sufficient evidence that certain sections of this force fan the political and religious contrasts in the country 's large problem areas in favour of its own position of power , its own economic interests and the ideology of the rigid unified state .
Vigorous European support for the moderate , right-minded wings in the army , which certainly exist , is very much what is required .
No mean task for the Council and the Commission , in fact .
Just as deserving of this support are the spokespersons of Papua 's indigenous population .
Like their fellow citizens , they are extremely shocked about the findings of the National Inquiry Committee into the assassination of Papua leader , Mr Theys Hiyo Eluay , on 10 November 2001 .
The Committee refers to it as a criminal case .
The Papua leaders and the population think differently .
In their view , this is a downright political assassination .
In a joint letter of yesterday , they therefore urge the President , Mrs Megawati Sukarnoputri , to mount a truly independent inquiry .
In Paragraph 10 of this resolution , the EP unreservedly endorses this justified request .
We call on the Council and the Commission to do the same as a matter of urgency .
For the sake of internal peace and the archipelago 's unity as a state .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is once again scrutinising the situation in Indonesia .
We are concerned about the continuing violence against defenceless civilian populations in the name of regional and religious disputes .
Every life is important and sacred to us , but the situation in Indonesia has already claimed thousands of lives .
We deplore the incitement to slaughter Christians by radical Muslim leaders , and we put forward the example of tolerance and democratic spirit shown by East Timor .
In a land where more than 95 % of the population identifies with the Catholic Church , the current democratically elected prime minister is a Muslim , and this causes no problems .
We appreciate the initiatives of the present Indonesia regarding the normalisation of relations with East Timor and Portugal .
The symbolic gesture of their representatives being present at the opening of the latest cultural event held in Indonesia with the support of the Portuguese Embassy did not go unnoticed .
We appeal to the Indonesian Government , however , to pursue measures to protect the populations and to identify and punish those responsible for human rights violations .
Impunity must not be the rule , especially when members of the army or police are involved , as has been proved in some cases .
In this context it is desirable and advisable that the international community should be involved in independent inquiries to investigate the truth in some of the reported cases .
We appeal to the Indonesian Government to continue trying to find political solutions to the disputes that exist .
We respect their attempts to keep the country united , but we stress the need to find solutions other than the mere use of force to respond to the ethnic , religious and regional differences that unsettle life in that country .
Finally , we urge the United Nations Human Rights Commission not to persist in its inexplicable silence towards the events in Indonesia .
Mr President , like the Northern Ireland conflict , the conflict in Indonesia is far from being a religious conflict .
The fanaticism merely disguises itself as religion .
In reality , these are ethnic conflicts with a very deep root , namely the Indonesian Government 's Transmigrasi programme which attempts to resettle the population of the main islands to the other islands on a systematic basis .
The evidence for my theory can be found in the Moluccas , the old Christian Spice Islands , where there are conflicts between Christians and Muslim immigrants .
In Borneo , there is a similar conflict between adherents of the animist religions and the incoming Muslims .
In Aceh , the same problem occurs between the indigenous Muslim subjects of the old sultanate of Aceh and immigrants from the main islands such as Java and Sumatra .
In my view , it is essential to point out to the Government that it must halt this migration and shelve the artificial resettlement programmes , for otherwise , this massive country , which stretches from Australia to the Asian continent , will no longer hold together and will disintegrate .
Mr President , the Commission fully shares with honourable Members their concerns about the continued violence in parts of Indonesia .
Together with the EU diplomatic missions in Jakarta , we have been monitoring the situation in the Moluccas since early1999 and we have participated in two fact-finding missions in late 2000 and early 2001 .
The Commission has also participated in several EU démarches to the Indonesian authorities to express our concerns about situations of continuing conflict in different parts of the country .
In addition , the Commission has provided more than EUR 4.6 million in humanitarian assistance to the people of the Moluccas since May 1999 .
We have joined with the Member States in a declaration welcoming the Malino II Peace Agreement and urging its full implementation .
At the same time , we have urged the government of Indonesia to take appropriate measures to support the peace process .
Since then , we have followed closely the efforts of the government to deal with new outbreaks of violence , including the arrest on 4 May of Ja 'far Umar Thalib on charges of incitement to violence .
The situation in Aceh has also preoccupied us for some time now and has also been the subject of EU démarches to the Indonesian authorities .
EU Heads of Mission visited the region in October 2001 .
I am therefore particularly happy to welcome the joint statement issued on 10 May by the Indonesian government and the Free Aceh Movement ( GAM ) , following two days of consultations facilitated by the Henri Dunant Centre in Geneva .
The joint statement recognised the special autonomy law as the starting-point for further negotiations in an all-inclusive dialogue and confirmed the intention of both parties to work on an agreement for the cessation of hostilities .
It has been our view for some time that the full implementation of the special autonomy legislation will be the key to a durable resolution of the present situation .
Papua has equally been a matter of continued concern and the subject of EU démarches .
The EU condemned the kidnapping and murder of Theys Eluay in November 2001 and called on the government of Indonesia to ensure a full investigation of this dreadful incident and to bring its perpetrators to justice .
EU Heads of Mission in Jakarta also visited Papua in February this year .
In the case of Papua , too , it is clear that full implementation of the special autonomy legislation will be key to the resolution of the situation .
The Commission has included in its Country Strategy Paper for Indonesia , which is now in the final stages of preparation , a particular emphasis on institutional capacity building , good governance and the rule of law , as well as conflict prevention .
Financial support has already been committed to the UNDP-managed Partnership for Governance Reform , and technical assistance has been provided to the Attorney General 's Office .
Provision has been made in the draft National Indicative Programme for 2002-2004 for a specific programme to support the implementation of the government 's policy for decentralisation in Indonesia and to promote good governance at local government level .
In the meantime , we have also taken steps to support the processes of conflict resolution more directly .
Following discussions between Commissioner Patten and the Indonesian Foreign Minister , Mr Wirajuda , last November , and in the context of the Commission 's Rapid Reaction Mechanism , an independent mission on conflict prevention in Indonesia visited the Moluccas , Sulawesi and Papua in February 2002 .
The expert mission met a wide range of central and local government representatives , as well as NGOs operating in these areas .
On the basis of the mission 's report , a package of projects is now in preparation for the Moluccas and Papua .
The project in the Moluccas will focus particularly on support for the participation of civil society .
The projects in Papua will support both the authorities and civil society .
All of these measures are consistent with the Commission 's support for the EU 's stated position , which firmly supports the territorial integrity of Indonesia , while encouraging the government to make urgent efforts to address and resolve peacefully Indonesia 's internal conflicts , whether separatist or sectarian in character .
We will continue to follow this approach and to provide all possible support for constructive action to deal with these very difficult situations .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Mr Tannock and Mrs Martens , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the religious clashes in India ( B5-0287 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Vinci , Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the violence in the State of Gujarat ( India ) ( B5-0291 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the inter-communal violence in the State of Gujarat ( India ) ( B5-0298 / 2002 ) ;
Mrs Lambert and Mr Messner , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on India ( B5-0299 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Sakellariou and Mrs Carrilho , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in India ( B5-0304 / 2002 ) ;
Mr President , we are here to express our concern at the recent outbreak of inter-communal violence that has erupted in the Indian State of Gujarat - violence which has claimed hundreds of lives and left thousands homeless and destitute .
I am sure that Parliament will join me in expressing condolences and profound sympathy to the members of both communities who have suffered loss and bereavement , including relatives of my own London constituents .
There is some history to the inter-communal violence in Gujarat including , it must be said , persecution of Christians by Hindu extremists .
The latest outbreak began after Muslim extremists killed 58 Hindu pilgrims on a train near Godhra - a deeply callous act which unleashed a round of reprisals and counter-reprisals .
This chain of events has generated considerable soul-searching in India itself , a country founded on the rule of law and secular democracy , with accusations that the State authorities did not react quickly enough to the scale of events .
No system of government is perfect , but since the army was called in , 30 thousand arrests have been made , with 80 % of those arrested being Hindus .
In addition , it is significant that the violence did not spread to other parts of India and large areas of Gujerat itself remained calm .
In the Indian Parliament , the government accepted the Congress Party opposition 's motion as the basis for discussion with cross-party support , reaffirming its belief in democratic pluralism and respect for minorities in a giant country of over a billion people of diverse backgrounds and race , and the independent Justice Verma commission is now reporting back to the government .
Clearly lessons have to be learned , but we should not forget that India is currently reeling from a series of atrocious terrorist attacks by Islamic Jihadi extremists - most recently the killing of 30 people , including women and children , and scores of wounded on the outskirts of Jammu .
This attack makes the dangerous threat of war more likely between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan , a country which regrettably and , until recently , actively supported Islamic terrorists .
The international community must urgently do everything possible to prevent any further escalation of violence which might threaten global peace .
Mr President , the atmosphere of conflict between religions , ethnicities and civilisations , which is worsening across the world , and in particular in India , is concerning .
The influence of events in building tension in that atmosphere is also very concerning , as it shows that this is not an entirely spontaneous phenomenon or simply the result of clashes , but that in many cases it is being orchestrated to hide the real social problems affecting people .
We have to take account of the atmosphere of high tension and violence that we are experiencing and which I believe has increased since 11 September , and the supposed clash of civilisations , with the war in Afghanistan and everything that goes with it , because that shows that we are seeing the consequences of the process that we call ' globalisation ' , which is gradually increasing inequalities and tension , and as a result , confrontations arise between communities .
I therefore think that the European Union should , as the Commissioner said , pay attention to these phenomena and increase its efforts , not only looking to the places concerned but also to the United Nations in order to deal with all aspects of the problem .
These types of acts are going to increase and we , the European Union , as an international body , have a great responsibility and the capacity to act , not only with financial aid , but , as I said earlier , by changing the effects and the process of globalisation , which is affecting so many peoples across the world .
Mr President , the violence between the different population groups in India cannot remain undiscussed .
Needless to say , this is a very important matter that has to be considered in the light of the significance that India represents , not only in Asia , but also in the rest of the world .
After all , we should not forget that India is not only a superpower that has great economic potential , it is also a country that has nuclear capacity .
All credit to the common resolution for not having succumbed to radical opinions .
After all , it should be clear to everyone that India is certainly not experiencing a clash of civilisations .
It should be emphasised that Muslims have largely been integrated in Indian society .
A concrete example of this so-called multicultural society is the fact that Muslims occupy high government offices .
This , however , does not detract from the fact that I deeply regret what happened in Gujarat .
I would , however , note that the incidents in Gujarat did not spread to the rest of India .
This is , in my view , proof that the Hindu-Muslim coalition is still respecting democratic values .
On the other hand , we need to be concerned about the increase in Muslim fundamentalism that is a daily occurrence in Kashmir .
The day before yesterday , an attack on an Indian army camp claimed 9 victims .
Extremist militia of Muslim activists who demand union with Pakistan are very active here .
Last Tuesday , there were already 32 casualties in an Indian army camp too .
This time , Indian women and children went into hiding .
These incidents must , further to this resolution , also be brought to the attention of the international community .
This tragic incident underlines once again the enormous threat which growing terrorism poses .
I take the view that the European Union and the European Parliament have every interest in continuing the support India as a constitutional state , where Hindus and Muslims are treated equally , in their endeavours to respect the democratic principles .
Mr President , although I appear on the list as an author , my group is not a signatory to this joint resolution , although we are likely to support it .
As previous speakers have said , probably none of us in this Chamber would deny the devastating effects of religious extremism .
In the case of Gujarat , as Mr Tannock mentioned , it is actually Hindu extremism .
It was the action of those so-called " pilgrims " which resulted in an appalling massacre of 58 people .
We have seen the fallout from that in what is euphemistically called " inter-communal violence " .
The resolution states that whereas numerous independent inquiries by human rights organisations confirm that state officials and the police of Gujarat were involved in the clashes , this involvement runs deep . It is not just a question of a casual street brawl but orchestrated violence and intimidation over a sustained period .
The Human Rights Watch report states that the Gujarat Government chose to characterise the violence as a spontaneous reaction to the incidents at Godhra .
Human Rights Watch findings and those of numerous Indian human rights and civil liberties organisations and most of the Indian press indicate that the attacks on Muslims throughout the state were planned well in advance of the Godhra incident and organised with extensive police participation and in close cooperation with officials of the BJP State Government .
On 3 April India 's national Human Rights Commission released the preliminary findings of its report on the violence , a strong indictment of the failure of the Gujarat Government to contain the violence .
The very authorities to whom people should have been able to look for protection were , in many cases , complicit in devastating attacks and increasing the level and ferocity of violence which makes every citizen feel threatened , whatever their religion or background .
There are now about 100 refugee camps organised by NGOs in the area .
A mere handful see support from the government of Gujarat State .
That authority has a responsibility for the wellbeing and care of these people now and in future .
The Indian Government has an overall responsibility to see that justice is done and that the instigators , organisers and perpetrators of this violence are brought to justice .
They will also need to ensure that the police force in Gujarat is made to recognise that it owes a duty to all people who may be under threat or attack , not just their own .
Clear signals are needed from the government - indeed we have had some - that religious intolerance and incitement to religious hatred have no place in secular , democratic India .
My group welcomes the ruling of the Indian Supreme Court in March this year banning any religious ceremonies at Ayodhya until the definite legal settlement of the case which we hope will be in the interests of a peaceful , long-term solution .
Mr President , first of all , I do not think this emergency resolution is the best way to help solve the still worrying situation in Gujarat , mainly because the violence seen in this state during recent months is a manifestation of an extremely complex phenomenon affecting the whole region and not just India .
It involves social factors such as poverty , urban ' ghettoisation ' , some interference by organised crime with unknown links abroad , a certain inability of the political elite to mobilise people 's energies around political ideals and the drift towards the religious sphere , especially through fundamentalist extremism .
It is , however , quite right that the European Parliament should feel concern for a case that has already cost the lives of a about thousand people - or even more , as estimates vary according to the source .
This is not the time to analyse the episodes that gave rise to this violence , but it is worth pointing out that everything began with the fire in two train carriages on 27 February last , in which 58 people died , half of them women and children .
Nothing can justify this kind of action , and the retaliations and revenge that followed cannot be justified at all , either .
Godhra , it should be remembered , is a peripheral urban area with a high population density and a level of latent social conflict , where the forces of law and order generally find it difficult to act , apart from the possible involvement of members of the local police in one or other religious faction , according to the results of inquiries so far .
What is certain is that at first the forces of law and order did not succeed in putting an end to the violence .
The matter was , however , taken up immediately by the democratic institutions of the Indian Union , namely the government , the opposition parties and parliament .
I did in fact visit the Indian Parliament on the very days when this subject was discussed .
Urgent measures were adopted not only on the government 's own initiative but also because of strong pressure from the opposition and the Indian media .
I must point out that stands adopted outside the Indian democratic system itself , however well intentioned they may be , sometimes end up being counterproductive in that they bolster nationalist and fundamentalist positions of various origins , Islamic or Hindu .
In any case , on behalf of my group , I recommend adoption of this resolution without any changes , as we consider it well balanced .
Mr President , in the 1980s , there were violent clashes between Hindus and Sikhs , and in the early 1990s between Hindus and Muslims in Bombay and Uttar Pradesh .
Now violence has erupted in Gujarat , where murders , massacres and burnings alive by both sides have claimed around 1500 victims since February this year .
The Hindu nationalist parties justify their radicalism by referring to the spread of Islam in neighbour states and its influence on India .
The Indian Supreme Court 's ruling of 13 March gives cause to hope that the violence will end .
The Court ruled that the land on which Hindu fanatics tore down a mosque to build a temple in 1992 may not be handed over to the radical Hindu organisation WHP .
Constitutional guarantees , such as the Muslim marriage law which upholds the traditions of Indian Muslims , are an expression of India 's religious freedom and freedom of opinion .
Secularism is enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution of India .
Article 25 , which guarantees the freedom to practise and propagate a religion , also imposes an obligation on the Indian State to protect all its citizens .
The ideal of peaceful co-existence between different ethnic communities and cultures is upheld as a principle .
The Indian Government has deployed a number of units of the army in an attempt to send out a clear signal to the world community that it is willing to end the violence .
It has also offered the relatives of the victims the prospect of an aid package amounting to around EUR 35 million .
The international criticism of many of the completely inadequate measures taken to deal with the radical movements has been acknowledged by the Indian Justice Minister in recent days , especially since India signed international human rights agreements a long time ago .
The PPE-DE Group believes that such insights should set a precedent .
Mr President , India is a State whose independence and foundation in the middle of the last century was possible based on a mass and globally respected social mobilisation , which was built on a doctrine of passive resistance as a political resource .
Mahatma Gandhi led the Indians with a message of non violence , tolerance , and overcoming religious differences , in an epic campaign that has remained among the most symbolic victories of peaceful methods in politics , as it established the most populated democracy in the world and a society considered to be a model of co-existence of races , languages and , in short , of civilisations .
However , conflicts based on religious fanaticism have never stopped occurring in India .
Although one of the most significant victims of those conflicts was Gandhi himself , the list continued with other assassinations , such as that of the Prime Minister Indira Gandhi , her son , also Prime Minister , and others .
And as well as those people whom we know as important figures , thousands of innocent people have fallen victim to intransigence and fanaticism .
It is a paradox that it is precisely where the material and social needs are greatest that religious extremism and intolerance arises and builds up .
We are talking about a country where the inequalities are devastating and where the physical environment and natural disasters often make life even more difficult for the people , and it is there that conflicts between the followers of majority beliefs and other smaller communities have permanently marked and tarnished the history of the greatest democracy in the world .
The international community must ask the Government of India to guarantee the safety of its people with the same amount of effort that it is making with other challenges of development in which it is achieving significant success .
The Indian Government must maintain its efforts by dedicating sufficient resources to enable people who have been displaced to return to their place of origin and to re-establish harmony in Gujarat and other areas affected by the recent clashes that led to our debate , and they must also purge the cases of collusion by the security forces in episodes of religious and political violence .
The European Union must support these efforts and urgently send as much aid as possible to the area .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think , as many of you have pointed out , that current events in India are partly the result of the wind which Europe and the West have sown in a good part of the world over the last forty years . It is hardly surprising then that we are now reaping a hurricane .
These unbelievable and , as Mrs Lambert has just demonstrated , logical reversals are the same as those which we - or rather you - applied to Palestine : the fact that Mr Sharon visited the esplanade of the mosques or Temple Mount was justification enough for attacks by suicide bombers who are in fact nothing less than suicide murderers .
Today , the fact that 60 pilgrims were burnt is justification and excuse enough for the violence unleashed on them by the Muslims .
I think that all this is the result of this inability , this democratic relativism spreading throughout Europe which prevents us from getting to the root of problems , which prevents us from remembering that , with 1 billion inhabitants , India is the largest democracy in the world , which prevents us from realising that , by going to Beijing rather than to Delhi , we are encouraging dictatorship , that by supplying arms to Pakistan for 40 , maybe 50 years , we are strengthening the dictatorship , that by doing what we have done to the Taliban regime or by not doing what we should have done , we generated a tragedy in Afghanistan , especially for its women .
This has slowly been building up to the events we are witnessing today and I think that , even if we can reproach the Indian authorities on a number of counts , we need to get beyond these reproaches .
I think we also need to look at the exemplary manner in which this huge country has reacted ; federal armed forces have been sent to Gujarat , a committee of inquiry has been set up and recourse has been taken to the Supreme Court , all fundamental reactions on the part of India despite its development problems .
I think that if there is a problem , Mr Marset Campos , it is not globalisation but the lack of globalisation .
There is still a special unit within the Commission - I do not know if Commissioner Nielson can confirm this - which ensures that Indian textiles do not enter the territory of the European Union .
Now , as everyone knows , textiles are one of the sectors around which India can develop and create a stronger economy .
Over the last ten years , since globalisation began , India has had a rate of growth of 6 to 7 % .
That was certainly not the case before globalisation .
So long live globalisation , but long live globalisation in both directions !
We cannot expect to keep on exporting our products to India while stopping imports of Indian products into our countries .
This is how to achieve development , this is how to strengthen democracy in India and perhaps also closer to home .
Mr President , the Commission very much shares the honourable Members ' preoccupation with the continued violence in the Indian State of Gujarat , a situation that gives serious cause for concern on humanitarian grounds .
Like the diplomatic missions of several Member States , the Commission Delegation in New Delhi sent a fact-finding mission to Gujarat to assess the situation on the ground .
The Commission has a significant cooperation programme in Gujarat of more than EUR 100 million .
I was there in January meeting the state government , inspecting the devastation after the earthquake a year before and trying to accelerate our reconstruction activities .
The mission I am talking about was different and more problematical because of its background , but it was necessary to send a mission to Gujarat to assess whether the riots had implications for the principles on which our cooperation is based , including respect for human rights and democracy and the rule of law .
The findings were deeply worrying .
Violence was not only widespread , but in many cases extreme brutality was used .
Unofficial figures set the death toll at 2000 , most of them Muslims .
The mission also heard accusations from the Indian media and the Indian Human Rights Commission that the Gujarat state authorities had been complacent in their handling of the Hindu rioters .
In line with India 's healthy and vigorous democratic tradition , a lively debate has been going on in the country about the consequences of the events in Gujarat and the responsibilities of the government at state and national level .
I am confident that India 's commitment to democracy and the rule of law will ensure that those who were responsible for these atrocities will be held to account , and that the victims will be provided with relief .
The central government and the state government have already taken steps in this direction .
Both in Delhi and in Madrid , the EU troika has raised our concerns about the crisis with the Government of India , and the Commission has participated in these démarches .
From a humanitarian point of view , the Commission is currently examining the possibility of giving humanitarian assistance to the victims of the riots through ECHO .
A decision on this is expected within the next two weeks .
The honourable Members will , of course , be informed immediately .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Mr Van Orden , Mr Deva , Mr Parish , Mrs Foster , Mrs Banotti , Mr Corrie , Mr Gahler , Mrs Korhola , Mr Lehne , Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Sacrédeus , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group , Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ( B5-0286 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Sjöstedt , Mr Seppänen and Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ( B5-0295 / 2002 ) ;
Mrs Maes , Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ( B5-0300 / 2002 ) ;
Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ( B5-0303 / 2002 ) ;
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , the negative developments in Zimbabwe are in inverse proportion to the degree of international attention focussed on this country since the rigged presidential elections in March .
One of the most dramatic outcomes , for example , are the growing food shortages which , as Commissioner Nielson has already mentioned in another context , are largely man-made , namely by the Mugabe regime itself .
We have received reports that around 50 000 people in Zimbabwe have fled their homes as a result of repression and violence at the hands of Mugabe 's troops , and we receive daily reports of farm lootings , while Zimbabwe 's leadership is blatantly enriching itself by confiscating private property while it can still get away with it .
However , I would also like to draw your attention to another quite scandalous aspect , namely the Council 's response to the situation .
Yesterday I received a reply to an application for information from the Council . I asked for an update on the targeted sanctions applied against certain persons .
I wanted to find out about the situation regarding the refusal to grant them visas .
In reply , I was told this was a matter for the Member States .
In other words , I could have just asked the others this time .
Apart from that , the question which really arises is this : what are the Council 's motives concerning these measures in a country which - as Commissioner Patten said at a Committee meeting - is in freefall ?
How has the Council managed to achieve a situation in which a country which is in freefall has vanished completely from its operational agenda ?
It was postponed in April , and a more comprehensive decision in May was also postponed because the high level troika had not yet departed .
It is now due to leave on Sunday . The really lamentable aspect of this state of affairs are the attempts by France , Belgium and the Presidency itself to water down the troika 's terms of reference in advance of the visit .
In light of the situation in the country , this is really quite incredible .
There is already talk of resuming cooperation , even though no evaluation of the measures we have taken has yet been carried out .
I really do ask myself what else has to befall the country to raise the Council 's awareness of its responsibilities in this context once more .
I hope , at least , that the European Union troika , which will visit the region from Sunday to confer with SADAC countries on possible courses of action in response to the Zimbabwean crisis , will hear first-hand , at least in one of Zimbabwe 's neighbours , about the dramatic worsening of the situation in Zimbabwe from diplomats posted in Harare .
As the European Parliament , we cannot accept the Council 's attempts to play down such an urgent issue in southern Africa in this way , and , above all , that it is not prepared to make these developments in Zimbabwe a test case for the new African development programme , for example .
These are the things we should definitely be demanding .
Mr President , once again we find ourselves discussing Zimbabwe , and the 64-thousand-dollar question is : what will actually work ?
We have already adopted several resolutions on Zimbabwe in this House . The Commonwealth has condemned the country .
So has the ACS-EU meeting .
What else could we do , in fact ? Despite everything , the pillaging and killing simply continue .
Mugabe appears to be unassailable .
In addition , a large-scale famine is threatening to erupt .
It is , of course , extremely difficult to deny hungry people food . I think food should always be provided , no matter what .
But is there no way we can bring Mugabe to his senses ?
Another way that could still be tried is to apply pressure on the SADEC member states around Zimbabwe , and on South Africa , in particular .
In my view , that country could have a great impact , and if that country takes the new programme for African development , the Nepad programme , seriously , then South Africa too should make more of an effort if it wants to count on aid from the European Union for this important economic programme for Africa .
There may also be another way .
We have already spoken in previous resolutions about maligning sanctions .
Would it not be possible for the European Commission to take stock of all the property owned by the leaders of Zimbabwe in Europe ?
How was it acquired ?
When ?
Where did the money come from ?
In most cases , land registry offices in Europe , and in Africa , are public , although it will be difficult in Africa .
Why does the Commission not set itself the task of mounting an inquiry into this and to publish the findings via the BBC and whatever other stations are listened to in Africa .
We will then be able to apply a little more pressure and bring shame on the leaders .
The Commission shares the concern about Zimbabwe following the presidential elections , in terms of the legitimacy of the present government , the issue of freedom of the press , continued violence , the economic crisis and the associated food shortages .
It is clear that the election results did not reflect the will of the people of Zimbabwe .
The process leading up to the elections , as well as the conduct of the elections , were characterised by deliberate attempts by the authorities to prevent free and fair elections .
We are particularly concerned about the continued violence and repression prevailing in Zimbabwe , the crushing of the opposition , civil society and the independent press .
Putting an end to violence and the resolution of the political conflict through negotiation is the highest priority .
Only with a degree of social peace can the rule of law be re-established , and , with it , the impartiality of state institutions , such as the security forces .
The EU has applied targeted sanctions against members of the ruling party and a moratorium on bilateral ministerial contacts .
It is possible that the Council may decide to further extend sanctions in view of the stalemate and lack of progress in inter-party dialogue and the continued repression and violence we see in Zimbabwe .
I would like to underline that the situation in Zimbabwe has now become a very real emergency , and is likely to become a protracted one .
We have anticipated humanitarian needs and are addressing food shortages and the needs of refugees and internally-displaced people .
EUR 18 million is available to cover immediate needs .
This figure is not fixed , but it reflects the needs assessment we have made so far .
This is the way we normally do things .
We have to ensure that this is the basis of our decisions .
These funds will be managed by the World Food Programme and by different NGOs , reflecting the need to avoid political games .
Although prepared to make a major effort to assist the population , we are fully aware of reports pointing to the government of Zimbabwe 's use of the food crisis for political purposes .
In our contacts with the Zimbabwean authorities we have systematically stressed that all of those affected by a humanitarian emergency need to be assisted , regardless of their political conviction , and reiterated the need for non-partisan food distribution .
Unfortunately , about 18 months ago , one of our attempts to distribute food in an even-handed way was disrupted by violence .
Moreover , we have emphasised that in Zimbabwe - once a food-exporting country - the present food shortages are mainly the product of misguided policies and only partly the result of drought .
The drought problem is , however , a regional problem and has the negative effect of making it more difficult to buy food in the region in order to assist Zimbabwe .
Thus , things are more complicated because of the drought , but the real problems we are