Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 13 December 1996 .
Ladies and gentlemen , once again our Parliament is meeting to appoint officers for the next six-month legislative term .
As the oldest Member , it is my duty to open this sitting and since I am easily the oldest Member of all , I would like , if you permit me , to make a very brief personal statement .
I am the only person left in this House who was born before the first world war and can therefore remember this epoch-making event from my own experience .
I am from an era that was shaped by the Vienna Congress at the end of the Napoleonic Wars .
For it is to that Congress that we owe the long period of peace that gave rise to the astonishing economic upswing of that era , which had both its bright and its dark sides .
I personally experienced three world wars , for after all what is called the cold war was nothing other than the third world war .
And I witnessed two godforsaken and inhumane totalitarian dictatorships - under Stalin , who succeeded Lenin , and Hitler - their rise to power and their terrible demise .
At that time I was fortunate enough to be able to work with important men who have done much for our continent .
The first was the prophet of Europe , Richard von CoudenhoveKalergi , founder of the Pan-European Union , who warned us as even in 1922 that Europe would suffer severely if it did not unite in time .
He and Aristide Briand and Gustav Stresemann only just missed achieving their aim .
Had they succeeded , we would have been saved millions of deaths and endless human and material losses .
I was also lucky enough to be involved in the efforts of statesmen such as Robert Schuman , Josef Bech , Konrad Adenauer , Charles de Gaulle and Franz Josef Strauss .
Finally , I had the good fortune to conclude a long career by representing Bavaria in the European Parliament for 18 years .
A wonderful time , in which I always had the feeling that our work is meaningful , quite apart from leading to friendships between many people , from many nations and parties , who are united by their understanding of the meaning and task of Europe in the years to come .
Looking back over nearly the entire span of the 20th century , allow me to make two comments .
I am doing so partly in memory of one of the best speeches I ever heard in this House , the opening address by the first oldest Member , that great French lady Louise Weiss , which we would still do well to read today .
We are facing a time of historical change , which is opening up new horizons .
Distance , space and time have now acquired an entirely new meaning compared to a few decades ago .
Our living conditions have changed radically .
Relations between peoples and nations are not what they were only a few decades ago .
That means we have to re-think our policies .
We are in the midst of a crisis - I am using this word in the Chinese sense , meaning a great danger but also a great opportunity .
That means we have an enormous responsibility , we who have the honour to be Members of the only European democratically elected body .
We cannot shift this responsibility onto others , for each and every one of us took on their task of their own free will in accepting to stand for the European Parliament .
So we have a duty towards those who have placed their trust in us .
We must do all we can to fulfil it .
Personal and private interests must take second place .
We owe our voters and the European ideal total commitment .
If we are to be credible , there can be no justification for not appearing on working days , including Fridays - you will allow me to say this , it is a hobbyhorse of mine .
Of course there can be cases of force majeure , but they must remain rare exceptions .
We have a historic responsibility towards all Europeans so long as we see the European Union as more than a large market and a rich nations ' club .
Our united Europe must be home to all Europeans , including those who do not yet belong to it but want to help build it .
Our doors must always remain open to them .
We must insist that as soon as they comply with the basic conditions for accession they have a right immediately to become Member States of the European Union .
That is not just a duty , it is also in our interests .
An eminent Member of the European Parliament and a colleague of many of us , Dr Heinrich Aigner , put it this way : ' Europe offers the only realistic prospect for peace ! '
What he was saying was that we should not primarily be a large market or an economic community , but a security community , which guarantees our freedom and that of many other nations .
Europe is not just Paris , London , Madrid , Rome , Berlin , Luxembourg , Brussels , the Hague , Lisbon , Vienna , Helsinki , Dublin , Copenhagen , Athens or Stockholm ; it is also Budapest , Prague , Warsaw , Ljubljana , Vilnius , Riga , Tallin , Bratislava , Zagreb , Bucharest , Kiev , Skopje , Sofia , Sarajevo , Tirana , Vaduz , La Valletta , Nicosia , Oslo , Berne and Belgrade .
A Europe that is uniting must also be open to the citizens of these towns and to the inhabitants of the Central and Eastern European countries .
The European Union must not turn into a private club for the more fortunate nations , as the Czech president Václav Havel recently warned .
We would be betraying the European ideal if , now that the military ' iron curtain ' has gone , we allowed a new rich-poor divide to come into being .
People say that enlargement will cost us dear .
Of course , all good things are costly , but in a dangerous world the first priority is security , and only a united Europe can give us that .
We have learned from experience that one day of war costs more in terms of human misery and economic loss than a whole years expenditure on peace-keeping .
And there is a wise French proverb that goes : ' Plaie d 'argent n 'est jamais mortelle . ' It is other things that are lethal !
Ladies and gentlemen , we have an enormous task before us .
We in this House are called to make history .
We owe that to our people and to each of our voters .
We must fulfil this obligation .
It is a splendid but also a difficult task .
Much will be decided over the next two and a half years .
And we bear the responsibility for it .
I hope God will bless us in our pursuit , us and the men and women who will be appointed to high offices in the coming hours .
And now to work !
( Applause )
Election of the President ( announcement of nominations and appointment of tellers )
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , the election of the President will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Let me remind you that under the Rules of Procedure no business can be transacted while the oldest Member is in the Chair unless it is concerned with the election of the President or the verification of credentials .
Pursuant to Rule 13 of the Rules , nominations for the presidency of the European Parliament may only be made by a political group or by at least 29 Members .
I have received the following nominations in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Procedure :
Mr GIL-ROBLES GIL-DELGADO Mrs LALUMIERE
May I remind you that pursuant to Rule 14 of the Rules , in order to be elected a candidate must obtain an absolute majority of the votes cast in the first three ballots .
Blank or spoilt papers do not count as votes cast .
In order to speed up tomorrow morning 's proceedings , I propose that we now appoint the six tellers .
( The President drew lots to appoint the tellers )
The following Members are appointed tellers :

Mr De Vries Mr Tajani Mrs Thors Mrs Thyssen Mr Tamino Mr Virrankoski


Mr President , I should just like to thank you for selecting the tellers as you have . You have short-circuited the d 'Hondt system and shown that tellers do not always have to be selected from the two largest groups .
Thank you very much .
( The sitting was closed at 6.20 p.m. )
Election of the President
The next item is the election of the President , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Envelopes and ballot papers have been distributed .
As I said yesterday , I have received the following nominations , in accordance with the provisions of the Rules : Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado and Mrs Lalumière .
Let me remind you that pursuant to Rule 14 of the Rules , to be elected a candidate must obtain an absolute majority of votes cast after the first three ballots .
Blank or spoilt papers do not count as votes cast .
I declare the first ballot open .
( The Members of the European Parliament proceeded to the ballot boxes )
( The sitting was suspended at 10.30 a.m. and resumed at 11.45 a.m. )

Mr President , my congratulations and I wish you all of God 's blessings and great success in your work .
Please come to the rostrum .
Mr President , I rise on behalf of the Socialist Group to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of this House .
You take on the presidency at a moment of great responsibility , bearing in mind what lies before us in the European Union in the coming years .
You have to follow a very illustrious act on the part of my very good colleague Klaus Hänsch .
I was asked just now by the media what I expect of the President of this Parliament .
I would like to repeat what I said because I think you will be able to fulfil those expectations in great measure and we on this side of the House look forward to that .
My reply was that I expect the President of this House to preside over this House with integrity .
We believe you will do so .
I also said that we expect the President of this House to pursue the demands of this House with great vigour , particularly in the light of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Again , we know and expect that you will do so .
Thirdly , my third expectation of a President of this House is that he make this Parliament more relevant and more accessible to the people of the European Union , making it more user-friendly and more people-friendly .
We know and expect that you will do that .
You have our best wishes and , where you act in accordance with those three requests , which I know you will do , you will have our absolute support .
We hope and expect that , in carrying out that duty , you will feel fulfilled and gratified in the post you have taken on . Mr President , we wish you well .
Mr President , your election as President of the European Parliament is a cause of great delight to our Group .
We have always admired your integrity and it is our belief , our conviction , that you will make an outstanding President of this House and a worthy successor to Klaus Hänsch .
The European Parliament has very specific responsibilities in the process of further integrating Europe , particularly since the Single Act and the Maastricht Treaty .
Those who voted for you , and we make no secret of the fact that there was consensus between the Socialist Group and the EPP Group , did so because you will also be the personification of this desire for further integration and Parliament 's responsibilities to help achieve that end .
We are also delighted because , as you yourself said , you have been able to make a solid contribution to the furtherance of democracy in your own country .
I was personally acquainted with your father and met him at meetings in Madrid in the seventies .
We are especially pleased and we are convinced that those who chose you in preference to the other candidate , Mrs Lalumière , will find you to be an honest , correct and very upright President .
On behalf of the EPP Group I wish you the very best and a very successful term as President of the European Parliament in the crucial months which will take us up to the Intergovernmental Conference and which will , I hope , see the good results of that conference implemented .
Mr President , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , I offer my sincerest and warmest congratulations on your election , which gives us very special pleasure .
Your personality , your uprightness , your standing as an eminent jurist and the personal courage you have displayed at a difficult time in your country 's history all seem to us to guarantee your success in discharging the high office to which you have been appointed .
However , Mr President , I am sure you will understand that , addressing you as I do after the Chairmen of the Socialist and PPE Groups , I must express very strongly the sense of frustration experienced by all the other political groups when it comes to appointing candidates to positions of responsibility in this Parliament .
Since 1989 , a reciprocal agreement between the two largest groups in the European Parliament has guaranteed that their candidate for the office of President will be elected on the first ballot , reducing any candidates from the other groups to the status of walk-on parts .
In other words , the real election no longer takes place in the plenary but within each of the two largest groups in strict alternation .
Not only that , but within the two largest groups the result of the voting is determined by the largest delegations , which reduces the effective electoral power still further .
And , for good measure , this system was extended in 1994 to include the Quaestors , making it impossible for anyone outside the two main groups to be elected to that office either .
The effect of this kind of system is to kick into touch six political groups out of eight - and yet those six groups account for 40 % of the Members of this House .
( Applause ) Furthermore , another effect of this kind of system is the ruthless elimination from positions of responsibility of the elected representatives of the least numerous nationalities within Parliament , which is out of step with the European ethos that gives equal rights to every nation represented in this House .
So , Mr President , I urgently make the following request : that you use the moral authority conferred upon you by your election to take the initiative and , in consultation with the group chairmen , to come up with a procedure which will not perpetuate the present system - a system which , by over-organizing the internal democracy , has ultimately suppressed it .
It would be a paradox indeed if the European Parliament , which has so often deplored the lack of democratic process in the functioning of the European institutions , should itself exacerbate the problem by its own internal procedures .
Still with the same aim of making good the shortcomings of institutional democracy , Mr President , there are two other brief requests I should like to make .
The first is that you should ensure that the decisions taken by the political organs of Parliament - the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents - should be precisely and promptly implemented by the administration , which has not always been the case in the past .
The second is that you should take steps to improve cooperation , which already exists but still leaves much to be desired , with all the national parliaments , with whom we share the democratic legitimacy derived from election by universal suffrage .
Why not arrange further talks with the representatives of the Union 's national parliaments , like those we held in Rome a few years ago ?
Mr President , I can assure you that you will have the support of our group in your everyday duties , and you can count on us when it comes to carrying out the reforms that are close to our hearts .
Good luck , Mr President .
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of my entire Group I wish you all success and congratulate you warmly on your election to this high office .
Mr President , we know you to be a man of integrity , as Mrs Green and Mr Martens have just said , and as a dedicated man .
I have every confidence that you will in this new office speak for the whole House , for all members irrespective of nationality or group .
When I came to our Group , Mr President , you said & # x02BC ; I am a free man .
I do not think ' , you said , & # x02BC ; that I shall stand for election again .
So I shall be free and independent ' .
These , Mr President , are two of the most important qualities you will bring to your office .
This House needs independence in its President and the strength which goes with it .
Europe needs independence in the President of Parliament and the power of his vision .
Your job , Mr President , is one of the finest political posts one can hold here in Europe .
Because this House and you in particular embody the desire for tolerance and the desire for reconciliation amongst our peoples .
So speak for us to the heads of government so that this desire for reconciliation , for tolerance and cooperation is heard more loudly .
We ask you , Mr President , to speak for our voters who are so often regarded as unimportant at government conferences .
We ask you to voice the concerns of our citizens , 20 million of whom are without work in this Europe of ours .
We ask you to express the hope of our people for one Europe , West and East , a Europe which will resolutely fight the scourges of our time : unemployment , crime , environmental pollution , racism , nationalism .
But , Mr President , above all we ask you to be forceful , not just to carry on with & # x02BC ; business as usual ' , but to be one of the two people who embody Europe in the eyes of the people : you and the president of the Commission are both seen as & # x02BC ; Mr Europe ' .
I am certain that you will be worthy of this office .
I will end , Mr President , with a warning , a warning to my friends and colleagues in the two main groups .
Nearly a third of the members of this House opted in this election for a choice which was on the one hand a protest vote and on the other hand a tribute to Mrs Lalumière 's courage in standing .
Do not forget , ladies and gentlemen , do not forget that the essence of a democracy is not that what the majority says , goes .
The essence of a democracy is how the majority treats minorities and I urge the House to remember that tradition .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is our responsibility to be the voice of democracy on the continent of Europe , and that responsibility must extend to the way in which we conduct our own internal affairs .
Mr President , we put our faith in you , we put our hope in you , we wish you a presidency informed by humour , wisdom and courage .
Mr President , first of all I should like to begin by congratulating you on behalf of all our Group and making a pledge to you to develop the good impetus which already came from the previous president , Mr Hänsch , and which we positively enhanced .
Perhaps , however , my words are of small yet double importance since I am the President of one of the minority groups which listened to the two candidates : the candidate who has been elected President and also the excellent other candidate , Mrs Catherine Lalumière .
We listened to them and we spoke with both candidates and therefore we left freedom of vote to all members of our Group .
This was an especially free vote , a very reflective one , and I think it was a divided vote in our Group ; some of us voted for the candidate who was elected and others voted for Mrs Catherine Lalumière and , given this pluralism , I think that we have some authority to criticize the election system which has already been criticized here today .
It is a model which hugely predetermines the ability to be elected President of the European Parliament .
It is a model of mechanical alternation between the two majority groups of the European Parliament .
It is an interpretation of Rule 17 which we should consider once again , on which we should work once again , in order to guarantee as much as possible that the election of the Presidency of the European Parliament should reflect as far as possible that person 's political ability to represent as far as possible all European citizens .
But I must also say , as President of this Group that , in the end , the members voted in freedom , in a secret ballot , with a responsible vote and that the elected candidate has obtained a majority of votes at the first round .
And the fact that I can speak to you in Spanish and that we come from the same Spanish background I hope will be well seen by my colleagues in the Group who are of various nationalities .
Here we have very much taken into account all of your previous political and professional life , Mr Gil-Robles .
Coming from the Spanish Left I put my faith in this hemicycle of the greatest European representation in the active promise made by Mr Gil-Robles to fight the Franco dictatorship which lasted for forty years .
An active promise both in exile and inside the country .
But this is not enough to be elected President of the European Parliament .
As a member of the European Parliament and Group President , I can give testimony to the work carried out by Mr Gil-Robles as Chairman of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , as Vice-President of the European Parliament , a dimension of his pro-European fight over many years in the European Federal Movement - a critical pro-European at that - which has put this man at the centre of the importance of European construction .
That is why today , briefly - because it is not up to Group Presidents to work out the political projects of the recently elected President or to take his place , since tomorrow he will be delivering his presidential speech - but I should just like to say that our pledge and our congratulations come together with a double plea which I should like to make now : we want him to represent the whole of the European Parliament with the greatest dignity and effectiveness vis-à-vis the other institutions .
It is the moment of the European Parliament in this difficult European construction when we must pay the various socio-economic and political bills in order to achieve harmonisation among the peoples and institutions of Europe .
And finally I should also like him to defend participatory democracy , to bring the European Parliament closer to the citizens , to end propaganda , to end contradictory information so that we can hold up to all of the people of Europe our visions of Europe , in all the countries , and make a pledge to political ideology .
In the knowledge that the recently elected President is not a sectarian politician , I know that he will accept the compromise of the different political groups which think in a different way to him .
We must congratulate him and we shall promise to help him in his task .
Good luck and success to the President , to the European Parliament and to the European Union !
Mr President , as Chairman of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , I too should like to offer my congratulations on your election , and to wish you luck .
I have no doubt that you will be an objective , open-minded and tolerant President , and that you will respect the rights of the minorities in this Parliament .
However , the number of votes cast in my favour - a number far exceeding , as you will agree , the size of my group - must be seen as an expression of discontent , a protest vote . Not a protest against yourself , Mr President , but a protest against a system which , over the years , has become more and more rigid and cumbersome and , it must be said , contrary to the principles of democracy .
I believe this message must be heeded .
It was , after all , the reason for my candidacy .
I knew well enough what the result of the ballot would be , but I believed , and still do , that we should reform the rules - not just the written rules but the practice that has grown up over recent years .
Indeed , listening to other members , Mr Pasty for example , I noticed that this discontent exists even among those who voted for you .
That means that there really is a problem , and I appeal to the sense of justice of the largest groups , and to your own , Mr President , to see to it that we address the reform of this system as soon as possible .
For the present , I wish you every success , for yourself , Mr President , and for the European Parliament , which needs to strengthen its political role on the international stage . I also wish you every success as a representative of the European Union , which needs people to represent its image with authority throughout the world .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate you on your election , on behalf of my colleagues in the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations .
I can promise that there will be loyal support from some sections of the Maastricht opposition , not for the Maastricht II treaty , but for a democratic debate on this amongst all viewpoints here in Parliament and for applying democratic rules to that debate , so that both decentralizers and centralizers , federalists and supporters of parliamentary democracy , can have a fair and open discussion with equal resources for the different viewpoints , and then a democratic decision through referendums in the various countries .
I also promise my support for cleaning up the allowances and travel expenses and for creating democracy and fairness within Parliament itself , including a much-needed reform of the d 'Hondt system , so that the two large groups - the PPE and PSE Groups - can have exactly the quota of chairman and vicechairman posts corresponding to their membership , and so that the quota of posts to which the small groups together are entitled are actually given to the small groups , which can then distribute this amongst themselves .
The procedure of creating such small quotas under the d 'Hondt system that the smaller groups are left with nothing is deeply undemocratic , and I hope that you , with your background of taking part in the campaign against the lack of democracy in Spain , will be the person who can carry through democracy and fair rules in relation to the larger groups .
Today , unfortunately , the fact is that you were not elected simply because of your personal qualities .
I should have liked to be able to congratulate you on being elected on that basis , but the way in which you have been elected is one that we know from a world other than that of popularly elected assemblies .
It is a method familiar to us from the business world , under the term ' holding company ' .
You take the support of the two largest subgroups within the two largest groups , and then with a minority of members you have a decision which is not necessarily in accordance with the wishes of the majority .
The holding company model has no place in an assembly elected by the people , and I would hope that next time we shall have a different , democratic method of election , so that you , for instance , can also be elected in the light of your personal qualities .
Today , the fact is that we would have to leave it to the drawing of lots by the notary public for all Members to have the same chance of being elected to your post .
Welcome to the job of President of Parliament , however .
I see you as the common representative of all of us , and I can promise you the support of my group over the next two and a half years .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to address you as the chairman of my group , which is not recognized as a group because it has too few members , but I should like to tell you how much we appreciate the undertakings you have given to this House .
As many previous speakers have emphasized , however , the large number of votes cast in favour of Mrs Lalumière reflected the deep sense of frustration within this House .
There is no doubt that the complicity that has grown up between the two largest groups , which should naturally be competitors within this House , is a clear cause of concern regarding our perception of the way this institution should function .
And I would remind you that every Member of this House has the same dignity and the same rights , through his electors , and the right to the same consideration as any other Member .
The parliamentary groups are , basically , procedural instruments to facilitate the proper functioning of Parliament , but the large number of non-attached Members are deprived of their right to express the views of their constituents .
That is why , despite the respect we have for you personally , we felt it important to demonstrate our opposition to this method by voting for Mrs Lalumière , inspired by the same principles to which she herself referred in connection with her candidacy .
Unfortunately , any hope we might have of more democratic conditions founders on what we hear of the representation on Parliament 's delegations and committees .
Let me give you one simple example .
We have in our group a former head of faculty , a Professor of Japanese Civilization and Language .
He was a member of the delegation for relations with Japan .
He has just been removed from it .
That seems to me a poor testimony to correct procedure and democratic intent .
However , Mr President , we congratulate you on your election , because it is a traditional courtesy , and we hope that you will show the same consideration for all Members of this Parliament , whatever their nationality and whatever the political opinion they express .
It is no secret that we are opponents of a federal Europe and defenders of a confederal Europe .
We believe that we must be free to express that opinion here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission and on my own personal behalf I too should like to offer you my very sincere congratulations on your election as President of the European Parliament .
You are taking over from Klaus Hänsch , a great president , and I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt and sincere tribute to him for his effective , efficient , determined and courageous presidency .
Mr President , you have been elected to your high office at a time when the European Union is confronted by many challenges .
Your mandate will take you through to the next European elections , in 1999 , when all Europe 's citizens will be called upon to elect their representatives .
A Europe that is close to the citizen - that is our ambition and our desire .
And I have no doubt that , with the impetus you provide , Europe 's citizens will be able to identify with this institution , which must be at the heart of the European democratic structure .
As you carry out your duties , Mr President , you will always be able to rely on the faithful , loyal and direct support , assistance and cooperation of the members and President of the Commission .
Mr President , in view of some of the speeches we have heard here this morning I feel it is important to rise again because people listening in the gallery and the media have heard some very strange interpretations of representative democracy here this morning .
I must say to you that through their acceptance of the use of the d 'Hondt system and other concessions they voluntarily make to the smaller groups in this House , the two big groups of this House are ...
( Heckling ) We will wait for the barracking to stop .
Ladies and gentlemen , I respect your opinion . So please show the same respect for others .
Please continue , Mrs Green .
The two large groups in this House already make considerable concessions to the smaller groups .
I was disappointed that in the speeches by the other group leaders there was no recognition of that fact , after all the discussions we have gone through in the last few weeks .
I would say as well that in any parliamentary democracy it is the majority in the House that determines who should hold the presidency .
That is what has prevailed here today .
I would like to conclude by saying to Mr Pasty in particular that when he gave the figures , which were quite misleading , he obviously had not looked at the nominations that have come forward , particularly from my group , because he would have noticed that of the three places for quaestor which we hold we have ceded one to a smaller group in this House and will be supporting a candidate from the GUE .
I will tell you as well that when you talk of small delegations , my group is nominating a Member from a four-person Finnish delegation in my group as a quaestor of this House .
So when he says smaller delegations inside the big groups are being denied their rights , he is quite wrong .
I would say to you , colleagues , that we are nominating a Finn as well as another Member for a quaestorship in this House .
I assume from what Mr Pasty has said in support of small delegations that he and his group will support our Finn for quaestorship .
( Applause )
Mr Martens , there is no question of holding a debate on this .
I shall just give you the floor for one minute , given the allusions that you have been making .
I did not realize it was intended to hold a discussion here on the fundamental rules which apply in this Parliament and which are not those of dictatorship by the majority groups , certainly not .
We do not operate a & # x02BC ; winner takes all ' system ; our system is that the various groups are fairly represented in the share-out of responsibilities and the vote we are about to have on Parliament 's vice-presidents proves that , since the various groups have all agreed that candidates from smaller groups should also have a chance .
So it would not , I think , be appropriate to abandon this principle , this system of giving a seat to the smaller groups and smaller delegations within the groups .
We have always said that we are amenable to amendments of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , but I would emphasize that here in this multicultural Parliament which has members from 15 Member States we apply a system which is fair and which , compared to other systems , is thus in my view the best method for this Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us not go on with this matter .
It is traditional for this set of speeches to be used to congratulate the President-elect in a courteous way .
Of course this President-elect could not cut off the expressions of those who find fault with the way in which he was elected , and nor has he done so .
But we cannot drift away from the agenda which now obliges us to proceed to the election of the Vice-Presidents .
I therefore wind up this debate and , if you all agree , proceed to the election of the Vice-Presidents .
Election of the Vice-Presidents
The next item is the election of the Vice-Presidents .
The following nominations have been received :








Mr Anastassopoulos Mr Avgerinos Mr Capucho Mrs Fontaine Mr Gutiérrez Díaz Mr Haarder Mrs Hoff Mr Imbeni Mr Marinho Mr Martin Mrs Péry Mr Podestà Mrs Schleicher Mr Verde i Aldea

The candidates have informed me that they agree to stand .
( The vote took place ) We shall now scrutinize the vote .
The results of the count will be announced this afternoon at 3 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , I should like to congratulate you on your election .
On a point of order , can you ensure that the ballot boxes are opened simultaneously rather than some being opened before others ?
This issue caused some problems today between myself and some members of staff , and I do not want a repeat of this .
Thank you very much , Mr Falconer .
You are quite right and I thank you for drawing our attention to this matter .
I should like to ask the five elections officers , each of whom is responsible for one ballot box , to make sure that they are not opened until the President says that the voting is open and that they should be opened simultaneously .
Before I open the vote I should remind you that if seven Vice-Presidents are not elected in the second round we shall obviously have to have a third round . We set out with a view that we maintain these candidacies for the remaining posts .
However , if there were any change I would communicate it to you by the deadline for submitting nominations , which is at 4.45 p.m.
As for the election of Quaestors , I propose that we set the deadline for nominations at 4 p.m. today .
Is there any objection ?
There is no objection , so this is agreed .
( The vote took place ) May I ask the election officers to go to Room 3 on the second floor to count the votes .
( The sitting was suspended at 3.25 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Mr President , I rise under Rule 13 ( 3 ) which says : ' In the election of the President , Vice-Presidents and Quaestors , account should be taken of the need to ensure an overall fair representation of Member States and political views ' .
The way we are going we will have no representation in the Bureau of the Netherlands , Ireland , Belgium , Luxembourg , Sweden or Austria .
I would urge all Members of the House to ask themselves if that is a sensible way to conduct democracy in Europe ?
It is not good enough !
Ladies and gentlemen , obviously all members of the European Parliament know Rule 13 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
It demands that each and every Member State be represented in the running of this Assembly .
However , it is a general principle that we practise this by a method adopted by the majority of the Assembly , i.e. according to a democratically approved rule .
Before continuing , I should like to ask you whether anyone opposes the use of electronic voting .
It appears not .


However , we now have three candidates - Mr Capucho , Mr Haarder and Mr Podestà - and we shall vote in this order .
In accordance with Rule 121 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , only the votes in favour will be counted , i.e. the votes made with the left hand button .
I ask the election officers to come to the rostrum to oversee the vote .
Mr President , If I understood you correctly when you were talking about the electronic voting , you said that we can only vote in favour .
Surely in a democratic society you can at least abstain ?
Mr Miller , thank you for your words .
Obviously , all Members of the Parliament can use any of the three buttons they wish .
What I meant was that we simply need a relative majority which means we shall only take account of votes cast for , since we do not need to take any account of the others .
If I was misunderstood I am very pleased to make things clearer : you can vote with any of the three buttons you like .
Only the votes ' for ' will be counted and may I remind you all that all we are doing is establishing an order of vote .
I also remind you that if the political groups had been able to reach an agreement on that order it would not now be necessary for us to vote , since there are no more candidates than the existing number of posts . In other words , everyone ...
Is it possible for one of the candidates to have more votes against than votes in favour ?
For in that case he or she would , of course , not be elected , because more votes against than votes in favour do not constitute a relative majority .
Mr Wolf , please take a closer look at the Rules of Procedure .
All we are doing is establishing an order of precedence among the candidates .
However , the number of relative votes is completely irrelevant .
If we had a secret ballot and one candidate had three votes , another had two and the third one vote , they would still be elected .
The aim of this vote is simply and exclusively to determine the order of precedence .
Of course , if any of you oppose this , perhaps you would have the courage to get up and say ' I oppose this ' , which means that we would automatically hold a vote by secret ballot .
But since no-one has opposed this , I am now going to stop wasting the Assembly 's time and call for an electronic vote .
Mr President , this is not the first time this has happened , but it seems to suggest a rather curious practice that we have adopted .
What it would seem to me you are suggesting is that as long as all the candidates can get one vote , which means they can vote for themselves , they are bound to be elected .
Of course they have been put forward by political groups , but surely it cannot be an acceptable situation that somebody can be elected vice-president when a majority of people in Parliament do not wish them to be elected .
Although I doubt we can do anything more now - and I am sure you are strictly following the Rules - I think that we need to look at this practice again for the future .
I shall be very pleased , Mr Elliott , to consult the Committee on the Rules of Procedure and put to them the proposal that you have made about whether the system should be changed .
Mr President , I cannot recall any time in the past twelve-and-a-half years that I have been here that we have used this method for sorting out this particular problem .
I cannot recall it .
That is the first point I would like to make .
The second point I would like to make is this : on the last occasion this occurred , which was the last time we voted in this Chamber for the election of President and Vice-Presidents , we had to go for an exhaustive ballot .
Therefore I see no reason why we should not go for an exhaustive ballot on this occasion . Consequently , I object to the very principle that you are proposing to the House .
Mr President , I think that under Rule 13 the ballot you just held is not admissible because you influenced the vote .
If we hold a third ballot , we can do so electronically , as we decided .
That is correct .
That is what we decided .
But in the meantime you keep announcing the results of the ballots .
That means that after the results of the first ballot you indirectly influenced the second one .
In a secret ballot - which is what the first and also the second ballots were - all the candidates are elected at the same time and then you announce the results at the end .
So this was not a secret ballot , even if it was electronic .
I think this is a kind of manipulation we cannot accept !
( Applause , mixed reactions )
Mr Telkämper , your remark will be taken into account and conveyed to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
I never claimed to have the last word .
I have tried to facilitate the expression of this Assembly 's will in terms of the order of precedence of the three Vice-Presidents but of course the President 's interpretation can always be reviewed by the Committee on Rules of Procedure and so that decision will be conveyed in due time .
Ladies and gentlemen , I disagree entirely with Mr Telkämper 's observation that you tried to ' manipulate ' the vote .
That is not correct . The vote was taken by secret ballot .
Of course , this is an unprecedented experience and it would be good in such cases if the results were announced at the end . But the vote was of course taken in secret , and there was no ill intent on your part .
Mr President , I believe you are quite right to refer a number of matters arising in connection with this vote to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
I should like to add another to that number . There is evidence that the election procedure , both for the President and for the Vice-Presidents , is not sufficiently democratic .
The voting papers used for your own election , Mr President , the election of the President of this Parliament , were not the same as those used for the election of the Vice-Presidents .
I ask you to conduct an inquiry to find an explanation for the existence of these different voting papers and the way in which they were distributed , and to refer this matter also to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you are talking about two different things .
On one hand , you are referring to what has been said by the presidency and I am not going to insist on that .
Secondly if there were different types of ballot papers I should ask you if you would provide the administration with data and the necessary proof since this is a very serious accusation which has to be backed up with very concrete proof .
If you can do so then an investigation will be held .
Election of Quaestors
The next item is the election of the Quaestors of the European Parliament .
The following nominations have been received :


Mr Balfe Mr Bardong Mr Killilea Mr Paasio Mr Ribeiro Mr Viola



The candidates have told me that they have agreed to stand .
Since the number of candidates exceeds the number of posts to be filled , there will be a secret ballot .
I remind Members that according to Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure the number of Quaestors shall be five .
The members of the European Parliament have a maximum of five votes .
Any ballot papers containing more than five votes will be declared null .
The election officers will be the same as for the previous elections , and I ask them to stand by the ballot boxes .
( The vote took place )
Address by the President
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sittings of Friday , 13 December 1996 , Monday , 13 January and Tuesday , 14 January 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , in the Minutes of the sitting of 13 January , my name does not appear on the attendance register - no doubt through some error of my own .
Thank you , Mr Colom i Naval .
That will be corrected .
Mr President , the Minutes of 13 January state that I have been appointed as a Member of the European Parliament .
In fact , I was elected .
In the United Kingdom , even when a vacancy occurs mid-term in the European Parliament , we do not take the next Member on a party list ; we have a by-election .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
I am sure that your remark will be taken into account by the Intergovernmental Conference , if it decides to address the issue - which affects us so profoundly - of establishing a uniform electoral procedure .
Mr President , on page 9 of the Minutes it says that Mr Falconer said that an election had never been held .
It should read ' these elections ' because I was referring to the Vice-Presidential elections .
Secondly , the Minutes do not record that I objected to the procedure , as you requested , and you then ignored that objection .
Thank you , Mr Falconer .
That will be noted .
The only thing that I would say is that you did not express your objection when I asked if there were any objections - although I did notice your protest later .
Mr President , the Minutes of Monday do not include my name in the attendance register , but I was present .
That has been noted , Mr Herman .
Incidentally , I assume you also voted , so that should appear in the Minutes too .
Mr President , can I remind you that in December a Member of this House was seen to have - and indeed admitted to this House that he had - voted twice in one of the votes , using the card of another Member of this House .
You will know that , after discussion in this House , that issue , which is a serious breach of conduct , was referred to the Bureau of Parliament .
I ask you , please , to report on what the Bureau of this Parliament decided to do about that gross breach of conduct in this House .
Mr President , on a point of order .
This decision of the Bureau raises several issues .
Firstly , it seems to me , in the light of the Bureau 's interpretation of these actions , that it is clear that the President in the Chair at the time acted incorrectly in interpreting the Rules , because what should have happened for a gross breach of conduct was that the Member should have been excluded from the House at that moment .
As a result of referring it back to the Bureau , and the Bureau then saying that it cannot act retroactively , it is clear that exclusion is impossible because of an incorrect interpretation by the President in the Chair at the time .
That is very much to be regretted and , from my group 's point of view , no matter where in this House a Member who cheats in this way sits - whether it be on the left or on the right - in future my group will be asking for immediate exclusion of that Member at the time that the incident occurs .
Nothing else will satisfy us .
Secondly , I would ask you to confirm that the letter was sent to the Member concerned and to read to this House that letter so that everyone is aware of exactly what has been said on behalf of this Parliament to a Member who engaged in a breach of conduct in this House .
Mr President , I would stress that the Bureau of Parliament is obviously competent in this matter .
At the instigation of Mrs Green , you have announced the Bureau 's conclusions .
Moreover , you have informed the House of the content of the letter sent to Mr Pasty .
I think that reading out that letter , in other words the two paragraphs which we have heard , means that the reprimanding of the Member in question has been made public , which is of course in itself a form of disciplinary action .
Mr President , we all know that interpreting the Rules of Procedure is always an issue that stimulates great debate .
That often happens in the Bureau as well . We had a very prolonged discussion on this subject .
I cannot accept Mrs Pauline Green 's comment . She knows how much I esteem her , but in this instance I disagree with her .
I think an elementary regard for the truth demands that we must acknowledge that Mrs Nicole Fontaine did not misinterpret the Rules of Procedure .
The Rules gave her the option to impose the penalty of exclusion , leaving it to her discretion .
The Rules of Procedure say that the President may .
He or she ' may ' , Mrs Green , but it is not obligatory .
The President on that day , during a very difficult sitting , when we were all very tired , and after discussion with the House , deemed that the matter should be referred back to the Bureau .
I do not think she interpreted the Rules incorrectly , she was not obliged to exclude Mr Pasty and I do not think we ought to create the impression that Mrs Fontaine acted wrongly .
She judged as she saw fit so that the day in question could end , and the issue then came to the Bureau and we considered it , Mrs Green .
I cannot agree with you , you are mistaken there .
Look at the Rules of Procedure , where it says may , but without obligation .
From then on , if you look at the Rules again , you will see : we debated at length , Mr Kerr is at your side , and we reached our conclusions and the President wrote Mr Pasty the letter , because the time had passed for us to talk about applying the Rule on exclusion .
This is a delicate and difficult matter which concerns the reputation of a Member of the House and that of this House as a whole .
We shall hear the five Members who have asked to speak .
Mrs Green has asked me for the floor again afterwards .
Before giving it to her , I shall set out the presidency 's interpretation of this matter .
Mrs Malone , one thing should be made quite clear : once the result of a vote has been announced by the President , it cannot be modified .
In this case , moreover , Parliament 's services have established that the outcome of the vote would have been the same , whether or not this vote was incorrectly cast .
The result would have changed by one vote , but the outcome would have been the same .
I should therefore be grateful if Members would not persist with this issue .
The decision was made , and no one questioned the validity of the vote at the time .
Consequently , the result of the vote announced by Mrs Fontaine stands .
Mr President , as regards the result of the vote , I should very much like you to announce the result to the House here once again .
If my information is correct , this was a very controversial amendment which was adopted by just one vote , in other words that of Mrs Baldi , who was not in the Chamber . This means that if that vote had not been cast , the amendment would not have been adopted , because it would not have obtained a majority .
That does of course make matters even worse .
It was a very controversial amendment .
I completely fail to understand why further sanctions have not been taken against Mr Pasty in order to prevent this kind of development in future .
I should be grateful if you would announce the result of the vote here again , loud and clear , so that we all know if you are actually in the right .
It was a roll-call vote , so that is possible .
Mrs van Dijk , I would ask you to take account of what I have just said .
I pointed out , firstly , that Parliament 's services have established that the act in question did not affect the outcome of the vote .
I also made it clear that , under Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , once the result of a vote has been announced , it cannot be changed .
I would also ask you to bear in mind the fact that no objections were made concerning this vote when the Minutes were submitted for approval on the following day .
Mr President , I do not gladly intervene in this kind of discussion , but this is a serious matter where the reputation of Parliament is at stake .
I was not present at the vote in question , so I do not wish to comment on what took place on the Thursday of the last part-session .
I wish to comment on the Rules of Procedure .
Neither Rule 117 nor Rule 110 makes any mention of the Bureau .
So all the references in this discussion to the Bureau are not in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
The Rules only mention the President .
My question is thus a direct one to you , Mr President .
Rule 110 states that in cases such as this , the President may , after giving formal notice , move that Parliament pass a vote of censure against the Member concerned .
Can I interpret your comments , Mr President , as meaning that you have just given formal notice to the Member concerned , pursuant to Rule 110 , and that you have thereby taken your responsibility under the Rules ?
I should be grateful for some clarification from you on this point .
Before giving the floor to Mrs Fontaine , I shall answer the question which Mr de Vries put to me directly .
I shall refer to Rule 110 , since Rule 117 specifically states that any infringement of Rule 117 shall be dealt with in accordance with Rule 110 .
Rule 110 states that : ' In serious cases of disorder , the President may - may , in other words , it is left to the discretion of the President of the sitting - after giving formal notice , move , either immediately or no later than the next sitting - it has to be on the same day or the following day , therefore - that Parliament pass a vote of censure which shall automatically involve immediate exclusion from the Chamber and suspension for two to five days ' .
It is clear , therefore , that the President of the sitting is required to exercise his or her powers in accordance with the seriousness of the incident .
I recall - since I was present at the sitting in question - that someone in the Chamber expressed the view that the matter should be referred to the Rules Committee , but that no one called at the time for the exclusion of the Member concerned , and that it was thought to be sufficient to refer the matter to the Bureau .
Perhaps the House did not remember that there is a deadline , but it is my understanding - and this is the prerogative of the President or the Rules Committee - that once those two days have passed , it is not possible , according to the Rules , to take the disciplinary action provided for by Rule 110 .
And my interpretation coincides with that which former President Hänsch asked to be minuted .
Our interpretations are therefore in agreement .
Nevertheless , I give an undertaking that the Minutes of today 's sitting will be sent to the Rules Committee , so that it can examine this interpretation , if it thinks fit .
As things stand , however , both Mr Hänsch and I take the view that Rule 110 establishes a clear deadline .
Moreover , I would remind the House that , pursuant to Rule 110 ( 2 ) , ' Parliament shall decide whether to take such disciplinary action at a time to be decided by the President , which shall be either at the sitting during which the events in question occurred or at one of the three following sittings ' .
Naturally , however , the disciplinary action has to be proposed on the same day or the following day .
Consequently , neither the Bureau nor Mr Hänsch , in application of their powers , was able to take disciplinary action in this case .
I would repeat that , if the feeling is that this situation should be changed , it will be changed by the appropriate means , which is via the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Hence the Bureau considered - and I have read out the minutes of its meeting - that Mr Hänsch , in application of his powers to ensure order in the Chamber , was fully authorized to send a letter to the Member concerned .
You are asking me to read out that letter .
I would make the point that if I read out Mr Hänsch 's letter , then I must also read out Mr Pasty 's reply , and for a very clear reason : anyone who is facing an accusation has the right to be heard , and naturally the Rules provide for such an opportunity for self-defence .
In these circumstances , and in view of the fact that the Rules do not specify whether or not the letters should be read out , I shall leave that decision to the House .
Mr President , I indicated clearly at the beginning that I wanted to speak .
I want to make two important points .
As far as Rule 110 is concerned , it is absolutely clear what the situation is .
They are Rules that we have discussed over a long period of time and the question is really the interpretation of the Bureau as to what constitutes ' the next sitting ' .
The next sitting is , in fact , today - the first occasion when we can deal with the matter .
It is very clear in the Rules that Parliament decides .
We all know that ' one person , one vote ' is absolutely central to the work of this Parliament and I have to say to you , Mr President - and I hope you will listen very carefully - that you are the fifth president of the European Parliament that I have raised this issue with .
For twelve years there has been a practice in this Parliament , which some people jokingly describe as ' playing the piano ' .
This is the first time there has been an investigation carried out by the presidency which has identified a Member who eventually - reluctantly - admitted guilt .
The other important point is that , at a great deal of public expense , this European Parliament sends representatives as international observers all over the world - to Africa and to Eastern Europe , for example .
Only a week ago I , as the representative of the Socialist Group , Mr Stasi of the Group of the European People 's Party and Mrs André-Léonard of the Liberal Group , returned from the first multi-party legislative elections in Chad .
Our main concern as observers was to make sure that there was no cheating and no one taking part in those elections voting more than once .
Unless we are capable of implementing our own Rules , some of us in the European Parliament will call upon the international community , including the Joint Assembly of the Lomé Convention , to investigate the democratic practices in this Chamber itself .
Thank you , Mr McGowan .
I now put to the House my proposal to read out the letters in question .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal ) I shall therefore read out the letters .
Mr President , I am delighted you are going to read the letter .
May I say that I believe that if you were to read an exchange of letters , that would be entirely inappropriate .
We are asking you , as President of this House , to read a letter that was sent by the President of this House to a Member .
If there is to be an exchange with you by that Member , that is something entirely different .
We want to hear the letter the President sent as a result of an incident in this plenary .
The Bureau can then deal with the consequences .
Mr President , I have no intention of prolonging this debate , but having been in the chair at the time and had the very difficult task of dealing with this matter , I feel I owe Members a word or two of explanation .
It was , I recall , during the last sitting of December , immediately before the Christmas recess , that this incident occurred .
A number of Members asked for a check to be carried out , which I immediately did , with the results of which you know .
As Mr Anastassopoulos has rightly said , the wording of Rule 110 is extremely clear .
The President may exclude a Member . That is clearly stated , and I believe that the word ' may ' and its equivalents in all the other languages mean the same .
I felt , for reasons which may well be open to question , that no purpose would be served by excluding the Member concerned immediately .
And , Mr de Vries , I would simply remind you that Rule 22 ( 3 ) stipulates that ' the Bureau shall consider decisions relating to the conduct of sittings ' .
That is why I felt I should act on the suggestion , made - if I remember rightly , and the Minutes will bear me out - by Mr Tomlinson , that the matter should be referred to the Bureau .
This was a very sensible suggestion in such a difficult situation .
I therefore asked that the matter be referred to the Bureau immediately .
As is apparent , swift action was taken , because the meeting of the Bureau that immediately followed - the last chaired by Klaus Hänsch as President - considered the matter , with the result you know .
Let me immediately reassure Mrs van Dijk : we did of course take steps to determine whether the outcome of the vote in question , on Amendment No 13 to Mrs Zimmermann 's report , would have been different .
I am very happy to say that it would not .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is what I wanted to say about this matter .
Mr President , I should like to make it absolutely clear that I do not challenge the action or the decision made by Mrs Fontaine in the Chair .
I may disagree with her interpretation but I do not challenge that she acted according to the Rules and I recognize Mr Anastassopoulos ' heroic defence of his colleague in the Bureau .
I have no challenge to Mrs Fontaine even though I may disagree with her interpretation .
However , I am appalled at the letter from Mr Pasty which you read .
Let us be clear that what happened in this House was seen by many Members of this House .
It is not something which took place in a private room where there could be different interpretations of what happened .
No one can vote in his own place and in someone else 's and do it accidentally !
This is completely unacceptable , Mr President .
There has been a clear breach of the Rules .
If we had had from the Member concerned - whom , as you will have noticed , I did not name in my opening remarks - a clear apology to this House following the letter from President Hänsch , we could have closed the incident .
But I have to ask you now what you are doing as President of this House to deal with an attack on the presidency of this House by an individual Member seen to cheat in the voting in this House .
Your integrity as President and our integrity as Members are at stake .
Mrs Green , I proposed to the House - and the House approved my proposal - to read out Mr Pasty 's letter as well , just as any letter of self-defence would be read out .
And under no circumstances can this right to self-defence be restricted .
However , the fact that I read out his letter does not mean that I accept or endorse what he said in his own defence .
I have already made it quite clear what the Bureau 's decisions were - which fully endorse former President Hänsch 's action - and I therefore have no need to reiterate what the Bureau said at the time .
This is clearly a delicate matter .
The fact that , instead of taking a decision , the President of the sitting preferred to refer the matter to the Bureau , has raised the question - and is raising the question again today - of which is the responsible body and what is the appropriate procedure for resolving such matters .
The responsible body is the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
I shall therefore refer this matter to the Rules Committee , so that in the light of this case , for which there is no precedent , it can refine the relevant provisions of the Rules , if it considers that appropriate .
For the present , nothing more can be done , and this matter is now closed .
Mr Martens , I shall give you the floor , but I would ask you not to reopen this matter .
I should like to make two very brief points .
I was present in the Chamber at the time of the incident , and it is correct that Mr Tomlinson proposed that the matter be referred to the Bureau .
Mrs Fontaine did that with the agreement of the House .
Secondly , your decision to refer the matter now to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure is the right one , in my view .
Thank you , Mr Martens .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , for the past half an hour I have been asking to speak on the Rules of Procedure , but you have repeatedly given the floor to Mrs Green , who has taken up half an hour by talking about her own affairs .
Now I too wish to refer to the Rules , since I too am a Member of this House .
Even those of us who sit on the right are entitled to speak !
Mrs Muscardini , this matter is closed .
We are not going to reopen it with any more speeches .
Mr President , I am referring to the official seated on your right , who perhaps has no eyes to see this area of the Chamber , but who has looked at me five or six times .
I am asking to be allowed to speak in this House like everyone else . Otherwise we shall remain in the Chamber and not move from it !
Mrs Muscardini , I gave the floor to everyone who asked to speak the first time round .
Mr President , I do not wish to speak on the discussion . I wish to speak on the Rules of Procedure , not the discussion !
Mrs Muscardini , the officials advise the President , who conducts the sitting in the way he thinks most appropriate .
Of course , he may make mistakes , but he does try to move forward with the agenda .
Election of Quaestors ( continuation )
We now come to the results of the second ballot for the election of Quaestors :
Members voting : 449 Blank or void : 13 Votes cast : 436 Absolute majority : 219
The results are as follows :
Mr Bardong : 225 votes Mr Killilea : 182 votes Mr Paasio : 216 votes Mr Viola : 171 votes
Mr Bardong has thus obtained an absolute majority of the votes cast , and I congratulate him on his election .
Two seats remain to be filled .
It is therefore necessary to hold a third ballot .
I would remind the House that , in the third ballot , a relative majority is sufficient for election to the seats that remain to be filled .
The ballot papers and envelopes have been distributed .
Since there are now only two seats to be filled , Members may not indicate more than two names .
In the event of a tie , the eldest candidates will be declared elected .
( The vote was taken ) I would ask the tellers to go to Room 3 on the second floor to count the votes .
Dublin European Council - Irish presidency - WTO Conference
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by the Council and the statement by the Commission on the meeting of the European Council of 1314 December 1996 in Dublin ; -the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the six months of the Irish presidency , including the outcome of the Conference of the World Trade Organization in Singapore ( 9-13 December 1996 ) .I give the floor to Mr Bruton , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , at the outset I would like to congratulate you on your election and also pay tribute to Mr Hänsch for his excellent work when he held the office that you have now assumed .
The Irish presidency of the European Union , which has just concluded , was characterized by very close cooperation with Parliament .
There were about 40 separate meetings between Irish Ministers representing the presidency and various committees of Parliament .
I think it is fair to say that the Irish presidency proved to be a success .
If that is so , I believe it is so because we , in the presidency , listened closely to what Parliament was saying and tried to the best of our ability to translate the democratic mandate that you represent into concrete action at Council level .
We also were very anxious to ensure during our presidency that the citizens of Europe could actually understand the work we were doing and would identify with it ; that they would say to themselves : this means something to us .
That is why , at the very outset of the presidency we took four phrases that would summarize in very understandable language what we were trying to do .
These were : secure jobs in Europe , safer streets in Europe , sound money in the pockets and purses of Europeans and peace for Europe , between Europe and its neighbours , and amongst its neighbours .
I am glad to say that we made progress during the six months on each of those four themes which are themes that everybody in Europe can understand as meaning something to them and their lives .
My report to Parliament here today will refer back to those four themes .
First of all , on the theme of sound money , it is fair to say that we made substantial progress at the Dublin Summit on the preparations for economic and monetary union .
In particular , the agreement on the Stability and Growth Pact , the agreement on the new Exchange Rate Mechanism and on the legal status of the Euro , which were concluded at the end of the Irish presidency were a major step towards sound money in the pockets and purses of Europeans .
I would particularly like to pay tribute to my colleague , Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker , of Luxembourg , for his contribution at the meeting in Dublin to what we achieved .
On the question of safer streets in Europe , we were particularly successful .
Here we were dealing with a problem which is very much in the minds of Europeans : the safety that they experience , or do not experience , when they leave their homes , or even within their homes , from organized crime .
We all know that there is an increase in the level of violent crime .
There is perhaps not an increase in the absolute level of reported offences , but we have seen an increasing degree of violence associated with such offences as are committed .
A lot of this violent crime is associated with an increased traffic in illicit drugs .
I am glad to say that during the Irish presidency we achieved substantial movement forward in making the streets , and indeed the rural areas , of Europe safer for our citizens .
We agreed a resolution on serious illicit drug trafficking .
We agreed a joint action on the approximation of laws and practices of police , customs services and administrative authorities in the fight against drug addiction and illegal drug trafficking .
We agreed a five-year programme to assist people who are drug-dependent at the moment to reduce their dependency and to reduce the incidence of drug dependency , and we agreed a programme of closer cooperation between our customs authorities and business in the fight against drugs so that the border-free Europe that we have created will not be something that can be easily exploited by those engaged in crime .
Furthermore , we took a very important decision in Dublin when we agreed to commission a major report on organized crime , which the Dutch presidency will receive in April this year .
The other important objective is that of secure jobs for Europeans .
In a real sense that represents the biggest challenge of all .
If people are dependent on drugs and as a result of being dependent on drugs create a market for criminals , in many cases that is because they have no other way of making their life tolerable .
They have no employment , no hope , no sense of dignity , no sense that their lives mean anything , and in an attempt to blot all that out , they turn to narcotics .
If you look , for example , at the use of heroin in Dublin , the city I am most familiar with , there is a very close correlation between the level of long-term unemployment in a particular and closely identifiable geographical area , and the level of heroin abuse .
Heroin abuse is confined to areas of long-term unemployment .
Soft drugs - other drugs - are to be found everywhere , but heroin directly relates closely to longterm unemployment .
That shows that there is a link between the problem of unemployment and many of the other problems we encounter as a society .
We adopted the Dublin Declaration on Employment .
That declaration recognizes that at the end of the day the primary responsibility for the creation of employment rests , in the first place , with national governments , but in practice , with the market economy .
It rests with firms and individuals , either improving their own training capacity so that they become more employable or , if they are firms , expanding their markets so that they need more people working for them .
It is an illusion to pretend that political institutions can solve the employment problem .
They cannot , whether they be national institutions or European institutions .
We should not raise expectations that bear no accord with reality .
There is a risk with declarations about employment .
We are engaged in a process of self-delusion if we believe that by adopting declarations or even spending large sums of money , we , as politicians , are going to solve the employment problem .
We are not .
We may improve the framework , we may improve the setting in which people will make the decisions that will create the jobs .
But it is on the shoulders of people themselves that the big responsibility lies .
In my view , the most important action we can take as far as employment is concerned is in the area of education and retraining .
I believe that is the biggest challenge for the European Union .
Education is an area where traditionally the European Union has stood back and regarded that as , firstly , a national responsibility .
We have , on the other hand , been very involved in the area of training .
But is there really a clear distinction in the modern world between training and education ?
Is not all training educational and , in a sense , does not all education have a training dimension ?
In a sense perhaps , if we are to talk in a profound way about making Europeans more employable , we have to talk about improving their skills , their education and their attitudes of mind .
Increasingly in a modern world that is governed by information technology and advances in science it is not one 's ability to do something that determines how employable one is . It is one 's ability to think , to communicate , to arrange facts in a particular configuration and to process information .
That is what determines one 's employability .
That capacity is not something that you train people to have , it is something that you educate people to have - educating people , if you like , to find the strength that is already within them ; educating them to realize that most of us only achieve 10 % of our potential and encouraging them to discover the remaining 90 % .
That is the challenge of employment in Europe : encouraging Europeans to have more confidence in their own ability .
That is the profound challenge as far as employment is concerned .
While I share the disappointment in Parliament that we have not provided funds for the TENs , let us not pretend that it is the crucial issue as far as employment is concerned : it is not !
It is at the level of education and training that the problem of employment for Europeans - the employability of Europeans - into the 21st century will be determined .
I wish to refer , finally , to the fourth priority I mentioned , which was a peaceful Europe and peace between Europe and its neighbours and around Europe .
It is fair to say that during the Irish presidency Europe became more recognized as a player in the Middle East peace process , as a result of the first Dublin Summit .
I am glad that , perhaps in part as a result of Europe 's involvement , we have now at last reached the point where this morning an agreement on Hebron was initialled between Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat .
We have also seen a qualitative improvement in our relationship with the United States during the Irish presidency .
The action taken by the President of the United States in regard to suspension of the operation of Title 3 of the Helms-Burton act can be directly traced to the success of the pre-Christmas Summit between the European Union and the United States .
We are handing the presidency on to the Netherlands , one of the founding members of the European Union .
I am very confident that it will do an excellent job - and it is already doing so .
It is very important that we should do everything possible to ensure that the Treaty is concluded in Amsterdam .
If it is not concluded in Amsterdam on time as planned , the whole process of enlargement will be postponed and all the strategic considerations flowing from it will be left unaddressed .
Everybody is aware that the timing of elections in different countries has a bearing on decision-making .
But if decisions have to be made - and they do have to be made - it is probably better to make them in a month than it is to take four months to make them .
I do not believe that there is any great case for prolonging the agony .
We know that some of the decisions on the table will be unpleasant for all of us - not the same ones for each country , of course .
We might as well do the job in Amsterdam as postpone it , and I hope that is what happens .
I wish to conclude my few remarks here by saying that Europe , as I see it , has been looking inward for the last three or four years : we have been looking inward at the project of a single currency , the project of a new Treaty , the project of the single internal market .
Our thinking is very introspective - and necessarily so - because unless we get things in order internally we shall not be able to take external action .
But I hope that the next phase of Europe 's development will be more outward-looking once we have got this business out of the way .
There are major philosophical , cultural and ethical challenges facing the world in respect of which Europe can , and should , be a major player .
If I were to state the major challenge currently facing European politicians it is not the question of what instruments we find to deal with the problems of the single currency , or what the precise relationship is between Parliament and the Commission or between the Council and Parliament .
Those sorts of issues are important to all of us here , but perhaps they are not very important to our citizens .
What is important is : do our citizens understand the philosophical , ethical and cultural project in which we are engaged for the 21st century ?
Do we understand the ethical issue that is posed for us by the huge increase in population in Africa , the problem of poor people surrounding this increasingly small island of privilege which is Europe ?
Do we understand , and have we a means of coping with , the ethical questions that arise in regard to the way in which we are using up so much of the resources of the world ?
If we do a demographic projection forward 50 years , we know we cannot continue doing so or allowing other countries to do so .
There is , if you like , a demographic and an environmental time bomb which we need to defuse and we need to have a sense of understanding that enables us to do that .
Through technology we have created a global market : money can now move within seconds from one part of the world to the other .
But , as all of us know , markets are not based on rules alone , they are based on a shared ethic .
Unless there is a shared cultural understanding of the basis of business , no business will be possible in the long term .
Do we have a global ethic ?
Do we understand the ethics of business on a world-wide scale , or is the global marketplace that we have created going to be an area empty of ethical principles where people simply exploit one another without any concern for the consequences ?
Do we understand this , as we inevitably rush towards ever higher incomes for people who are at the very top of the scale in terms of their capacity to exploit this global marketplace ?
Do we understand that this means that there are still a large number of people who are completely left behind ?
Is it not the case that , in a sense , globalization is adding to income inequality in Europe ?
And what is that doing to the solidarity that is so necessary for Europeans to feel a sense of identity , a sense of citizenship ?
Has the underlying sense of what we are caught up with the global reality ?
Each of us has a sense , if you scratch us hard enough , of what we are : Irish patriots , French patriots , British patriots , Scottish patriots or whatever .
Is that sense of what we are - this very nationallycentred sense of what we are - really a relevant form of definition for a world which is now global , where people of one ethnic group can move physically within 24 hours and , in terms of their transactions , within a millisecond , from one culture to another ?
This form of self-definition , this cultural identity that we retain from pre-war years , is not actually adequate to the world we have created in the global marketplace .
Once the IGC is out of the way and the single currency is established - no minor task I admit - the debate in Europe is going to move into an area of philosophy , culture and ethics .
If it moves into that area the public will become much more interested in Europe than they are today .
The gap between citizens and the Institutions will be narrowed , because then we will be talking about things that people themselves worry about and we will be defining Europe in terms that directly affect the sort of philosophical sense that people have of the relevance of their own lives .
That is the challenge for Europe in the years ahead .
( Applause )
Thank you for your statement , Mr Bruton , and for your kind opening words to the Chair .
I now give the floor to Mr Santer , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , summarizing the achievements of the Irish presidency is an agreeable task .
Once again , a small country has shown that it can provide a great presidency . The Irish presidency has taken the initiative in many areas ; it has adopted carefully thought-out objectives .
I cannot cover them all , the more so since I believe that the end product of these efforts is well reflected in the agenda of the Dublin Council , which made this a major event .
A month later , we must judge it by the yardstick of our great objectives for the European Union .
Has it taken us further down the road towards closer and closer union between the nations of Europe ?
Has it helped to bring the Union closer to its citizens ?
And has it laid the foundations of the Community 's future on the threshold of its enlargement ?
To all these questions , my answer is yes - but I must immediately add that Europe needs more .
We must push on , persevere unceasingly .
That applies to the single currency , it applies to employment , it applies to cooperation on internal and judicial affairs .
And it applies to the Intergovernmental Conference , which is now moving into the finishing straight .
Mr President , I have always said that the single currency would happen , and that it would happen on time .
And the Dublin Council has removed some more of the obstacles from the road ahead .
The message is a very positive one : the two Regulations on the legal status of the euro have been approved in principle and can now be finalized , the first being due to come into force this year and the second by 1998 , when the Council has ruled on which Member States will be participating in the euro zone .
The European Council has approved the new exchange mechanism , designed to safeguard the unity of the single market between the countries which join the single currency from 1 January 1999 and those which do not - the ins , the pre-ins and the outs .
The agreement reached on the growth and stability pact , especially , has blown away the last few clouds and made the prospects for monetary union even brighter .
We were able to agree on the necessary compromise - a good compromise .
Budgetary policies are now provided with a suitable framework , proof that the political will remains firm .
That will is in line with the internal budgetary efforts that the States are making , and here again I repeat the conviction I have had from the outset : growth is returning , and , provided that the Member States do not relax their efforts , there will be a large number of countries participating in the euro zone from 1 January 1999 .
The agreement on the growth stability pact , then , is the strongest signal this Council has given us in monetary matters , a stimulus to optimism .
It is a signal , too , that has been received by all the economic and financial actors in Europe and elsewhere .
Everyone now knows that the euro will be a fact of life from 1 January 1999 .
Indeed , by a happy coincidence , the designs for the future euro banknotes were presented at this same Council , giving a recognizable face to Europe 's currency , and demonstrating the very tangible nature of this project of ours , which concerns every European and is a tool in the struggle for jobs .
Let me state very clearly that , for me , the European currency is a means , not an end , one of the weapons with which we can fight the battle for employment .
Mr President , we must leave no avenue unexplored in our efforts to increase employment .
That is the real message of the pact of confidence for employment : nothing must be left undone that will promote employment .
And I congratulate the Irish presidency on its unstinting efforts , to which the Dublin declaration on employment bears witness .
Cooperation between the Commission and the presidency has been exemplary and fruitful , focusing on the objectives of the pact of confidence for employment .
My specific purpose in concluding that pact was to mobilize all the European actors , at every level .
There are strong signs that this concept is taking concrete form , and those signs are a powerful incentive to further progress , above all as far as the Member States are concerned .
It is up to them to carry out the reforms .
If they also combine forces and coordinate their efforts , there will be a multiplier effect at European level .
In accordance with the Essen conclusions , the Council has adopted the second joint report on employment - another step towards joint mobilization , as indeed is the decision to set up the Committee on Employment and the Job Market , which is to play an important part in assisting the Council to prepare and implement the European employment strategy .
We must move forward together towards the modernization of our economies .
And instead of cultivating gloom , let us put the spotlight on those who get things done , those who get moving !
Out there on the ground , people are taking action , and that is why the territorial pacts were so well received in Europe 's regions .
The European Council decided to launch and finance some sixty such pacts .
The social partners are moving , too , and , for the first time in the history of the Community , unions and employers have presented a joint declaration at a European Council meeting .
They are currently negotiating at European level on work organization and flexibility .
The single market is also among the priorities of the pact of confidence for employment .
I am not going to summarize the progress made under the Irish presidency .
We need not only to perfect the internal market , the single market , but also to exploit its full potential .
There are substantial untapped reserves of growth and employment : I have therefore undertaken to present to the European Council in Amsterdam in June a plan of action and a detailed timetable for achieving this objective before 1 January 1999 .
My intention is to restore the dynamism of the single market with specific , priority proposals designed to make good all the existing shortcomings .
We must also ensure that all the criteria for the proper functioning of this market have been satisfied .
If its full potential is to be exploited it will be necessary , for example , to make sure that undertakings are fully informed of the new opportunities arising .
The presidency has secured the adoption of the third multiannual programme for small- and medium-sized enterprises .
I welcome that , because the SMEs have a critical role in employment : they must be made aware that the single market is their theatre of operations , too , not just the preserve of big business .
Mr President , if there is one area in which the Irish presidency has made an exemplary contribution , that area is justice and internal affairs .
If the fight against drugs is a public priority , it was an Irish priority too , and Dublin has shown that it was a European priority .
Four programmes have been adopted that are designed to strengthen cooperation in the area of justice and internal affairs : GROTIUS , SHERLOCK , VOISIN and STOP .
If it proves possible for these programmes to be launched during the present year , the credit for that must go to Ireland .
The same applies to advances in the fight against organized crime , which , as we know , recognizes no frontiers .
Our Member States must have a sense of solidarity , and show it .
The Council has decided to set up a high-level group responsible for drawing up a plan of action to a tight timetable .
I am aware of a growing sense of optimism in this respect .
That could be a good omen for the IGC , which is why this trend now needs to be reflected by positive action .
I know you share my conviction : if we finally equip ourselves with the weapons to fight this war , Europeans will take notice .
Now , Mr President , I come to the matters that will determine the institutional future of the European Union .
At the end of six months ' intensive work , the presidency 's text has enabled us to see these matters more clearly .
We must pay tribute to the Irish presidency for selecting and applying the best possible method over these past six months .
I have also been impressed by the commitment to the Intergovernmental Conference of Parliament 's representatives , Mrs Guigou and Mr Brok , and I am very pleased , incidentally , that the European Parliament and the Commission see eye to eye on many points .
But we must not deceive ourselves : we are still a long way from achieving texts that clearly respond to the concerns of the public and the problems of enlargement .
That will be the role of the Dutch presidency , and we shall be discussing it this afternoon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you also wanted an opportunity to discuss the results of the Ministerial Conference in Singapore .
Overall , they are positive .
The European Union was able to obtain reaffirmation of the commitments entered into during the Uruguay Round , as we hoped , but those commitments have not been extended , which was the particular aim of those countries that export textile products and agricultural produce .
The Singapore declaration on multilateralism and non-discrimination in the services sector is encouraging , as are the agreement on information technology products and the political commitment to telecommunications .
I must not pass over the passage in the ministerial declaration which refers to the initiative on behalf of the less developed countries , because it was the Commission 's efforts in Singapore that ensured that the initiative was not simply buried .
It is true that neither the question of relations between trade and environment nor that of basic social standards saw the breakthrough for which the Commission was hoping .
I remain convinced that the future will enable us to press forward with our ideas , as indeed we can do here and now in the other two areas in which the Union is keenly interested : relations between trade and investment , and relations between trade and national competition rules .
Mr President , we often - too often - hear it said that Europeans distrust Europe .
I do not go along with this view - I am profoundly convinced that Europeans are still favourable to Europe .
Although it is true that their attitude today is a cautious one , that is because Europe has been presented to them too ideologically over the years .
That is not my approach : let 's stick to the hard facts , and prove that the Union is working for the benefit of Europeans - then we shall regain their support !
That is my political line , the same line as has been adopted by Ireland : the results are there to be seen !
The Dutch presidency will follow the same road , and we shall be discussing that this afternoon .
Europe has everything to gain from it !
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I wish to welcome the Prime Minister of Ireland , John Bruton , to this House today and take the opportunity of both thanking and congratulating him on the excellent work of the Irish Government during the six months it held the presidency of the European Union .
Ireland took over the presidency at a crucial time when the intergovernmental process was in the doldrums , when a concerted effort was needed to try to re-establish its momentum .
Whilst my group may have very many criticisms of the draft treaty which came out of the Dublin II summit - and many of these will be aired by my group 's specialists later in this debate - there is little doubt that the Irish commitment to and success in producing a draft Treaty covering many of the vital areas under consideration was a very considerable feat , especially given the very real differences which exist between the Member States of the Union on sensitive issues such as : flexibility and qualified majority voting ; employment and the social dimension : the third pillar and the fight against drugs ; international crime and terrorism ; the development of a common foreign and security policy ; and enlargement of the Union and much , much more .
Ireland also took over the presidency at a time when the timetable for economic and monetary union demanded action , a time when the concept of EMU was under attack in many Member States and when it would have been simpler and much more comfortable simply to ease off the throttle and wait for the following presidencies to take up the challenge .
I want to pay tribute to Ruairi Quinn who has been the President-in-Office of the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers under the Irish presidency and who was determined not to take the easy option but rather to succeed with his agenda , to reach agreement on the stability pact , to finalize the legal arrangements for the Euro and the structure of the new EMS , all of this at a time when the Irish presidency was engaged with a heavy timetable of Council meetings , with the vexed questions of the budget of the Union for 1997 and at the same time conducting an ambitious series of meetings with this Parliament .
I pay tribute to the work of Mr Mitchell , who is here this morning , in that respect .
The presidency also met with the committees and political groups in this Parliament , while of course governing Ireland and engaging in the tortuous process of seeking real peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland .
Perhaps it is to Ireland and its buoyant economy , its expanding potential and its burgeoning confidence that we should look when we ask ourselves why one of the Union 's smallest countries should have performed so well in the presidency of the Union .
Unlike its big neighbour , Ireland 's government - and when we listen to Mr Bruton this morning we understand why - understands the European perspective .
It has engaged itself in the processes of the European Union , not just in a very practical sense but through an intellectual examination of Ireland 's future prospects and place in the world .
That was well demonstrated by Mr Bruton 's comments .
I want to turn my attention for a moment to the foreign policy agenda of the Union in the past six months .
Ireland has exercised a measured and thoughtful role in this most difficult of areas as well .
In this Parliament we have congratulated Foreign Minister Dick Spring for his intelligent and sensitive handling of Europe 's role in the Middle East peace process .
Once again in contrast to some of the Heads of State in the Union , the Irish presidency operated with a maturity that brought credit on the Union and we thank the Prime Minister for that as well .
We on this side of the House believe that your presidency has been a success .
That is not to say of course that we agree with every decision or every statement and Mr Bruton would not expect us to .
Far from it , but we are able to see that the Irish presidency was conducted efficiently and effectively in staunch defence of European objectives and with integrity .
It has laid the grounds for the Dutch presidency and demonstrated that Europe can play a role internationally .
Such a role is crucial at this moment .
The President-in-Office will recollect that the European Union played a facilitating role in the Middle East peace process at the Barcelona Conference which launched the Union 's Mediterranean policy .
As I am sure we all do , I welcome the signing of the Hebron Agreement today .
Given the present tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean , the opportunity now exists for the Union to demonstrate its facilitating role again by using the arena of the Mediterranean Conference to bring together all those involved in the current tension - Turkey , Greece and Cyprus , all involved and committed to the Mediterranean process .
Shortly the Foreign Ministers , including that of Ireland , will meet in the context of the Mediterranean Conference to discuss security issues .
I urge them and I hope you will urge them , as the outgoing presidency but part of the Troika of the European Union , to exercise their considerable diplomatic and political leverage to diminish both tension and the desperately dangerous arms race which has now gathered pace in the Eastern Mediterranean .
We should be pursuing the item which has been on the agenda for the last two years of demilitarization on the island of Cyprus with as much strength and vigour as they are now pursuing the arms race in the Eastern Mediterranean .
In conclusion , the Irish presidency has laid a firm foundation for the succeeding presidencies on the IGC , on EMU and shown that sensitive diplomacy which recognizes what Europe can do and the role it can play in the present world is something we have to offer .
We thank the presidency for that .
Mr President , both the Dublin summit and the Irish presidency were a remarkable success .
As the President of the Commission has just said , it has shown once again that the representatives of a small country can provide a great presidency of the European Council .
That was certainly the case with Taoiseach John Bruton and his ministers , who have carried out their task efficiently and with a strong sense of conviction towards Europe .
The European currency is now firmly on course - not only because the seven euro banknotes are to be brought into circulation in many countries from 2002 , but also because a decision on the stability pact was taken in Dublin .
For us , this stability pact is not a strait-jacket for our economies .
On the contrary , we are convinced that it will bring interest rates down and promote economic growth and employment .
It is therefore high time for us to persuade our fellow citizens of the fact that this economic and monetary union is the best weapon against the unemployment which is still so radically undermining our society , and I thus believe that the declaration on employment which you have extracted from the European Council , Mr President-in-Office , is a real breakthrough .
I know something of the workings of the European Council , and you have achieved a real breakthrough which is a very great success .
It was also decided in Dublin that the Finance Ministers would form a kind of joint economic administration in relation to the European Central Bank .
They will have to determine Europe 's external relations with other currency areas , in particular the dollar zone .
With the single currency , Europe will be able to limit very substantially the monetary upheavals which are disrupting whole sectors of our economies .
The Irish presidency also succeeded in taking the IGC negotiations into a political phase .
When the IGC has been successfully concluded in Amsterdam , we shall have to make a start on enlargement .
This is of crucial importance for the stability and security of our continent .
The peoples of Central and Eastern Europe are nurturing high expectations .
I have to say , however , that if the Amsterdam summit does not succeed in organizing the European Union in an efficient , effective and democratic way , it would not be justified to begin these negotiations on enlargement .
That is why some very sensitive issues , such as the composition of the Commission , the powers of the European Parliament , the weighting of votes , majority decision-making in the Council and the competence of the Court of Justice will have to be resolved .
European diplomacy must become a genuine instrument of cooperation and collective security .
European defence policy must become a reality .
Unfortunately , despite the successes of your presidency regarding external policy , I am bound to say that the positions adopted in Dublin on relations with Russia , for example , on the conflicts in the Great Lakes region and the situation in former Yugoslavia still fall short of a real common foreign and security policy .
Because of the absence of political will and the lack of a common view of Europe 's vital interests at world level , the conditions are still not in place for Europe to be shaped into a real power which can be a player of equal stature to the United States on the world stage .
There will also have to be adjustments to the regional and agricultural policies and the financing of the Union .
The adaptation of this financing is a necessity , so that some Member States are not given the impression that they are having to bear disproportionate costs in relation to enlargement .
The remarkable progress - which is also being accepted in some national ministries - towards a real common police force , a kind of European FBI and a European legal area , augurs well for working together to combat terrorism , drug trafficking and international crime .
Here too , we must pay tribute to the Irish presidency .
Any initiative which is aimed at tackling justice and internal security issues jointly and subjecting these to democratic controls must be able to count on our support .
A key factor for the coming months is that with your document , you have for the first time taken the negotiations into a political phase .
I hope that the momentum will not be lost , and that the Dutch presidency will take the helm in the same spirit , though we shall be discussing that shortly .
I congratulate both you and the Commission most sincerely on the outcome of the Dublin summit .
Firstly , Mr President , I should like to congratulate you on your election and wish you every success during your term of office .
Cuirimse céad mile fáilte roimh Taoiseach na h 'Eireann agus Aire Gnothai na h 'Eorpa ata anseo chun deire oifiguil a chuir le Uachtaranacht Eireann don Comhphobail .
I warmly welcome the outgoing President-in-Office of the Council and his European Affairs Minister Gay Mitchell on their formal visit to the European Parliament to bring to a conclusion Ireland 's presidency of the Union .
We are all very pleased at the success of Ireland 's presidency .
To the Taoiseach and his colleagues in government and the many hundreds of civil servants who have been involved we say a very sincere thank you and we are very proud of you for a job well done .
I am also pleased to say that the summit in Dublin was one of the more successful summit meetings in recent years .
Solid progress was recorded on the four major priorities listed by the Irish presidency at the beginning of its term of office and approved by Parliament. which were the single currency , the fight against crime and drugs , the Intergovernmental Conference and the tackling of unemployment .
The establishment of a single currency in less than two years ' time is now firmly on course ; the stability and growth pact ensures that the financial markets , investors and the general public can all be confident that the Euro will be a stable currency and will not be subject to fluctuations because of short-term policies being pursued by one or more governments within the new currency zone .
I welcome the progress made in Dublin on strengthening cooperation between European Union countries in the fight against organized crime and international drug smuggling .
The illegal drug trade is responsible for a great deal of misery in each of our countries and crime against people and property to fund drug habits means that large numbers of our citizens are living in constant fear for their personal safety .
Those ultimately responsible for supplying the illegal drugs now available in communities throughout the Union have long operated on an international basis and effective action to curb their activities also demands a coordinated international response .
The Union should allocate resources from its annual budget to intercept smugglers as the drugs are introduced to the Union , to control the distribution of substances used in the manufacture of drugs within the Union and to investigate the money-laundering activities of the drug barons .
The draft revision of the Treaties which was presented to the Dublin Summit by the Intergovernmental Conference represents a solid basis from which to proceed to the final and most controversial stage of the negotiations on a new Treaty .
The agreement at the summit on the draft revision of the Treaties was a major breakthrough and a special word of thanks is owed to those involved , in particular the government representative Noel Dorr , for the leading role he played in this respect .
One of the issues still to be decided in these negotiations concerns the number of European Commissioners to be appointed in the future .
It is vitally important to preserve the political legitimacy of the Commission in all Member States and in the eyes of each national electorate .
In the long run this will only be possible if each country has a full seat in the College of Commissioners .
A second institutional issue still to be decided concerns the future operation of the presidency of the Council of Ministers .
It has been suggested that the small European countries lack the resources and the ability to undertake the onerous task of presiding over the affairs of the Union and that the present system of rotating the six-month presidencies should be abolished .
Well , the record of the Irish presidency during the last six months and in particular during the Dublin Summit , like the previous Irish presidency , demonstrates clearly that smaller Member States can organize efficient and successful presidencies and in many cases can broker agreements which larger Member States are unable to achieve during their presidencies .
The experience of the last six months suggests that there is a strong case for preserving the present system of rotating the Council presidency .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like to begin by congratulating you and also by congratulating the Taoiseach and his colleagues in government on the excellent conduct of Ireland 's six-month presidency of the Union .
It has been a period marked by a strong focus , hard work and considerable success .
In the most effective and emphatic way possible , it has given the lie to those who argue that a rotating presidency among all Member States should no longer operate in future .
You have established , Taoiseach , beyond doubt - and in Ireland 's case , not for the first time - the capacity of smaller Member States to discharge their responsibilities to good effect , confounding many of those critics at Member State level who argue trenchantly for change .
I would also like to pay tribute to Ireland 's public service which , though relatively small in number , has managed to rise to the challenge of preparing and coping with the presidency and , in many instances , chairing many of the 2 , 000 and more meetings that are part and parcel of the work of the presidency .
Given the uncertainty that surrounded the issue prior to the Dublin II Summit , perhaps the single most significant political achievement was the agreement of the Stability Pact as part of the necessary preparations for economic and monetary union .
As well as obtaining agreement on the legal status of the Euro and the general principles of ERM II , the Irish presidency has maintained and deepened the momentum towards a single currency .
Here again , the capacity of smaller Member States to act as honest brokers , mediating between larger states , was well illustrated and underlined by the Irish presidency with the assistance , as has been acknowledged here today , of the Luxembourg Prime Minister .
The Liberal Group , however , is disappointed with the sluggish and begrudging progress to date on a number of the liberalization dossiers , especially in telecommunications and postal services .
This is not a direct failure of the presidency but rather a failure of the collective will of the Council itself .
More disturbingly it is a failure to appreciate the competitive dynamics of a more open global economy - of which the Taoiseach spoke so eloquently - an issue which , if not addressed , would cost Europe jobs in the long-run rather than protect European jobs , as many of the proponents of the current status quo seem to believe .
It is in the area of the intergovernmental conference that the Irish presidency has passed on its greatest legacy .
The draft treaty is marked by both ambition and realism and is a credit to its main author , Mr Noel Dorr .
However , at the institutional level and on the question of flexibility , we are disappointed that more progress has not been made .
It would be unfortunate if , in the end , we were bounced into ill-thought-out or ill-conceived solutions without due reflection and debate because this will be crucial to our effective ability to cope with enlargement - a point , again , which the Taoiseach quite correctly emphasized as the next major challenge beyond the IGC .
Mr President , although there is no Irish contingent in my group at present - but there is an associated party , which incidentally forms part of the Irish Government - I also wish to express my group 's thanks for the work of the Irish team at the head of the Council presidency .
Mr Bruton makes profound and brilliant speeches , and his Minister for European Affairs has conducted his relations with the European Parliament in an exemplary way .
Having said that , I must also express my group 's concern and disappointment at the outcome of the summit , although I appreciate that the incoming Dutch presidency will cast a more favourable light on the Irish presidency .
And what is the reason for our concern and disappointment ?
It is the weakness of the proposals concerning the institutional reforms aimed at democratizing the European institutions and improving their operation , above all with a view to enlargement .
We certainly welcome the proposed new chapter on employment , but the draft treaty contains no reference to safeguarding public services or to the orchestration of job-creating policies .
We regret the fact that no provision has been made for genuine progress on the issue of citizenship , and we have the impression that the most important decisions on the reforms will be taken at the last minute , without transparency and without directly informing either the citizens or those who represent them , so that they can discuss things in a responsible way .
We do not agree with some of the statements which have been made concerning employment and the rehabilitation policies .
We do not believe that the tough budgetary rehabilitation policies that are linked to the introduction of the euro automatically mean an increase in production and jobs .
We disagree with that .
We believe that they are leading to the growth of unemployment and a corresponding rise in financial speculation .
It is essential for speculative financial transactions in Europe to be taxed .
There are the new possibilities for employment in the environmental and social fields , but they are not enough .
We feel that there is a need to reconsider the third stage of economic and monetary union , and to reflect again on the effects which are being produced in some national economies and societies .
And we strongly disagree with the thrust of the pact on stability and growth .
Indeed , the pact on stability and growth will impose conditions on the future budgetary policies of national governments and give rise to serious problems for some Member States .
With regard to a citizens ' Europe , we support the measures to combat drug trafficking - and the campaign against the laundering of profits from drug trafficking must be stepped up - but we regret the fact that the decision to create a European observatory for racism and xenophobia has not been taken .
On external relations , we fully agree with the approach adopted to the Palestine question , but we regret the excessive tolerance and understanding shown towards the Turkish Government .
The Turkish Government 's record on respect for human rights does not justify it being treated in this way , since it is increasingly violating the human rights of its citizens and especially those of the Kurdish people .
We should also like to see more decisive action to promote cooperation between the European Union and Cuba , with full reciprocal guarantees , and with a view to fostering democracy in that country .
I do not have time to say more , Mr President-in-Office , but I wish to say that our criticisms are made in good faith , and that we hope that your excellent work bears fruit in the future at the Intergovernmental Conference .
I shall end by saying , without a trace of irony : may God help us in these difficult times , since we are unable to trust in Europe 's institutions alone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the European Council in Dublin has finally got the single currency up and running , I shall confine my remarks to the work done at the Intergovernmental Conference .
As we said previously , in a resolution during December , the draft of the Treaty as revised by the Irish presidency - which I congratulate - has the great merit of providing a progress report on the IGC , which features a total deadlock in the field of institutional reforms and a complete absence of any will to move forward on the part of certain governments .
My group believes that no one can afford the luxury of a wait-and-see policy , which involves the risk of last-minute bargaining , with uncertain and unpredictable results and , a fortiori , a threat not only to enlargement , which would be bad enough , but also to the future of the Union in general .
We are convinced that Parliament must conceive a strategy , over and above its role of making suggestions , which it must of course continue .
What should be the strategy of this House over the remaining six months , apart from the notable efforts of our two observers and the adoption of our resolutions ?
A question which is all the more relevant in that the assent procedure does not apply to the results of the negotiations .
I think it worth reminding the House that , on the occasion of the last enlargement , it undertook not to accept any further enlargements without sweeping institutional reforms .
That means , among other things , a genuine procedure of codecision between the European Parliament and the Council , the abolition of the unanimous vote , the establishment of the Commission at the centre of the Union 's institutional system and a tougher cooperation clause to prevent any future deadlock or paralysis .
In conclusion , I should like to call formally upon President Santer to align the Commission with Parliament in this battle .
The Commission is , de facto , the guardian of the Treaties .
It would be incurring a serious responsibility if it were to fail to caution public opinion and the Member States against the dangers of any enlargement which is not preceded by a genuine institutional reform .
Mr President , the European Council in Dublin once again highlighted the disagreement between those States for which the single currency is merely an instrument of economic regulation and those for which it is a central element of policy .
In aligning themselves with the German arguments , which favour upgrading the workforce rather than a policy designed to give fresh impetus to global demand , some French leaders are committing a fateful strategic error and a major economic misjudgment .
What benefit can there be for France , or for the United States or the United Kingdom , in bringing about the creation of a massive central European bloc under the control of a Germany which a traditional balance-of-power policy would make it easy to contain ?
European integration has changed its nature .
The utopia of Jean Monnet has given way to an area of widespread rivalries , a gigantic poker game in which the stake is European hegemony .
A new strategy for an old objective !
Furthermore , the stability pact , to which the word ' growth ' has been added for the sake of expediency , is tending to establish an economic model which is extraordinarily rigid and constricting for the Member States .
Thus , not only would their monetary policy be imposed upon them - the same would apply to their budgetary , fiscal and social policies , in other words virtually all their policies .
In the business world , assets only exist if they are profitable .
General De Gaulle once said that policy in France was not just a matter of money .
Those who claim that everything should be left to market forces are really burying their heads in the sand .
In the face of this obvious truth , the participants in the Dublin talks have resigned themselves to soft growth and relocation , fully aware of the evil consequences that this policy of abandonment will have for employment and social cohesion .
Ladies and gentlemen , you know that the criteria for the single currency will be nowhere near being satisfied in 1997 and that the real decision will not be taken until the French general election in 1998 .
At any time , whatever decision may be taken , the French people can be asked to give its opinion in a referendum on Europe .
That is something you cannot change !
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the Taoiseach , the Tánaiste , Mr De Rossa and also Minister Mitchell and Irish civil servants for clearly demonstrating once and for all that a small nation can not only shoulder the responsibility of hosting the EU presidency but can discharge its task with great success .
During the last six months the Irish presidency accelerated the momentum towards a single currency ; it identified an integrated European employment strategy covering macroeconomic policy and structural reform ; it laid the basis for major initiatives in ensuring effective European cooperation against organized crime in general and drugtrafficking in particular and , equally importantly , it provided us with the remarkably simple and readable draft Treaty text identifying the alternative choices that we face .
As we ponder these choices , the latest European buzzword has been thrown into the debate by the Commission and Member States - that of flexibility .
Is this latest concept the ideal instant quick-fix to help us overcome our difficulties or is it a Trojan Horse designed to undermine the drive towards an ultimate federal Union ?
I fear that it is the latter , especially if it offers a system which multiplies opt-outs and potential fragmentation rather than unity of purpose .
The integrity of the Union requires all who believe in it to proceed together along the same road and in the same direction , as clearly set out by our founding fathers .
This core integrity is more important than massaging the nationalist egos of recalcitrant Member States who have been , and will continue to be , a barrier to progress .
It will not be an acceptable excuse that we halt the march to Union by sacrificing important principles in order to keep some or other blocking Member State on board .
We should remember the experience of Maastricht .
We weakened our commitment to the Social Charter and single currency in order to achieve a consensus .
However , the price for compromising our position was not agreement , it was opt-out and a weakened text .
For these reasons , I am wary of John Major 's definition of flexibility earlier this week .
It indicates that a majority of Member States might be allowed to proceed with closer integration , provided they have the consent of disagreeing Member States .
That is not flexibility , that is a dictatorship of a minority over a majority .
This central issue has to be faced sooner rather than later .
The ultimate goal of Union sought by the overwhelming majority of Member States cannot be held to ransom indefinitely .
Those who do not share our vision should be told once and for all that we do not intend creating structures for multiple opt-outs .
Instead we will create structures where they can opt out totally if they so wish and allow the rest of us to pursue our shared vision of a united Europe unimpeded .
I hope that the slogan of the Dutch presidency will become ' opt in or opt out ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , the Dublin summit will probably be remembered as an important step towards the achievement of economic and monetary union , a major political objective for Europe , on the planned date of 1 January 1999 .
So we must pay tribute , Mr President-in-Office , to the work done under your leadership during the past six months of the Irish presidency .
Apart from the significant progress achieved in the monetary field , the Irish presidency - in line with its stated priorities - has succeeded in achieving a broad consensus on the approaches to be adopted in future with regard to employment policy , and on improving the future coordination of activities to combat the drug trade , organized crime , terrorism and the sexual exploitation of children .
We must therefore congratulate the Irish presidency on its excellent results , and thank it for the efforts it has made to achieve those results .
The conclusion of the stability and growth pact , which can be seen as a decisive step towards the introduction of the single currency , will no doubt be the most striking achievement of this summit in terms of its impact on the future of European integration .
A Gallup poll conducted in four States of the European Union - Germany , the United Kingdom , France and Italy - clearly shows that our fellow citizens are in no doubt as to the magnitude of the issue at stake , whether they view it with enthusiasm or apprehension .
And that issue is not purely technical or economic , but political in the strongest sense of the word .
The introduction of the single currency , the euro , at the dawn of the twenty-first century , is an acid test we cannot evade .
If the process is not completed , European integration will be no more than it is today - a single market and a customs union , but one that tends to merge more and more into a vast free trade area , open and exposed to all the currents of globalization .
But if the process succeeds , then the European Union , strengthened by the new solidarity and disciplines created by monetary union , will become a true economic power on the international scene , and then , with the benefit of its reformed institutions , a political power too .
We are talking not just about a development but about a real change in the process of European integration .
If we want that change to be a success , we need the process of the reform of the European institutions to move forward in step with it . That process has now been prepared by the intergovernmental conference , but has not yet really begun .
It will be up to the Dutch presidency to take over the baton and ensure that the Amsterdam summit is the counterpart , for the institutions , of what the Dublin summit has been for the currency .
Mr President , I should like to add my congratulations to the Irish Government on the excellent way in which it has conducted the presidency .
I shall devote my one minute to the institutional question .
As it would appear from the final declaration from Dublin , this issue has in fact hardly been touched on , and that need not surprise us , because the Irish presidency has put forward few proposals on the subject , taking the view that the most important and most delicate institutional matters should be left to the final round of negotiations .
This means that we may have many hopes , but also must have many fears , and that in any case we must be very vigilant .
One point where vigilance is required is the danger that third pillar matters may be removed from the third pillar - not to the first , but to an institutional limbo where no individual parliament can then exercise controls .
Mr President , I would like to welcome our Taoiseach , Mr Bruton , here and congratulate the Irish presidency , including our civil servants , on the hard work they have put in .
I agree about the rotating presidency ; it should continue .
However , having said that , I do not agree with the outcome .
I do not think anything the Irish presidency did halted efforts to make the European Union a military superpower or to stop the widening of the gap between rich and poor , which is the likely outcome of EMU . ' Adapting the European Union for the Benefit of its Peoples ' is the title given to the document outlining the draft changes of the Treaty .
This is totally misleading .
Some changes to the security section of the document propose greater militarization of the European Union .
The only people who would benefit from this would be the arms manufacturers .
It is a tragedy that the Irish Government failed , and in fact , did not even try , to have adequate safeguards included in the draft changes to protect Irish neutrality and did not propose that the objective of disarmament be written into the Treaty .
In fact , the draft changes would deepen the European Union 's relationship with the nuclear armed Western European Union and pave the way for the eventual merger between the two bodies .
The Stability Pact for the EMU , brokered in Dublin , is not something to be joyful about , although furthering the battle against unemployment was a stated objective of the Irish presidency .
It played second fiddle to the rush to get agreement on the Euro .
Mr Quinn , the Finance Minister , has described EMU as fundamentally a political project , but he has failed to identify any political benefits which will come from it , or allay fears that it will simply widen the gap between rich and poor .
I also believe it will be an act of folly for Ireland to join EMU if Britain remains outside , as appears increasingly likely .
Less than one-third of Ireland 's trade is with the probable founding countries of EMU , while 70 % of it is with Britain and the rest of the world .
Mr President , I also want to say hello to the Taoiseach and thank him for his marvellous , spontaneous remarks here today .
I think congratulations have already been extended .
You can see , Taoiseach , the respect Members here have for what you and your colleagues have done during the Irish presidency .
It must certainly be a source of great encouragement to you .
I am very proud of what you have achieved and you should rightly be proud of a job very well done .
I think this summit will be judged a resounding success at many levels .
I will just single out three different areas .
Firstly , the Irish presidency was entrusted with the task of producing a draft treaty to replace Maastricht .
Not only did you do this on time , as promised , but you also came forward with a 140-page document which , unlike the present Treaty , can be easily read by ordinary citizens and , most importantly , they can make sense of it on that first reading .
Secondly , the draft shows that progress has been made at the IGC on a number of key institutional questions .
Foremost amongst these is the recognition of the need to further democratize decision-making .
I particularly welcome the commitment to streamline the codecision procedure , thus putting both sides of the European Union legislature , the Council of Ministers representing the Member States and us , in the European Parliament , representing the people , on a truly equal footing .
I also welcome the commitment to extend the scope of codecision .
I acknowledge , however , that these are merely commitments in principle .
They will have to be fleshed out .
I hope that the ambition shown by the Irish presidency , culminating in the draft treaty , can now be fulfilled in time for the Amsterdam Summit .
The second main area of success was undoubtedly EMU .
Many speakers have alluded to this .
Progress was made on the new European monetary system , the legal status of the Euro , and the Stability and Growth Pact .
Had these decisions been fudged , the entire EMU project would have been undermined .
It is vital that these successes are now accompanied by further measures which strengthen democratic control , protect the rights of consumers and fully inform ordinary people about the changeover to the single currency so that the prophets of doom will not be proved right .
If the EMU is to win public confidence , this must be done .
The explanation must be available , it must be clear and it must be transmitted by a willing media .
Finally , I welcome the Dublin Declaration on Employment .
This declaration is one of the most significant signs that I have seen , as a Parliamentarian , that our demands can influence the direction of the European Council .
Mr Santer will tell you that time after time after time , we talk here about employment .
Now we see action in the form of this Dublin Declaration on Employment .
The declaration must now be followed up by real action as set out in specific instruments , realistic targets and effective timetables .
The European Union must aim for greater coordination of employment policies and a growthorientated macro-economic policy .
The Dutch presidency must follow on with specific measures on improving education , more relevant training , Community-based employment initiatives and giving priority to youth unemployment and life-long learning .
Taoiseach , you have mentioned the importance of training and education and the connection with drug-taking in cities such as Dublin .
I appreciate that you actually understand the demands and needs of the ordinary people .
Again , I congratulate you and wish you well .
I am glad to see that the Irish media are here in force this month .
I hope that they will report back so that the Irish public will be informed of the high esteem in which our leadership is held .
Mr President , there are a number of key issues on the basis of which one can assess Dublin and the Dublin document , and the first of these is openness .
What have we achieved on this ? We have Article 189b on codecision based on common rules , but no real progress .
With regard to bringing the Union closer to its citizens , there is a statement on extending the acquis communautaire .
Not one decision is being given back to the Member States , something which Mr Santer has repeatedly said would be desirable , however .
On democracy , there is to be codecision in a number of areas which we do not yet know about , but less parliamentary democracy overall , because more powers are being given to the EU .
On employment , incentive measures are to be implemented , but there are no jobs to replace those being lost in the adjustment to the third stage of economic and monetary union .
On enlargement , it can presumably be expected that a few wealthy Central and Eastern European countries or the richest among them will be able to join in 2005 , but there is no mention of speeding up enlargement to include them all .
And on the environment , there are some fine words , but no real changes are being made , except that the procedure established by the Court of Justice - which ruled that the environmental guarantee was unlawful and turned it into a derogation , whereby the Commission had to approve any divergences in the Member States - is now actually being confirmed .
So that is a real step backwards .
As regards the six key areas , or six key issues , identified by Denmark , one has to say that no progress is being made .
On the contrary , we are getting everything we do not want : Union citizenship , police , armed forces , a single currency and resources for a federal state , and it will hardly surprise you , Mr President , that I am unable to support that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are three points I should like to raise in connection with this morning 's debate .
I don 't see that the Irish presidency has all that much to be complacent about .
Its muchvaunted monetary policy is costing us extremely dear , and the pact for employment is in conflict with market forces in the context of the shackles imposed by monetary union .
The real problem , the problem of the undervaluation of the dollar , has never been addressed .
We also hear much about successes on the law and order front .
Well , I can tell you that in 1950 France recorded 250 , 000 crimes and offences within her territory .
In 1995 , that figure had risen to 4.5 million .
That trend is the same in most European countries , and no significant decrease has been recorded this year .
The President-in-Office said a little while ago that the need to make life tolerable might explain a degree of delinquency , and especially the urge to take drugs .
But , in this area , I believe that what makes life hard to tolerate is this civilization of enlightenment , cold , hard enlightenment that disregards the needs of human warmth , needs that are satisfied by a sense of family , by religious faith and by the greatly underrated sentiment of patriotism .
Mr President , the presidency of these last six months , of which Dublin II was the summit in both senses of the word , has been the presidency of a small country .
As a Luxemburger I welcome the success of the Irish presidency , which proves , if proof were needed , that political commitment to Europe is not dependent on a country 's size or the size of its population .
In passing , may I say that I also welcome Mr Bruton 's recognition of the part played by the Prime Minister of Luxembourg in the Dublin compromise on monetary union .
Ireland 's success should convince us that the rotating presidency system remains a valuable one .
It gives each Member State , large or small , the chance to show its commitment to Europe and its effectiveness , whatever the size of its government .
And I believe there is a lesson to be learned here for the purposes of the institutional discussion at the intergovernmental conference .
Mr President , the process of European integration is slow , and calls for patience .
We must not be tempted to create the illusion of a great leap forward .
The Dublin summit , for example , resolved nothing as far as employment is concerned .
President Santer 's pact of confidence for employment , greeted so enthusiastically by this House , did not receive the necessary political boost - nor , as Mr Bruton said , did the plans for the Trans-European Networks .
We , as socialists , remain convinced that employment is the central duty of Europe .
It is of course , as Mr Bruton said , a philosophical question , a philosophical choice .
Europe will be saved not by profit but by investment , by training , and I agree with what the Irish Prime Minister said about the importance of that subject .
Europe will be saved , too , by ecological and social standards .
Our citizens do not understand that capitalism , to use that big word , may have been ' civilized ' in the twentieth century in a national context but that it cannot be in a European context .
Mr President , employment , social standards , economic and social cohesion - we as socialists see these things as forming an indissoluble whole .
A final word , Mr President .
I should like to pay particular tribute to the efforts of the Irish presidency in the field of internal security .
We , as socialists , want to see much of what we call the third pillar entering the Community domain , and we shall support the efforts made to that end by the future Dutch and Luxemburgish presidencies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank the Irish presidency .
The Taoiseach himself invested a great deal of interest and initiative in the success of the presidency , but in a personal capacity I should also like to say how much I appreciated the good cooperation of Gay Mitchell and Noel Dorr , who made important contributions on employment and the Intergovernmental Conference from the European Parliament 's point of view .
The Irish presidency has smoothed the way for the last six months of the negotiations surrounding the Intergovernmental Conference .
The agreement that was reached on the outstanding problems in connection with monetary union has freed us to focus our attention on the Intergovernmental Conference .
Monetary union is the final cornerstone of economic integration .
The next step must be a move towards greater political integration .
I believe that this monetary union will help to make Europe more competitive , and will contribute to an increase in stability and the creation of more jobs , and I do not share the view of Mr de Gaulle that monetary union will make one country dominant : on the contrary , monetary union will produce a sensible sharing of responsibility between the Member States of the European Union and will not make any country dominant .
From Parliament 's point of view , the Irish presidency has taken an important step in the paper which it has drawn up for the Intergovernmental Conference .
In fact , it has proposed a Treaty text that would make codecision the standard procedure for approving legislation .
We should like to think that this will be the basis of the negotiating approach under the Dutch presidency , in terms of content and method .
The document also proposes an extension of qualified majority voting , which we need if we are to develop the Union 's capacity for action and prepare it for enlargement .
The letter from Germany and France contains a proposal that this should , in fact , become the norm , from which there would be certain specified exceptions - in other words , the procedure would be reversed .
If we could combine these two concepts , we would achieve the breakthrough on institutional reform that we so urgently need .
I have no time to mention many other issues , and in particular the progress which was made on prioritizing thirdpillar policies in the area of foreign affairs and security .
Let me mention briefly two further points in the time I have left .
We must take care to see that we do not reach a situation in which the role of parliaments is downgraded - and the European Parliament is in the same boat as national parliaments in this respect - nor must we allow the creation of a new third chamber .
Above all , we should like to point out that there can be no talk of the success of the Intergovernmental Conference until the European Parliament has full budgetary powers .
That will be a key point for us when it comes to evaluating the outcome of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , the six months of the Irish presidency have been a period of intensive and productive effort .
The Dublin European Council last month set a positive seal on the four main priorities announced by the presidency at the start of its term of office . Our group welcomes this and would like to remind the House of these priorities .
They include the following points : the adoption of an important series of measures in the area of justice and home affairs ; the progress made in respect of economic and monetary union , for example the approval of the structure of the new exchange rate mechanism ; the agreement on the rules establishing the legal framework for the euro ; the approval of the principles and main features of the growth and stability pact designed to ensure budgetary rigour in the economic and monetary union ; the important results concerning the growth and employment strategy , which led to the adoption of a declaration on employment , in other words a common programme to identify a broad range of measures to be implemented at national and Community level , to strengthen the synergy between the macro-economic and structural policies in the Member States ' programmes for employment and growth ; and the presentation , as requested by the Florence European Council , of a general outline document for a draft revision of the Treaties , focusing on three main objectives - bringing the Union closer to its citizens , strengthening and broadening the common foreign and security policy , with the aim of achieving greater consistency and efficiency , and ensuring , with an eye to enlargement , the proper functioning of the institutions and the efficiency of the decision-making process .
This document represents a sound basis for the negotiations which lie ahead , making it possible - by means of a more determined search for balance and compromise - to achieve the aims and aspirations contained in the preamble , and to arrive at the date set for the ending of the IGC - June 1997 - with a new , updated Treaty on European Union which is equal to the challenges of the twenty-first century , above all the future enlargement .
Mr President , the Irish presidency has other merits , which I shall not list here because time is short .
Ireland has now handed over to the Netherlands ; let us all unite to contribute in a productive , clear and cohesive way to the next six months of building Europe .
Mr President , because of lack of time , I shall restrict myself to a brief and thus incomplete political assessment of the Ministerial Conference in Singapore .
In general terms , one can say that the results were positive .
The World Trade Organization has emerged strengthened from the conference .
One of the major gains was certainly the reaching of a multilateral agreement on information technology - the key sector for today and the future , which already has a worldwide turnover of USD 400 billion .
The establishment of a working group on public procurement is definitely important .
This will enable further proposals to be drawn up on competition , investment and transparency in public spending .
Unfortunately , we also have to note that little or no progress has been made on other issues , some of which were among our priorities .
On the environment , we can say that nothing at all has been achieved .
Even worse , the subject was hardly mentioned .
As regards the social clauses , the situation is that , in terms of our positions , very little has been achieved .
But our efforts were not entirely in vain : the fact that the social clause and , in particular , the reference to minimum labour standards were included in the final declaration can be regarded as a victory , given the very strong opposition from the developing countries .
On the institutional side , the fact that the European Parliament was able to put forward its proposals on the spot , for the very first time since GATT came into being , strengthens our role in the general decision-making of the Union .
However , it remains the case that Parliament 's status at such a conference is unclear .
Amongst other things , it does not allow us to exercise real control over the Commission .
We should give our full attention to this aspect in future , especially in the light of the revision of the Treaties , and with a view to the next conference of the World Trade Organization .
Mr President , the Dublin Summit was yet another step towards the exacerbation of poverty and unemployment in the European Union .
Ignoring the intense disappointment and indignation felt by European citizens , the leaders of the Union 's Member States went ahead and accepted the anti-populist stability pact , disregarded the dramatic consequences for the productive base , employment and social welfare in all the countries , especially the poorer ones , and insisted on imposing the so-called curative policies , in other words intense one-sided austerity , further dislocation of the labour market and strict financial adaptation , which are strangling development .
The Dublin Summit contributed to the further militarization of the European Union , a fact which intensifies the disquiet of Europe 's peoples , who are striving for peace and social prosperity and for the dissolution of cold-war relics such as NATO and the Western European Union , peoples which demand binding national referenda to express their opinion and decide for themselves what Europe 's future should be .
Concerning enlargement , Mr President , I should like to record my grave concern about the presidency 's apparent intention that negotiations on the possible future accession of Cyprus to the European Union should not go ahead exclusively with the legitimate Cyprus Government , a concern whose intensity increases in light of the continuing silence of the European Union 's institutional bodies in the face of statements by Turkish government and military agencies threatening military action against Cyprus in response to its reinforcement of its own defence .
The European Union must unequivocally condemn this aggressive attitude and action by Turkey .
Mr President , we all know that the WTO has a central role to play in the fair regulation of international trade relations .
The holding of the Singapore Conference thus represents an undeniable advance , valuable in defining agreements that will help to move mankind forward in the right direction .
But that conference has highlighted some very different approaches and concepts , especially as regards social standards .
To think it sufficient to stress that problem in a final declaration and then go away with a clear conscience , or to believe that it is enough to refer the question to the ILO on the pretext that international trade and social rights should be kept separate , is irresponsible to say the least , especially bearing in mind the limitations of that institution 's power to act .
I would call this a retreat forwards . Above all , it demonstrates the political desire of certain Union governments to submerge the question of social standards in the WTO .
I take a very dim view of the Union 's failure to present a united front .
We were not all singing from the same hymn book in this area , which played into the hands of certain developing countries .
I take a very dim view of it because the Union could , and should , have done more to achieve the setting-up of a working group on social standards within the WTO .
Mr President , I understand that it is not always easy to arrive at the best compromise at such difficult meetings as Singapore .
But I find it shocking , and even pathetic , that developed countries could barter information technologies , whisky and brandy for the exploitation of millions of children who are being forced to work - work to death , in some cases - and whose numbers are still growing according to the ILO itself .
You will understand my reaction , which is that humanity should take precedence over financial gain , a reaction that keeps faith with the values of democracy , solidarity and humanitarianism .
My profound desire is that the Union should take strong action against any failure to respect human rights in the field of labour , and that it should not hesitate to take the necessary steps when specific illegal acts become known , as in Burma and elsewhere .
So we have a choice . Either we succeed in introducing social standards into the WTO , or we shall see the proliferation of social struggles in countries regarded as politically and socially stable .
What is happening in South Korea today should be seen as a grave warning .
Mr President , the Irish proposal covers issues which are of the utmost importance .
There has already been a good deal of debate about these and I have no wish to go over the same ground again .
Who could fail to approve in principle of the programmes that have been outlined : on the issue of fundamental rights , for example , or freedom of movement , on strengthening the common foreign and security policy and doing more to combat crime ?
The people who elected us - and to pre-empt Mr Brok , that means one third of the voters in Austria - also appreciate the importance of all these values and know that we must go on working to maintain and consolidate them .
But they know too that the Member States and their representatives are broadly of one mind on the basic issues which the document addresses in detail .
What they do not know is what the Intergovernmental Conference will make of the Treaty as a whole , in other words to what extent the Treaty that is arrived at will differ from the one to which they gave their approval .
That is why we regret the fact - which has been mentioned by a number of speakers - that some important practical questions for Europe 's future , in particular institutional questions , have been left unresolved for tactical reasons , and discussion of them has been postponed .
We do not believe that we shall be able to counter people 's anxiety regarding future developments or achieve the much-vaunted goal of transparency if we keep the public in the dark .
On the contrary , that would serve to heighten their concern about creeping centralism , as would remarks such as those made by Commissioner Fischler , who told an Austrian newspaper that he would flatly reject the European Parliament being involved in deciding his budget .
Concerns of this nature are also being aroused , however , by the planned extension of majority decision-making and the suggestion from the presidency , in its conclusions on the second Dublin summit , that the legal framework for the introduction of the euro should be based on Article 235 of the EC Treaty .
This suggestion , which is being heard more and more frequently and has also been made in a study by Mr Bandet , demonstrates the tendency on the part of the Community , regardless of the formal commitment to subsidiarity , to use dubious legal grounds for laying claim to powers to which we believe it has no right .
Mr President , I also wish to offer my sincere congratulations to the Irish presidency on its success in carrying out the task - which it took on at a difficult time in the life of the Union - of drawing up a draft treaty to serve as the guidelines for the final stage of the negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference , to which I shall now restrict my comments , as chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Institutional Affairs .
Parliament clearly set out its position on the IGC in the two resolutions contained in the Martin / Bourlanges and Dury / Maij-Weggen reports .
I would refer Members to those reports , with which they will be familiar .
The guidelines that were approved at the Dublin summit indicate the course to be adopted in the final stage of the negotiations .
Given Parliament 's wish to be involved in the work of the IGC , we are bound to point out certain inadequacies , ambiguities and shortcomings in this document .
The proposals on extending the codecision procedure are imprecise .
The IGC is on the right track , but little has actually been decided or laid down .
The subject of majority voting in the Council - which is a crucial issue in the present Union , and will be even more so following enlargement - is not addressed .
Nor has much progress been made in setting out precise proposals for combating unemployment , which is the scourge of the European Union and modern civilization as a whole .
The document contains other inadequacies , ambiguities and shortcomings .
The proposals concerning external policy and the instruments for carrying it out are not bold enough , and the Commission 's role in this area is not defined .
There are no clear proposals on the CFSP either , nor any substantial proposals , but only hints , on the subject of European citizenship .
And the questions of enhanced cooperation and flexibility , which will probably be the two concepts that will make possible a Union of not only 15 but 20 or more , are dealt with ambiguously .
It is to be hoped that during these final six months - the six months of the Dutch presidency - this ambiguity will be eliminated and these concepts will be fleshed out .
Lastly , the European Parliament 's relationship with the national parliaments is not clearly defined in these guidelines , which nonetheless constitute a framework which we believe to be very important , and on which we offer our sincere congratulations to the Irish presidency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to add a few words on the conference in Singapore .
It is always a matter of some surprise to me how we in this Parliament , instead of acknowledging the achievements of a major conference such as Dublin or a successful conference like Singapore , manage rather to denigrate that success by making excessive demands .
Surely , as the European Parliament , we too must be able once in a while to acknowledge positive results - so that when the people outside hear us , they will see that progress is being made - instead of always using the same negative yardstick . What use is that to anyone ?
And when the individual speakers come to realize afterwards what thanks they get for adopting such an approach , they will see that they are appreciated only by themselves , and even that appreciation is misplaced .
Together , we experienced a conference in Singapore which opened against a background of heavy scepticism .
It was the first conference to review the functioning of the WTO , and the decisions at it were taken by a consensus procedure involving 150 countries .
The 15 countries of the European Union , which were represented by the voices of the Council and , in particular , the Commission , could achieve nothing if a single country - Albania , for example , or any of the others - refused its assent .
Under such circumstances , the conference was an important and positive milestone as regards the future development of the WTO .
I should like to make that point here , and I should also like to convey to the Council my appreciation of the fact that it worked : that we spoke with one voice in Singapore .
The person to whom we owe that achievement is Sir Leon Brittan , and I should like to thank him in particular for the committed approach which he took , in close contact , of course , with 15 different ministers who subordinated their own interests to the fact that they had made the Commission their spokesman .
In my opinion , we as a Parliament were , so far as possible , well integrated in the process .
We went to Singapore in order to take part , and that should continue to be our practice in future .
I am fundamentally grateful for that , even if parliaments never achieve everything they might wish .
We must also be very satisfied as regards the results of the conference .
The conclusion of an agreement on information technology products , with the green light for a future deal on telecommunications , is an historic event in terms of the further development of world trade .
It will contribute to prosperity and encourage free trade ; we can all see it as something extremely positive - and we should be saying so .
My final point is this : of course , the emerging and developing countries are in an extremely difficult situation .
We read every day about the troubles which are taking place in those countries and how poverty in their societies is on the increase , and it is understandable that people there should fear that we are seeking , by laying down environmental and social standards , to make them less competitive .
What is needed is mouth-to-mouth resuscitation : a real and continuing effort to convince these countries that it is in their own interest for us to move forward together .
Singapore was a successful conference .
As the European Union , we can take pride in our presence there , and I would only say that if we can sustain this kind of development , we shall also , in the long term , achieve our goal of free world trade .
Mr President , I too would like to talk about Singapore , and I believe we should have had a separate debate on this important subject .
I wish to raise in particular the cases of China and Taiwan .
China would rightly complain if - after satisfactory economic negotiations - political objections were raised to its entry .
The same logic must apply to Taiwan .
Economic negotiations on Taiwan 's entry to the WTO could be completed easily - possibly within weeks .
They should be .
And Taiwan , a major trading power and an important democracy , should be allowed in .
It is unhealthy for the world 's trading arrangements to continue to exclude the Republic of China , because of the demands of the People 's Republic of China .
The difference in this case between a ' Republic ' and a ' People 's Republic ' is like the difference between a jacket and a straitjacket .
Of course we must bring the People 's Republic in too - as soon as certain basic conditions have been met .
This would strengthen the WTO and help reform in China .
Under President Clinton 's new China policy the American and European positions are much closer .
We in the ELDR Group urge our negotiators to redouble their efforts to achieve a solution to these problems .
And if they were not discussed in Singapore we would like to know why .
Mr President , we had Dublin and we had Singapore .
In Dublin , the pact of budgetary discipline was adopted .
After half a century of Keynesianism we were told that wealth comes from the quest for the grail of the balanced budget .
I have studied all the statistical surveys of nineteenth century American public finance and European public finance and I have never come across a balanced budget .
It is true that a stability pact has been adopted , with a budgetary criminal law that allows countries found drunk in charge of a budget to be punished for it .
Then there was the single currency we have been promised for 1999 , and the social clause drafted as if the country of Adam Smith , creator of the universal poverty of nations , could at the same time rediscover ultra-liberalism and talk about social affairs .
Fortunately , we also had Singapore .
Clearly , we avoided disaster in Singapore , because we planned to reopen the agriculture file and then didn 't .
But , Mr Santer , let us not go back to Punta del Este .
The United States has adopted the Fair act .
In April 1996 it severed the link between production and aid , and it is occupying a position of strength with a view to reopening negotiations at the end of the year 2000 .
Let us not lag behind , Mr Santer .
It is true that the President-in-Office has told us that an area of philosophy has been created .
That is Dublin 's great contribution .
But I would remind you that Descartes was born in France , published his works in the Low Countries and died in Sweden .
He too , along with Spinoza , invented the European area of philosophy , before Dublin .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Irish presidency and , in particular , the Prime Minister and the Irish Finance Minister , for the progress that was made on economic and monetary union .
December 1996 will be seen as a watershed for the whole process of economic and monetary union .
It was the pivotal point where economic and monetary union went from simply being an aspiration of the European Union to becoming a reality .
It will be an important point in Europe 's history .
But I want to turn my attention to the Pact for Stability and Growth .
Let us not forget that it is called a Pact for Stability and Growth .
It is crucial that the agreement that was reached in Dublin is implemented as it is written .
I hope that all the people who signed up to that agreement , on the Pact for Stability and Growth , will honour it as it is written and that there will be no rearguard action either by members of the Monetary Committee or the Central Bankers or , indeed , any particular Finance Minister from any major Member State in the European Union to undermine the compromise that was reached in Dublin on that pact .
If there is an attempt at any stage to try and change that agreement or make it less rigorous , then this Parliament will roundly condemn it .
It is essential that the Irish Prime Minister and the incoming Dutch presidency honour that agreement .
Secondly , I want to turn to something that the Irish Prime Minister , Mr Bruton , said about the role of government in trying to create jobs and boost the economy .
I was rather disappointed , given the excellent partnership between the public and the private sectors in Ireland in helping to realise the very high growth rates in Ireland in recent years , that the Prime Minister should say that in a market economy there is little role for government action .
The multiplier effect of public investment has a crucial role in boosting growth and boosting employment .
If you look at the Irish economy , Prime Minister , you will see that in your own economy the role of public investment has been absolutely crucial in getting the sort of growth rates that you have had in recent years .
That is why we need concerted action at European level : a common economic policy , particularly in the field of public investment , so that we can boost growth rates and tackle the unemployment problem .
The final point I want to make is in relation to the way in which we now have a centralized monetary policy and what we do on economic policy .
I address this to President Santer and to the Irish Prime Minister .
During the course of 1997 it is absolutely essential that the Council , the Commission and this Parliament seek to establish a mechanism as a counterweight to the centralized monetary authority of the European Central Bank so that we have some sort of economic governance within the European Union .
That means a strengthened Economic and Finance Committee of Finance Ministers ; it means a stronger role for the European Commission ; it means a stronger overseeing role for the European Parliament .
That must be our objective during 1997 .
I hope the Commission and the Council will come forward with proposals on this matter .
Mr President , like so many others , I want to congratulate the Irish presidency on the success of its term of office and to say that because smaller countries have fewer resources , the success which they achieve therefore deserves greater commendation .

I want to compliment Mr Bruton the Taoiseach , Mr Spring the Tánaiste and Mr Mitchell all of whom worked extremely hard and contributed immensely to that success .
I want also to acknowledge today that it was not just while Mr Bruton was President-in-Office that he was dedicated to the European ideal .
All through the years he has promoted the European ideal and been a hard-working and well-informed advocate of European Union .
It is particularly important to say that at this time .
In his New Year message , speaking to his own people in his own state , he set out as one of his three objectives to work for the creation of a federal Europe .
It is easier for us in the institutions to advocate these things ; we are expected to do so .
In the years immediately ahead we have three important tasks to accomplish . I refer to the Intergovernmental Conference , the single currency and enlargement .
Some of these things , in particular enlargement , will not be achieved without sacrifices by the people who are in the European Union at the present .
If we are to achieve success in this area , we cannot do it by making agreements between our own institutions - the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
We must win over national public opinion .
National and regional parliaments have a very big role to play .
That is why I appreciate so much the long-standing service to the European ideal in the Irish context which the present Prime Minister of Ireland Mr Bruton has given and in which he has been well supported by Mr Mitchell .

I want to refer briefly to the statement by Ms McKenna that European monetary union is a bad thing and that Ireland should not be involved .
She based this on our trade flows with the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe .
Her figures are out of date .
Today we export 40 % of our goods to the hard-core countries of the European Union and 28.5 % to the British market .
I would remind her that in the 170 years of monetary union with Britain we made less progress than in the 17 years of monetary agreement with the countries of the European Union .
Mr President , I hope you will forgive me , but I see the results of the Irish presidency and the Dublin summit above all in terms of their value as a starting-point for the Dutch presidency , especially when it comes to employment .
Without wishing to criticize the Irish presidency in this respect , I would nevertheless point out that there is so much fog surrounding these issues that I cannot say that things have now been made so clear that nothing can go wrong with the Dutch presidency .
Our aim with the creation of the chapter on employment was that a balance should at least be established between monetary policy , on the one hand , and the policy on growth , employment and cohesion in the Community on the other .
When we look at the results of your presidency , I have to say , in any event , that such a balance is not present in the draft treaty .
According to this proposal , employment policy has to be in keeping with the economic guidelines ; that is the only thing which is said on the matter , but the reverse must also be the case .
That is now precisely the point at issue .
One cannot simply continue with an economic and monetary policy without , at the same time , taking account of the effects on employment - and not only on the people who are already in work , but on the many millions who are outside the employment process and who , despite the financial measures taken in recent years , have still not found a job .
I hope that this fact will be brought home clearly once again in the summit discussions .
In short , there is a great deal more to be done here , not least because the proposal from the Dutch presidency does indeed suffer from the same fault .
The inclusion of the Essen procedure in the treaty , which we now seem to have in mind , is totally inadequate .
We also need a timetable and specific aims and indicators .
Only then will we be able to overcome the lack of commitment in the declarations .
Finally , I should like to make another comment on the opening statement by Mr Bruton , which contained a plea for more education and training .
On the face of it , that is a reasonable point to make , but it is precisely because the Member States have drastically reduced their expenditure on education and training in recent years .
That also has a great deal to do with EMU , and now with the stability pact .
But I would commend to the House a scientific report which appeared in my own country yesterday and which points out that , however important education and training may be in terms of ' employability ' , they do not create a single new job .
Here I would quote Mrs Papandreou , the former Commissioner , who told the House that there are now people in Europe who have been trained and retrained six or seven times , and who are still waiting for a job .
This point is still being ignored , it is still thought that education and training , that economic stability will automatically lead to employment .
That is nonsense , unless there is an accompanying policy aimed specifically at creating jobs .
I should like to see Mr Santer 's stability pact focusing on that in the first instance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak about the third pillar : about what Dublin has achieved so far in that area , and about our expectations for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Our most important project in this respect is Europol .
Everything was agreed in the Maastricht Treaty , then long drawn-out negotiations on the convention caused delays , and now the project has become bogged down in ratification procedures in the national parliaments .
The fact that Europol is not yet operational is scandalous .
Now it is up to the national parliaments to do their best to give Europol a chance to work .
My second point concerns the growing belief that Europol needs to be given power to act on its own initiative .
It would use that power not to displace national police forces , but rather to have optimal scope for action - not as a European FBI , but simply as a European police authority with responsibility for certain serious crimes which have a European dimension .
That is the direction - already mapped out by Parliament - which the Intergovernmental Conference has to take .
My third point is this : we all wish to see substantial sections of the third pillar brought under the Community umbrella .
This applies in particular to asylum and immigration , and quite rightly so .
When borders within Europe disappear , only Community legislation on asylum will be successful .
However , if we take that view , then it is time we made efforts to draft joint asylum legislation .
Practical joint legislation on asylum is therefore the third requirement to emerge from the Dublin summit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not always share Mr Nassauer 's views , but on this occasion I have to agree with him entirely .
It is indeed one of the most shameful results of the Dublin summit - and the fault not of the Irish presidency , in my opinion , but rather of the obstructive approach on the part of certain Member State governments - that ringing declarations are still being made about Europol as the body which is about to crack organized crime in Europe .
The fact is that , apart from the ringing declarations , there is no movement at all on Europol .
Europol was supposed to be the magic solution for combating drug-related crime .
But is Europol combating drugrelated crime ?
No .
Europol was supposed to be the magic solution for combating crime involving nuclear materials - an issue , I might add , which has completely disappeared from public debate .
Is it the case that nuclear materials are no longer being smuggled in Europe ?
Probably not , because it is no longer election time in Germany .
It was said at the last summit in Dublin that Europol was to be an instrument for combating the sexual abuse of children , and that action in that area was urgently needed .
But no action is being taken .
We in Parliament have long been aware that in the Member States , the reservations over national sovereignty - and that is ultimately what is at issue - are more important than taking effective action against crime at European level .
The members of our group have no hope of a change of attitude in the Council of Ministers or on the part of the Member State governments .
It is to you that we look , Mr President of the Commission .
You ought to be able to take the initiative , for example by asking the Member States to make operational resources available to your Commission departments which are responsible for third-pillar matters , so that they at least could function effectively .
I am thinking of UCLAF , the anti-fraud unit , which could be much more active in tackling organized crime .
If for once the Commission - instead of taking time off to celebrate apparent decisions at summit meetings , which were not really decisions at all - could decide to call on the Member State governments to put deeds before words at long last in the fight against organized crime , then you could be sure , Mr Santer , that we would applaud you .
But there will be no applause if you continually issue the kind of statements in which you mention all the things which have been decided but not actually implemented .
Be more courageous , and you will have Parliament on your side .
Mr President , in terms of square miles , Ireland is not one the largest Member States of the European Union , but it is a major player in terms of what it has achieved .
John Bruton 's government deserves every respect for the high level of commitment and ability and the energetic initiatives which it brought to the Council presidency .
It built conceptual bridges and demanded practical results , instead of issuing the customary high-sounding but insubstantial declarations .
As to whether Dublin 's ' performance enhancement ' approach also worked in the area of main priority , which is the battle to reduce the figure of 18 million unemployed , it did manage to create a new level of awareness among the Member States and to link a number of measures in order to make them effective .
The measures in question include , firstly , special support for the target groups of the long-term unemployed and unemployed women and young people , involving employment initiatives at local and regional level ; secondly , a significant increase in the quality of training and continuing education , to get us in shape for international competition and make us more flexible and mobile ; and , thirdly , the implementation of the programmes agreed for SMEs , where sound structures and a capacity for innovation will generate new jobs .
Clearly , we are only at the start of the necessary process of dismantling administrative and fiscal barriers .
I would also comment that Mr Santer 's confidence pact has been steadily gaining support .
Rapprochement between the Member States , which was tried successfully in Essen two years ago and has now been documented in the Dublin declaration , is the best way to achieve greater joint responsibility , coordination and cooperation at European level .
There is less reason than ever to oppose a meaningful future Treaty chapter on employment .
Mr President , in my two minutes I wish to focus briefly on one aspect of the outcome of the WTO Conference in Singapore : the question of observance of internationally recognized core labour standards in worldtrading arrangements .
In doing so , I would like to pay tribute to Minister Enda Kenny , the Irish Trade Minister , for his strenuous efforts to achieve a positive consensus position for the Union on this matter in Singapore .
That was no easy task given the hostile position of some of our own Member States , not least the United Kingdom , to any mention at all of core labour standards in the final declaration .
Some will be disappointed with the paragraph on labour standards which appeared in the final declaration because it does little more than reaffirm a commitment to the principle of such standards , underline the role of the ILO and note the need for continuing collaboration between the ILO and WTO secretariats on this matter .
The issue is not made an operational matter within the WTO framework , and I share the frustration of Mr Sainjon in this respect .
But , having been at that conference in Singapore and having witnessed outright the hostility to any mention of these matters from a number of developed as well as developing nations , rather than feeling disappointment , I share the view of Willy De Clercq , the head of our delegation there , that the fact that this matter was not excluded from the negotiations should in itself be counted a success .
The flame has been kept alive .
That is not sufficient .
The Socialist Group calls upon both the Commission and the Council in their preparatory work for the next ministerial conference - and that needs to begin now - to build upon the reference that we now have to ensure that progress is made on core labour standards , as well as environmental standards , and to ensure that we have world trade which is fair as well as free .
I wish to thank the Irish presidency sincerely for its valuable work on this issue .
Mr President , the Irish presidency was right to highlight the successes that have been achieved in preparing for monetary union .
They are to be welcomed .
At last , we can appreciate how great the international impact of monetary union is going to be , because we need a stable monetary framework at international level too , after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system .
We cannot allow speculators to gain a stranglehold on our economies , any more than we can leave trade and the economy entirely to market forces .
So the conference in Singapore was certainly a success as regards the further opening-up of markets and making further progress towards deregulation .
In our view , however , a great deal still remains to be done - and not least by the European Union - if the demands which Parliament has made are to be pursued with vigour .
In particular , more progress is needed on achieving fair international trade .
Our system of rules is far too underdeveloped , not only in the area of social and environmental standards , but also in relation to the way in which international competition operates .
We cannot adopt legislation against monopolies and cartels within the European Union , and then at the same time allow such cartels and monopolies at international level and offer them stability .
That is why we need a system of international competition that will help to make fair international trade a reality .
The same is true in the other area to which I referred .
Europe must speak with a single voice here - something which it failed to do in Singapore .
A presidency and a Commission cannot achieve anything when it becomes clear in Singapore that the European Union is divided on the question of rules in this area .
Progress must be made here .
We cannot steer a course on the basis that free international trade will continue to be successful and contribute to the growth of national economies because it is based on exploiting human beings and despoiling nature and resources .
We cannot simply now set aside the Lyons employment summit .
I can only take a cynical view of the declarations by the G7 Heads of State and Government on exploiting the opportunities offered by globalization , when people and the planet are the victims of such a policy .
That is why we need what GATT and the WTO have always sought to achieve : fair international trade , governed by rules , on the lines that we in the European Parliament have always advocated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all of you for your kind remarks with regard to the Irish presidency and in particular for the well-deserved praise of Minister of State Gay Mitchell who handled relations with Parliament on behalf of the Irish presidency .
I simply wish to make four points in conclusion .
This is the second time in my life that I have spoken before the European Parliament , the first being in September .
In that debate there was an atmosphere of pervasive pessimism and criticism of the performance of Europe .
The atmosphere in this debate is entirely different .
It is a positive debate where people are demanding that Europe should do more but in those demands there is the underlying feeling that they are confident that Europe has the capacity to do more .
That change of atmosphere from September to January is a great credit to the leadership of Parliament and it is also a sign of health in Europe .
Secondly , the treaty which the Irish presidency presented in draft form in Dublin is a treaty for the people .
It is a treaty for the citizens of Europe .
It is not a treaty for an economic entity alone .
It contains provisions in regard to stronger action on crime and drugs .
It contains for the first time provisions in regard to guaranteeing individual human rights .
It introduces for the first time into the Treaty the concept of sustainable development , a matter of great importance to all of us who concern ourselves with the environment .
It strengthens the provision in the Treaty in regard to the protection of the consumer as opposed to protection of the producer .
It also explicitly brings about for the first time a position of equality between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers in regard to co-decision .
These points show that this treaty is bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
( Applause ) This brings me to my third point .
This treaty has to be ratified .
It will not be ratified unless citizens understand that it contains something valuable for them .
As was apparent in the debate , this is not a matter about which we can be in the least complacent .
In all our discussions of the treaty it is very important that we continue to remember that we must translate the treaty language into something that will actually make people willing to leave their television sets , the place where they are having dinner with their family and go to a polling station somewhere in Europe and vote Yes .
That requires an effort of communication .
We must not just get it right ; but we must also simplify it and make it something that contains an emotional message that people will respond to positively .
That is the political challenge that we face .
Finally , I agree very strongly with all those Members who made the point , in particular with regard to Europol , that it is not enough to adopt a treaty or a declaration unless ratification and implementation in the Member States is as strong as the political will to adopt the provision in the first place .
In that respect Parliament must be vigilant in regard to any backsliding by individual Member States .
I accept all the criticisms directed at Member States in this area of failure to implement declarations .
Our record is not brilliant and indeed the record of those who are most eloquent in favour of the adoption of common European positions is often the worst in terms of putting them into practical action , and frequently the record of those who are most critical and slowest in adopting common European positions is often the best in turning them into reality .
( Loud and sustained applause )
I have received nine motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
Election of Quaestors ( continuation )
I can announce the results of the third ballot for the election of Quaestors :
Members voting : 464 Blank or void ballots : 9 Votes cast : 455
The results are as follows :
Mr Killilea : 194 votes Mr Paasio : 214 votes Mr Viola : 169 votes

As a result of the third ballot , I declare Mr Paasio and Mr Killilea elected Quaestors of the European Parliament and congratulate them on their election .
Pursuant to Rule 16 , the Quaestors will take precedence in the order in which they were elected .
Vote ( number and membership of committees )
The next item is the vote on the motion for a resolution ( B4-0028 / 97 ) on the number and membership of parliamentary committees .
Amendment No 1 has been withdrawn .
I give the floor to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy on a point of order .
Mr President , regarding Amendment No 1 , to which you just referred , I should like to thank the honourable Members who agreed to join me in signing it , and I should also like to thank the PPE Group for giving up a seat on the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to enable all the groups to be represented on that committee .
The question raised by the amendment related , in fact , to the representation of all the political groups on the committees .
I think you should refer to the Rules Committee the practice which has grown up over the last few years of neutralizing certain committees , which I believe is a violation of Rule 135 , which provides for equitable representation of all political groups and Non-Attached Members on committees , without making any distinction between the committees that are not neutralized and those that are .
It is not proper that the Conference of Presidents should be able to make a proposal to any parliamentary committee on which one political group is not represented , and of course that applies especially to the Rules Committee .
I think that this point should be cleared up and that Rule 135 should be interpreted in its correct sense .
Thank you , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
I shall consider your request .
In any event , as an active substitute member of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , you know as well as I do that any Member or political group can bring before that committee whatever matters they think fit .
I put the proposal for a decision as a whole to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Programme of the Dutch presidency and the situation in Serbia
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the programme of the Dutch presidency , including the situation in Serbia .
I give the floor to Mr van Mierlo , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we like to say that Europe is the cradle of democracy , but no one can deny that there is still a gap between the process of European integration and securing democratic legitimation for it .
And however we might try to explain this , the fact remains that there is a gap to be bridged .
It is with this in mind that I appear before the House .
It is a great honour for me to be here with you , particularly as you elected a new President yesterday .
Allow me to congratulate you on your election , Mr President , and to wish you strength and wisdom in your new position .
I hope that our meeting today will lay the foundations for constructive cooperation between the Council and Parliament over the next six months .
The programme for the Dutch presidency has been described as austere , which is an accurate but incomplete description .
We are austere because we are ambitious .
We are modest not in our aims , but in how we set about them .
We do not have either the time or the space to concentrate on a few national priorities .
The European agenda is the only one we are pursuing , and I cannot conceive of any greater ambition at the moment than using this agenda to achieve the results that Europe needs .
It was with this in mind that the Netherlands drew up its programme for the next six months , and the energetic work of our Irish predecessors has been of great assistance here .
You should already have received the written text of our programme , and I shall focus in my address now on the main policy challenges that are facing us .
We tend to regard the turn of a century as far more important than just the next number in the series .
Whichever way one looks at it , it is certainly true that the coming millennium coincides with far-reaching changes in Europe , changes which could finally heal the memory of our darkest hours .
This is not just some law of nature taking its course , it is an historic opportunity to be grasped and shaped .
It is an opportunity not to be missed .
For some years now , we have been discussing the dilemma of whether we should consolidate or expand .
Where should our priority lie ?
Recent events in Europe have shown that we can no longer remain intellectually uncommitted in this debate .
No one can go on claiming to support consolidation or enlargement in the secret hope that this will give the alternative less chance .
With the fall of the Berlin Wall , enlargement became an historical imperative , but at the same time we realized that we cannot expand without consolidating , so it became a case of doing both .
We are approaching enlargement of the European Union on the largest possible scale , an enlargement that will finally give the Union the right to call itself ' European ' .
At the same time , we are working on the most intensive policy consolidation that integration will ever face , in the shape of economic and monetary union .
We wondered what stage we would have reached in the progress of European integration when we took over the responsibilities of the presidency , and here we are on the threshold of two fundamental changes in European development : enlargement and the establishment of European monetary union .
But Europe is not quite ready for them .
That is why the Netherlands has two main aims : to produce a treaty in six months , and to produce a treaty of substance , a treaty that will enable us to handle these two changes .
Our first concern is therefore the management of the IGC and the management of the run-up to EMU and enlargement .
There are also certain foreign policy issues which are of such magnitude and such vital importance for Europe that they simply have to be given priority .
I should like to begin by saying something about the Intergovernmental Conference , EMU and enlargement .
The Intergovernmental Conference is taking place in the run-up to the 21st century , a century which must see an undivided Europe .
We are determined that the IGC will be concluded on time and will produce substantial results .
Our Irish predecessors have laid solid foundations for this , and further impetus has been provided by France , Germany , Portugal and the Benelux countries .
The European Parliament has played an active part , both through its resolutions on IGC issues and through the constructive contributions of its Members - Mr Brok and Mrs Guigou - in the negotiating group .
There is a good deal of work still to be done , starting with the more sensitive areas where little progress has been made , such as institutional reform .
I am thinking here of more decision-making by a qualified majority and relations between the institutions , including the European Parliament .
Even sensitive issues such as flexibility are going to have to be discussed in more practical terms .
Flexibility is the key to eliminating the apparent opposition between consolidation and enlargement .
The ability to be flexible should allow scope for both , whereas without flexibility , a much larger Union will grind to a halt .
But it is also a medicine to be taken sparingly and carefully : too large a dose , and the Union will fragment .
This will undoubtedly be the most difficult intellectual issue for the IGC to resolve , just as the institutions are going to be the most difficult political problem .
We are going to have to take immediate action in both areas in order to fill the blank spaces in Ireland 's blueprint as quickly as possible .
We need to maintain the progress we have made in other areas .
I am pleased to see the trend towards giving Parliament greater legislative powers , and we shall be strongly supporting this , along with the idea of giving you greater involvement in the appointment of the Commission .
Should the gap in European democracy not be closed from both sides ?
If so , then we need to ask whether and how the national parliaments can play a greater role in Europe , without undermining the position of the European Parliament .
We agree that the Union is finally playing the kind of effective and coherent international role that is in keeping with its position .
But this is not to say that a genuine European foreign policy is not proving hard to get off the ground .
Why should this be so ?
The accepted line is that there are major differences in national interests , but are these really as important as is always assumed ?
On closer inspection , I cannot help feeling that for the few genuine differences that exist , there are also many hypothetical ones .
Are the latter sort mainly intended to protect national identities ?
If so , then what is happening is the opposite of what we claim : policy is not being made for the benefit of interests , but interests are being invented for the benefit of policy .
All the more reason to have done with our crippling reliance on unanimity .
Improving our approach towards justice and home affairs - the crucial area of internal security - also needs to be put high on the agenda for early discussion at the IGC .
The Union must be able to act more decisively in combating growing transfrontier crime and drug trafficking .
The Dublin European Council proposed various measures on which we have already set to work , and we have far from exhausted all the possibilities for increasing practical cooperation between the national authorities in this area .
The formulation of the new treaty is now entering its decisive phase .
There will only be a new treaty if everyone makes an effort , and not for the ' honour of Amsterdam ' or some such thing : we are the ones whose honour it will be to make Amsterdam a success .
Economic and monetary union is irrevocably on its way towards the third stage .
A solid and stable euro is now within our sights , if we can achieve a firm stability and growth pact and agreement on the structure of a new exchange rate mechanism and the legal framework for the euro .
This presidency will do everything it can to maintain the dynamism and credibility of the process , first of all by implementing the political decisions taken at Dublin in the fields I have just mentioned .
Let me make our position quite clear on the question of membership .
It is quite simple : every country which meets the criteria is welcome - the more the merrier .
Enlarging the Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean will demand great efforts on their part , but also on ours .
For me it is clear that , without strong foundations , the Union will not come through a further substantial enlargement unscathed .
The need for substantive results from the Intergovernmental Conference thus lies at the very heart of the Union 's preparations , and indeed of our presidency .
The applicant countries will need to make intensive preparations for accession , particularly if they are to be able to participate in the internal market properly .
Accession also needs to have the broadest possible support in the countries concerned , and this will not be gained simply by technical , abstract arguments , but by genuine , intensive dialogue .
This is how people grow to understand each other , and how expectations can be measured against realities .
The disadvantage of the structured dialogue we are now conducting is that it is neither structured nor a dialogue .
It is simply an exchange of ideas , and it needs to be brought down to a more practical level by focusing on just one or two problems that have been discussed in detail in advance .
This goes for every aspect of integration , from the internal market to subjects such as the constitutional state and good governance .
I have some further comments on the subject of enlargement .
Achieving a peaceful , democratic and prosperous European continent in the next century is no longer a vision , but a political mission to ensure that the forthcoming enlargement is a success .
The negotiations will undoubtedly be tough , difficult and long , but what they will essentially be about is the question that is deeply rooted in our European culture : how do you reconcile the principle of ' equal opportunities ' with the unequal abilities that we are faced with in reality ?
I am aware that the absence of a lasting solution to the Cyprus problem could undermine enlargement as a whole .
This being so , and also for the sake of the accession of Cyprus itself , we must ensure that the Union does everything it can to achieve a solution through intensive talks with all those involved , including Turkey , of course .
We have already made a start on this , as well as on talks with the United States and the United Nations .
It is vital that we should all work to the same agenda , and that there should be no hidden agendas either .
I hope that you too will bear this in mind in your relations with that country .
So far I have discussed the IGC , EMU and enlargement , which we see as a strategic triangle .
But it does not stop there .
The world around us is not waiting to see the outcome of the IGC , any more than our citizens and the economy are .
For this reason , we shall be focusing on the continuing development of policy , legislation and the management and government of the Union .
You will have read how we intend to do this in our programme for the presidency .
Our major internal challenges are still creating more jobs , good working conditions , personal and public safety , and the protection of our precious environment .
Combating racism will be given particular attention this year .
The economic foundation of integration - its faithful workhorse - is still the internal market , whose operation requires our continual care and attention .
We must not think of it in isolation .
It is not just a question of creating a larger market as we move nearer to a single currency , it is also a question of how the market links up with the environment and the human dimension .

We need to carry on giving close attention to our activities outside the Union , firstly because there are many violent regional conflicts which we cannot ignore , secondly because we need to stay alert to protect the Union 's interests as a major economic power , and thirdly because the relationship between politics and economics in international relations has become much more complicated .
Taking active measures to support human rights and democracy is also a major focus of our foreign policy , since these ideals lie at the very heart of European culture .
However , there are also more practical reasons why we need to have a European policy on human rights , in that it has become more difficult for individual Member States to conduct such a policy effectively on a purely bilateral basis .
Support for human rights and democracy also needs to form part of a broad-based and coherent approach to conflict prevention and management .
There are a number of important regional challenges that face us .
First of all there is the Middle East peace process where , for the first time in a long while , we now have , if not a breakthrough , then at least some clear progress .
Yesterday evening 's agreement on Hebron was an important step on the road to a just and stable peace , and could give the peace process the new momentum which it so desperately needs .
I welcome the fact that the European Union has shown in the run-up to this agreement that , working in close cooperation with the parties involved and the United States , it can make a substantial contribution to the peace process which can go beyond providing economic support .
Economics and politics cannot be clinically separated here .
Without economic support from Europe , the entire negotiation process would clearly be jeopardized , and this gives the Union the right and the duty to play an active political role in the process - not primarily as a negotiator or mediator at the negotiating table , but a political role nonetheless .

The recognition given by all the parties to the role played by our special envoy , Mr Moratinos , underlines this fact , and I should like to take this opportunity to express the presidency 's appreciation of his commitment and effectiveness .
The role of the European Union in former Yugoslavia is much more overtly political , since many Member States have sent troops there to support the diplomatic and humanitarian efforts .
Careful attention and resourcefulness will be needed to maintain the momentum in implementing the peace agreements .
The decisions of the Peace Implementation Council in London will be important here .
Some of you have asked me to comment on the resolution before Parliament on former Yugoslavia .
Although I naturally do not wish to pre-empt the vote on this resolution , I can assure you that the presidency supports its main thrust .
The Council has clearly and repeatedly endorsed the conclusions of the González report and called on President Milosevic to recognize the results of the elections of 17 November .
I am currently visiting all the Member States to tell them the presidency 's plans and to hear where their specific interests lie .
Everyone naturally mentions the situation in Belgrade , and feelings about it are broadly the same everywhere .
From the outset I have been , and still am , prepared to go to Belgrade as soon as we feel we can achieve something .
But I want to be careful to pick the right moment .
Recent reports from Belgrade seem to indicate that Mr Milosevic is gradually starting to listen to what people are saying , particularly the demonstrators .
However , there is still a long way to go to democracy in former Yugoslavia , and until a satisfactory result has been achieved in Serbia , the world must keep up the pressure on Mr Milosevic and keep on supporting the opposition and the student movement .
The plan for the post-Barcelona process is a good one and shows great promise for Euro-Mediterranean stability in the broad sense .
However , its implementation very much depends on how existing regional conflicts develop , not the least of these being the Middle East peace process .
The presidency will certainly be doing everything it can to promote the further development of the post-Barcelona process .
We shall not accept the kind of split that is threatening to develop in the Council between the northern and southern Member States , with the southern countries in favour of enlargement in the Mediterranean and the northern countries in favour of enlargement eastwards .
Stability in the Mediterranean affects everyone in the Union !
Spain , Italy and Greece 's neighbours are also our neighbours up here in the north .
That is why we , as a northern country , regard it as a privilege to be able to put this view into action by throwing all our energies into the co-presidency of the Barcelona process .
Successful transatlantic relations remain the cornerstone of our external policy and are another area which must be given our undivided attention if they are to continue to be successful .
The situation is no longer as it was in the Cold War , when we were totally dependent on nuclear weapons and the Americans .
If we wish to maintain our relations , we are going to have to look after them , nurture them and invest in them .
We must not limit transatlantic dialogue to simply business and economics , because at certain times it can be vital for America and Europe to take joint action on the world stage .
Europe and America desperately need each other in a world where there are so many sources of instability .
In so many fields - whether it be the world trade system , the management of regional crises or relations with Russia - close transatlantic cooperation is the only key to success .
Inadequate cooperation , on the other hand , is a recipe for disaster .
Where our cultures and interests coincide , we must join forces , for example to protect our common values in terms of human rights .
Where there are differences , we must be able to discuss and deal with them .
This is why we need to promote transatlantic dialogue and the implementation of the EU-US action plan .
The terrible situation in the Great Lakes region of Africa naturally calls for action from the Union .
In addition to providing humanitarian aid , we are going to have to address ourselves increasingly to conflict prevention and management .
Here too , talks have already started with America to see whether we can decide on a joint approach to this very difficult issue .
I know that I have by no means covered all our foreign policy areas , but I should like to conclude with a few thoughts on the changing nature of European integration .
For a long time , many people saw European integration as a ' technical abstraction ' , and it was regarded as a very marginal topic in the national political debate .
The fall of communism and ' Maastricht ' have put Europe at the very heart of national politics in all the Member States .
Areas of traditional domestic policy have taken on a European dimension , whether people want them to or not , and these developments have dramatically changed the nature of integration .
' Europe ' used to mean a technical agenda ' over in Brussels ' , but it is now increasingly becoming an accumulation of national sensitivities .
This is an extremely difficult and unavoidable , but in my view not entirely negative development .
It is difficult , certainly , since it has made the interaction between government and democracy at European and national levels much more complicated .
But has not national government also become much more complicated ?
We have nothing to teach each other on this point !
I often think that the crisis we have in Europe and the impotence we feel are really the sum of all the impotence felt in the Member States , which is why we have so little room for manoeuvre when we come to the negotiating table in Brussels .
We have so little leeway at home that we cannot afford to go back with a message that our supporters will not find acceptable .
It is difficult and unavoidable , but there is a positive side to it , in that it shows that integration is maturing .
What is the point of European integration if it has not taken root in the minds of our citizens , or if it does not affect the things that are important to them ?
People still find it easier to identify with their own country and their own region , but they are understanding more and more , and they see every day that there are so many things that go beyond what their own country can do .
People and Europe are becoming increasingly aware of each other , yet they are still to far too great an extent strangers .
President Vaclav Havel , who made a memorable speech to this House in 1994 , had also identified this problem .
On reading the Maastricht Treaty , he was astonished at the fact that common ground-rules should be laid down for such a disparate group of countries .
He was impressed by the ingenious structure , but he concluded that : ' My reason has been spoken to , but not my heart ' .
There is a difference between the lifeless letter of the Treaty and the living reality of integration , but the fact remains that the Union is an edifice that has been constructed , and is perceived as such by many people .
However , the question for me is whether or not we can expect people to feel anything like passionate about Europe as an edifice .
Has our European age not taught us all we need to know about the ambivalent relationship between emotion , statehood and war ?
And is not this lesson we have learned the very raison d 'être for the edifice we call European integration ?
Europeans need to be able to identify with the body governing them , but with what I would call rational emotion .
We cannot force them to do this , of course , not if our capital cities play ' cat and mouse ' with each other and with Brussels , or if democracy competes with itself at national and European levels .
And certainly not if Europe makes exaggerated claims , since these simply lead to inevitable failure and thus generate discontent .
However , looking no higher than the goals of realpolitik will not work either .
Identification with Europe will only grow if our European edifice can do its job convincingly and if it has democratic legitimation , so it needs to be transparent and accessible too .

It will also help to promote identification with Europe if the national politicians conduct a fair , open and conscientious debate that extends beyond their own borders .
The increasing Europeanization of what I referred to earlier as national sensitivities makes this essential .
Do we not now need to develop something like a new culture together ?
The Treaty , in my view , need not speak to the heart , but it should be much more readable .
The European Union is an edifice , a unique interaction between the supranational level and the Member States .
It is also unique in that it is almost easier to say what the European Union is not , rather than what it is .
It is something which exists much more in the eyes of the outside world than in the eyes of its own citizens .
Making it clear what the Union is , and what it can and must become , is a task which faces all those involved in European integration , not just in the European institutions , but also in the national governments and parliaments .
This , at least , is the view taken by the Dutch presidency .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for your congratulations and for the statement that you have just made .
I now give the floor to Mr van den Broek , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , on behalf of President Santer and the whole of the Commission , I should like to add just a few words to the most interesting introduction given by Mr van Mierlo , on which I should like to congratulate him and his team .
As you know , President Santer regrets that he is unable to be here this afternoon because he was required to attend Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
I shall be quite brief .
On 7 January this year , the entire Commission visited The Hague to discuss the Dutch presidency 's plans , and it was encouraging to learn from these intensive and very useful talks that we share just the same priorities .
It is what you would expect , and is hardly surprising .
We all realize that the Dutch presidency has a difficult job ahead of it over the next six months , since there are so many priorities , although there may be slightly more emphasis on the Intergovernmental Conference , from which we are expecting so much and which I have to say I confidently expect to be a success under the Dutch presidency .
What is more , Dutch presidencies already have some experience of Intergovernmental Conferences , and I would point out that the birth of the Maastricht Treaty in 1991 was anything but a painless experience .
The road to Amsterdam is also sure to be a bumpy one , but it will be worth it .
As Mr van Mierlo has already said , the Dutch presidency is highly motivated , and we are firmly convinced that without a successful conclusion in June , Europe will be thrown into reverse instead of moving forward .
Certainly , on the subject of enlargement , the Commission promises to have all the preparatory documents for the enlargement process ready by the middle of the year .
These will include the recommendations on all ten applications for membership from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic states and the report on the effects of enlargement on various policy areas , in particular the common agricultural policy and regional policy .
It also means that a new financial framework will be proposed for the Union 's finances after 1999 , and a broad policy document will be put forward concerning the enlargement process itself , such as how to conduct the negotiations , what to do about the transitional periods , and so on .
In short , the Commission also intends to do its share alongside the work of the presidency .
This also applies , of course , for other major areas such as economic and monetary union and the Commission 's contribution to the ongoing institutional debate at the Intergovernmental Conference , where we too recognize the importance of ' flexibility ' - I support Mr van Mierlo 's comments here .
You can expect a paper from the Commission on this subject shortly .
The word employment has been mentioned , and I was pleased to hear it .
You know how determinedly President Santer and the Commission keep on stressing the added value of having policy convergence in this field .
We intend to put forward more detailed proposals in Amsterdam , including an action plan to ensure greater freedom of movement in our common internal market .
On the subject of foreign policy , we support the priorities that Mr van Mierlo described , though I agree with him that there are many more than he had time to mention .

I should like to say a few words about the situation in Belgrade , in view of your motion for a resolution and the questions on the subject that have been addressed to the Commission .
It goes without saying - and here too I agree with what Mr van Mierlo said - that the Union and the Commission insist that President Milosevic must carry out all the recommendations of the González committee .
It is also self-evident for the Commission that until this happens and until a number of other conditions from the Dayton Agreement have been met , there can be no question of any formal links between the European Union and Belgrade , any cooperation agreements or any technical aid or preferential trade for Belgrade . We have proposals on all these issues on ice , but the current political situation in Belgrade rules out any possibility of acting on them .
I should like once again to congratulate Mr van Mierlo on his introduction and to assure him that he has the full support of President Santer and the entire Commission .
We are looking forward to working closely with the presidency .
Mr President , it is an honour and a pleasure for me to be able to welcome the Dutch presidency on behalf of the Socialist Group .
My group has great expectations of the presidency , expectations which Mr van Mierlo 's speech has just confirmed , and we have no doubts about the European-mindedness of either the Netherlands Government or yourself , Mr van Mierlo .
But friends must be able to take criticism as well as praise , and there are a few critical comments I should like to make .
First of all , greater attention needs to be given , as you are well aware , to bridging the gap between Europe and its citizens .
The bureaucracy , the endless round of Council meetings and the obscure and incomprehensible deals are hardly likely to fire people with enthusiasm , either in the Netherlands or elsewhere .
That is why we hope the Dutch presidency will promote greater openness , greater transparency in decision-making and more consultation , not least with the European Parliament .
It is quite ridiculous that we sometimes have to go to Stockholm to find out what happened at a Council meeting .
The Netherlands , with its tradition of open and democratic government , has a role to play here , and this also goes for the other problem area , the poor management of the Union 's finances .
Parliament , the Commission and the Council must work together to ensure that resources are used carefully and correctly .
We feel that the Dutch programme lacks specific proposals for improving controls , and indeed I have to say that it lacks specific proposals concerning the Members of Parliament themselves .
We need a European statute for all MEPs .
We have been calling for this for ten years now , and I think it is high time the Council did something about it .
We hope the presidency will take steps to introduce the statute this year .
Europe needs popular support , it needs people to believe in the European ideal again .
We can achieve this by ensuring that the Union puts its own house in order , and by pursuing clear policies which produce practical , tangible results .
We are naturally pleased with the presidency 's plans in the field of employment , because we need more jobs in Europe .
Unemployment stands at over 10 % in many Member States , and this naturally provokes activity from the trade unions .
The idea that ' EMU equals unemployment ' is probably wrong , but then so is the blind pursuit of monetarist objectives .
More investment in people , pressing on with shorter working time , greater scope for time off to look after children or for further training or retraining - all these are already in the pipeline and are just waiting to be put into effect .
Europe has its own role to play here , in addition to what the Member States are doing .
Europe also needs a stronger Community policy on justice and home affairs , which is a prime example of the kind of area about which people are concerned .
We are talking here about international crime , combating drugs and racism , and policies on fraud and asylum .
At Maastricht , it was planned to bring the third pillar under the first , but I have the impression that the opposite has happened , because there is now more emphasis on the intergovernmental approach , which is not what was intended .
So much for my criticisms . There are , however , some positive points that I should also like to make .
We welcome what was said about environment policy , which is an area where we have a very robust agenda , for example in connection with development cooperation .
We think it is wonderful that we are gradually adopting a coordinated , integrated approach to the environment and development cooperation .
I shall not comment on what the Minister said about the IGC , because this is something we all support .

We feel that Europe is out of kilter , and we need to do everything we can to restore the balance between north and south , not least financially , and between our own interests and international solidarity .
We need to work for EMU , but also for employment , the environment and equal opportunities .
Of course , we realize that the presidency is also keen to keep its balance and not to slip .
But if a tightrope-walker loses his nerve and tries to stand still , he inevitably falls off .
Mr van Mierlo , I wish you courage and inspiration on the rather slack rope in front of you , and I hope to be able to bring you the hearty congratulations of the Socialist Group when I meet you at the other end in June .
Mr President , the founding father of my country - I am a firm believer in a Europe of nations - was the Prince of Orange from France , who was also the Count of Nassau in Germany .
This was the first example of Franco-German cooperation , as it were , and it led to the birth of the Netherlands .
When he was in difficulties , Willem van Oranje Nassau used to say in French : ' Il n 'y a pas besoin d 'espérer pour entreprendre et ni de réussir pour persévérer ' .
You do not need to hope in order to try , or to succeed in order to persevere .
I would just like to point this out to the Dutch President-in-Office , although the situation now is not as hopeless as it was in 1548 .
I should like to thank Mr van Mierlo for his philosophical and constructive speech .
You may be primus inter pares for 14 Member States , but given that post-war European idealism has faded and the whole concept of Europe is gradually being eroded , you can no longer afford to hide behind terms such as flexibility and pragmatism .
You are aware of this too .
After the reunification of Germany , we are now on the threshold of further enlargement , and we have an historic opportunity to ensure that we become more than just an extended trade zone .
Mr President-in-Office , how do you intend to use the same ambivalent policy which the Netherlands applies to drugs as a means of combating crime ?
Your proposals for consolidation are not clear .
Are you or are you not prepared to accept a rotating Benelux Commissioner ?
How can you claim to be playing a useful role in the Middle East peace process when you have failed to do so up to now in Europe ?
Once again , it is the United States which is supporting the Serbian opposition and which defused the minor missile crisis on Cyprus .
How inconsistent it is to continue to support human rights violators such as Algeria and Syria , while allowing relations to cool with Turkey , towards which the Union has certain obligations and which deserves a high level of financial support .
Is there any area where you are actually taking action under your putative foreign policy ?
I cannot find any mention of one .
Next , there is the democratic deficit .
This does not lie with the European Parliament , but with you !
You are the one who is in charge of all this secretive legislation in Europe .
However , we shall give you the benefit of the doubt , and ultimately we shall be judging you on the following points .
Has the legislative activity of the main European legislator , the Council of Ministers , become as open as that of its fellow legislator , the European Parliament ?
We do not need to amend the Treaty , simple rules of procedure would be quite enough .
And has the social aspect of Europe been maintained by allowing workers a say in legislation ?
Moving on to human rights , you criticize China , but it would make more sense to criticize Suriname .
Can you tell us whether Bouterse had Dutch nationality at the time of the murders , and will you ensure that the mysteriously lost file on his nationality is made public ?
This will help the cause of human rights and help to combat international drug trafficking .
Are you maintaining your support for the hard euro , for instance ?
What have you done to improve the governability of the Union before we proceed to enlargement ?
These are the points we shall be judging you on at the end of the day .
On behalf of the small delegation in the Union for Europe Group , I should like to wish the Dutch presidency every success , because this is what Europe needs and deserves , and we must all work together for its stability and security .
I wish you every success , Mr van Mierlo .
Mr President , I should like to focus on the central issue of European politics and leave Dutch domestic policy to the Tweede Kamer , which Mrs Maij-Weggen remembers so nostalgically .
The European Union is entering the most important phase of its development since 1957 .
We are standing at a crossroads .
Either Europe - north and south - has a single currency by 2002 , or else we shall have wasted this opportunity for an entire generation .
Either the Union incorporates the democracies of Eastern Europe , or else it will have failed in its most important task .
Either it maintains the integrity of its institutions intact , or Germany 's geopolitical importance will once again spawn resentment throughout the rest of Europe .
All these issues have tended to make many national leaders afraid to give the Union the direction it needs , preferring all too often to fan the flames of nationalism by what they do or refuse to do .
All too often , they are happy to blame Europe for unpopular decisions taken at national level , while they themselves take the praise for what the Union achieves .
This is threatening to make the Union the focus of everyone 's fears rather than their hopes , and it is a dangerous development .
European integration is not irreversible .
Nationalism is far more destructive and the Union far more fragile than many people realize .
In this context , the main tasks facing the Union under the Dutch presidency are clear .
Firstly , we need to ensure that the single currency is strong and stable from the outset and , secondly , the Union must be made more decisive and democratic in preparation for enlargement .
Eleven countries are waiting to join , six in Central and Eastern Europe , three in the Baltic region and two in the Mediterranean .
The more disparate the Union becomes , the more difficult it will be to take decisions .
A Union with 18 to 26 members must therefore choose either to restrict the use of the veto or else to see itself become a miniature version of the OSCE .
A Union which can no longer take decisions rapidly and decisively will soon become irrelevant in the eyes of its citizens and lose their support for good .
Nothing is more damaging to the Union 's credibility than its continual failure to speak with one voice in international politics , for which misuse of the veto is partly to blame .
Portugal blocked an EU agreement with ASEAN , Spain an agreement with Canada , the United Kingdom opposed a common position on chemical weapons , and Greece blocked the Union 's Mediterranean policy .
The scope for blackmail in the Union 's trade and foreign policies is simply far too great at the moment , and that is why the Treaty needs to be amended .
Of course , amending the Treaty alone is not enough .
The Member States also need to be prepared to share its common interests and principles .
Nowhere is this more urgently needed than in former Yugoslavia .
When will the Union finally take steps to make Belgrade and Zagreb hand over those suspected of war crimes ?
Yes , the Union is making sympathetic noises about the conclusions reached in London , but none of it is very convincing or effective .
I therefore call on the Dutch presidency to propose joint measures making all non-humanitarian aid to former Yugoslavia conditional on the handing-over of suspects to the tribunal in The Hague .
The public also urgently needs a response from the Union to the rapidly growing problems of transfrontier crime and migration .
I would also urge that measures be taken to tackle fraud head-on , that we should have better controls at our external borders , and that we should have a fair system for sharing the burden of looking after refugees .
If decisive action is to be taken on each of these issues , the Member States must limit the paralysing effect of the veto .
The Union must be able to take action where its citizens want it to , on urgent international problems .
It is time that the Union finally carried out the promises made to its citizens in the Maastricht Treaty .
National politicians must allow the Union to become more than just the sum of selfish national concerns .
I hope that the Dutch presidency will be successful in achieving this .
Mr President , I should like to open a parenthesis in this debate which so far has been exclusively in Dutch and introduce a few ' brushstrokes ' with southern colours .
As has already been mentioned , three major subjects are on the agenda which cross over in some cases in such a way that they are inextricably linked and should inevitably be included among the priorities of the Dutch presidency .
I refer to the final phase of the IGC , the third phase of economic and monetary union and enlargement .
There are other subjects , of course , which are particularly felt by the citizens of our countries and which also deserve to be concentrated upon .
These include growing social problems and , in particular , the serious scourge of unemployment , citizen participation in Community life and decision making and whether or not to apply the principles of Community cohesion and solidarity which are enshrined in the Treaty .
I should like to begin by saying , and this is no surprise , that it is my conviction that little or no progress has been made in this presidency concerning the last three aspects which I have just emphasized .
Indeed , on a social level - and especially in the field of employment - there seem to be no changes of a major sort on the horizon , no significant changes , no basic changes concerning what have been Community policies until now .
Given the obsession as to the application of nominal convergent criteria , there has been greater flexibility , greater deregulation , more precarious employment and more unemployment .
Of course , we do appreciate the references made in the announcement on the programme of the Dutch presidency , such as achieving more equality between men and women .
But , given the current social situation , this is not enough .
New guidelines and , in our view , a farreaching change are vital .
The same could be said about citizen participation , which must deal with the fact that citizens are increasingly ignored in Community life and decision making .
At the eve of the end of the IGC and of the third stage of EMU , we would like to hope for a greater determination and an attempt to increase participation by European citizens , which would lead to a wider ranging , more pluralistic and involved discussion and would enable citizens to be listened to , thanks to referendums on all of these matters .
As the European Parliament itself has already emphasized , after all .
However , the Dutch presidency has also done little to advance this matter , limiting itself to the already known and limited expectations as to the outcome of the IGC and the intentions which we have definitely noted but which to us appear to be excessively vague .
As to cohesion , here it is a complete vacuum , and not even a single word on this area .
But this is quite symptomatic and revelatory of a certain conception of the European Community .
Now I wish to come back to the three main subjects which I referred to at the beginning .
In today 's debate , we have already had the opportunity to assess the outcome of the Dublin Summit in two aspects , and we have to repeat that what we said then , in other words that we should refer to an aspect which to me seems to be of particular relevance and topicality , as far as EMU is concerned and the current presidency .
This concerns the statement made by the current Dutch Finance Minister as to the select group of countries which , as has already been pointed out , should enter EMU at the beginning of the third phase , therefore giving priority to the levels of development or of buoyancy of the economies of those countries , switching to a subordinate level the respect or not of nominal convergence criteria .
We are not surprised by this declaration .
However , we hoped that it would come at some point in time , from this or that origin .
Not only because we thought that those criteria were artificial and arbitrary in any way , but also because , primarily , the difficulties in fulfilling them are quite obvious even on the part of countries with the stronger economies ! - and secondly because the real aim is the creation of a strong currency and , in the end , we always suspected that the final decisions in this area would be - or will be , finally adopted according to markedly political criteria .
However , and here I am concluding , all of this calls for the new presidency to clarify thoroughly and objectively what they are really proposing in this area .
And that is what I am asking for now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here is another non-Dutch person taking the floor .
It is a pleasant custom to wish each other all the best at the start of the year , and I wish the Dutch presidency great courage in dealing with the difficult problems that are sure to land in its lap over the next few months .
In its programme , the Netherlands says that it feels fortunate to have inherited the draft of the new treaty from Ireland , but a clear majority here in Parliament has already pointed out that it is not so happy with the Irish presidency 's proposals for the treaty , and for one crucial reason , which is that little attention is given to the issue of democratization .
In particular , as Mr Brok explained this morning , there is a very real danger that the further expansion of the Union will lead to fewer powers for Parliament , which would simply be the final straw .
It is quite ridiculous to be launching campaigns to bring Europe closer to its citizens , while at the same time leaving the elected representatives of those citizens out in the cold .
On the contrary , we need to put their representatives in a stronger position , and I think the exposure of the BSE scandal by our Committee of Inquiry here in the House has been convincing proof that elected representatives are irreplaceable when it comes to safeguarding the interests of the people and public health .
We know from experience that the Commission and the Council are far too easily swayed by lobby groups or the governments of certain Member States .
So I think Parliament must be able to prove that it can safeguard these important interests , and this is also why we want Parliament to have codecision rights on agricultural matters .
As regards the proposals on the internal market , I feel it is a little too ingenuous to claim that they are the safest way to guarantee growth and employment .
What sort of growth ?
Growth with more pollution and less concern about jobs ?
It is clear that the internal market has not scored well on creating employment over the last few years , and I would point out that there is increasing evidence of conflict between sound environmental regulations in the Member States and free competition on the internal market .
When Germany proposes tax breaks to promote environmentally-friendly energy , these are dismissed as distorting competition , and countries which try to internalize environmental costs are attacked , while others which externalize such costs do indeed distort competition .
We cannot have any sustainable development based on practices of this kind , which are on the increase in the internal market .
The employment initiatives announced are extremely disappointing .
Yet again they simply refer everything to the ECOFIN , which has proved over the last few years to be more of a stumbling-block than a stimulus .
We have taken measures to oppose this , with a number of our colleagues .
I should like to conclude by saying that when you ask yourself , Mr van Mierlo , whether a European edifice can fire people with enthusiasm , the answer is that it will generate some enthusiasm if Europe presents itself as an emancipating political project designed to deal with an incomprehensible and uncontrolled world market .
Instead , though , the Union often presents itself as subservient to the world market .
I would urge the Dutch presidency to be more active on human rights and external relations .
The Netherlands does not have the greatest reputation in this area , preferring to leave it up to the Union to take initiatives on human rights .
But you are now in the driving seat for Europe , so do something about it this time , and put pressure on President Milosevic to recognize all the election results in his country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following Mr Miranda 's example , I too should like to contribute in a different language to this debate , which has largely been conducted in Dutch , and to say how delighted I am that the Netherlands is holding the presidency for these next six months .
As a member of the transnational Radical Party , I cannot forget that it was a Dutchman , Mr Bos , who chaired the preparatory committee at the UN which - thanks also to the European Union 's help and support - led to that organization setting 1998 as the date for the International Criminal Court to be established .
This is proof indeed that , given the necessary political backing , small steps can be taken in the right direction ; and I now hope that other such steps will be taken during the course of the Dutch presidency .
The challenges lying ahead of us , and ahead of you , are naturally enormous , and I think they will be crucial for the future of the European Union .
1997 is clearly a key year for economic and monetary union ; let us therefore hope that the Dutch presidency will take to heart the increasingly widespread idea that , alongside the necessary and proper route towards the single currency , some political thinking should be devoted to its much-needed counterpart - economic management - so that convergence will not merely be monetary , but will really bring about the kind of economic management that was called for by Jacques Delors , without which the day the single currency comes into being could also be the day that sees European public opinion becoming ever more disaffected with Europe and with the European Union , on which we have to rely if we are to meet the international challenges facing us .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs has prepared an excellent document for the IGC , which I hope Parliament will adopt tomorrow . I hope that the Dutch presidency will regard it as a valuable contribution in bringing to a successful conclusion the work started under the Irish presidency .
With regard to the challenges which await us in the field of foreign and security policy , I do of course understand the possible limitations , but I believe that with a resolute government at the helm , some important matters can be taken forward : for example , floating the idea of a moratorium on the death penalty , or taking action on China - not giving in , as I hope you will not , to the veto which Italy and France are brandishing to prevent you from putting down a motion on China in the Geneva Commission on Human Rights .
You have our best wishes , then ; you will have Parliament behind you , and yours will be small steps in the right direction .
Mr President , the greatest challenge facing the Dutch presidency is undoubtedly the conclusion of the IGC .
Institutional reform is needed to make the Union capable of accommodating 25 or more Member States .
Ireland 's general draft for the reform of the Treaty does no more than list the problems here , so there are still hurdles to be overcome .
It has now become clear that the reforms will relate primarily to the further consolidation of European integration , in other words more powers for Europe and the further centralization of decision-making at European level .
This seems an obvious development from the point of view of achieving a particular concept of the Union 's future structure .
However , we must not overlook the negative aspects associated with this , particularly the ever-widening gap between European government and its citizens .
I would therefore urge the Dutch presidency to give particular attention to two issues arising from this disturbing and unwelcome side-effect of centralization .
The Irish proposals provide a useful platform here .
Firstly , there is the proposal that a protocol should be attached to the Treaty defining how the principle of subsidiarity is to be applied .
At the Edinburgh summit at the end of 1992 , certain clear statements were made about this principle in response to Denmark 's rejection of the Maastricht Treaty , but they were unfortunately not taken up by the European Parliament , nor have they been included in the Irish draft .
However , applying the statements made at Edinburgh could do much to reduce the quantity and detail of European legislation , which will be necessary if a Union with 25 or more increasingly disparate Member States is to remain manageable .
In this context , the Dutch presidency must not hesitate to give back to the Member States , if necessary , certain responsibilities which have been transferred to the Union .
A second useful proposal in the Irish draft is to strengthen the position of the national parliaments in the administration of Europe .
A great deal is made of the democratic deficit in discussions of democratic controls on European decision-making , and it is generally felt that the answer to the problem lies in giving the European Parliament greater powers .
However , we must not forget that the national parliaments form the basis for parliamentary democracy in Europe , and this is how the public sees the situation .
We therefore also support the proposals to involve the national parliaments in the European decision-making process , for example by sending them early drafts of proposals for European legislation .
It would seem that flexibility is going to be the most serious obstacle in the negotiations over the next few months .
It was proposed as a way of preventing those countries which refuse any further transfer of sovereignty from standing in the way of the group of countries which are prepared to allow it .
We are not exactly taken with this idea , which is likely to undermine cooperation and make decision-making in the Union more difficult .
We feel it would be better to restrict cooperation at EU level to areas of policy associated with the internal market .
Countries which wish to have more extensive cooperation in fields such as foreign policy and justice can reach agreements on such matters outside the Treaty .
Finally , we hope that the Dutch presidency will manage to bring the IGC to a successful conclusion , but we feel that the quality of the results is more important than keeping to a self-imposed timetable .
I wish the Dutch presidency great physical and mental resilience in its work .
Mr President-in-Office , in your statement you mentioned a number of commendable programmes and projects , which are worthy of support ; we should not , however , like to see what has happened with other presidencies , when issues have remained pending indefinitely and some problems have slipped out of sight , only to swell the workload of subsequent presidencies .
The Alleanza Nazionale regards the coming months as crucial , since the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference will provide once and for all the key to understanding what form the EU of the future will take : in other words , whether it will be what is often called a European Union ' à la carte ' , from which each country can take what attracts it most , without feeling bound by commitments which do not suit it ; or a Europe with a single market and a single currency , where the financial and monetary policies of the individual countries are determined by the European Central Bank and , within that , by a small group of bankers belonging to the so-called Deutschmark zone ; or else a Union enlarged to include the Eastern European countries , and therefore - unless the rules are changed - ' unravelled ' and in the grip of severe social and employment-related problems , which would then absorb its attention to the detriment of initiatives in other sectors ; or again , as the Alleanza Nazionale hopes , a Europe which , above and beyond economic and financial cohesion , will at long last speak with a single voice on foreign and security policy issues , a Europe which sees the problems of the Mediterranean region as vital to its interests and to its very existence - not least the problem of the population explosion in the countries which face us on the North African coast , and the consequent illegal immigration of desperate people in search of work and a livelihood .
The Dutch presidency could make a major contribution on these and other issues , even though certain statements from you and from the governor of the Dutch Bank lead me to believe that attention is more likely to be focused on the achievement of the single currency and compliance with the Maastricht criteria .
Despite the fact that my party is in opposition in Italy , I would also point out that the efforts being made by the Italian Government to comply with the commitments entered into at Maastricht - of which we in the Alleanza Nazionale are highly critical - deserve respect from everyone : no one has a right to judge them with arrogance or with an air of superiority .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
Mr President , the Netherlands presidency has a great responsibility on its shoulders .
Europe is at a critical moment in its development with two monumental challenges looming on the horizon .
Firstly , of course , there is a move towards the final stage of economic and monetary union but there is also , just as crucially , the enlargement of the European Union towards the Mediterranean and in Central and Eastern Europe .
As we all know , the accession negotiations will not begin until after the Intergovernmental Conference has concluded and after the Dutch presidency .
But if the eventual negotiations are to be successful , the preparatory work has to be undertaken during the next six months .
Rather than the somewhat vacuous exchanges of the past , there must be a real effort now at constructive dialogue .
A number of important issues must be raised - issues which range from aspects of the internal market to the development in Eastern Europe of civil society in all its complexities .
In this context , too , let us also focus our attention on the reforms of the European Union , reforms which will be necessary to allow enlargement to come about .
In this House we all realize the need for institutional changes but let us not forget that our budgetary structures , particularly the structural funds and the common agricultural policy , will have to be fundamentally reformed .
Without these changes enlargement simply will not come about .
Over the next few years , alongside EMU , enlargement of the Union must be at the very top of our agenda .
Enlargement is not a question of if , but of when and of how .
Enlargement is in the interests of both the European Union and the applicant states .
It is in the interests of the Union because it will give us a larger market and will help secure peace and stability .
It is in the interests of the applicants because the Union can help them achieve economic prosperity and political progress .
I wish to emphasize that all of us , together as Europeans , have a moral responsibility to work with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe so that they can overcome the legacy of the past forty-odd years .
The environmental degradation , the gross economic mismanagement and the stifling of any truly democratic impulses are all aspects of that legacy .
In partnership with the people of Eastern Europe we must overcome those aspects conclusively .
Together we have to build a new and united Europe - a Europe which includes East as well as West .
To a large extent the speed at which enlargement will take place and the extent to which the huge problems will be overcome will depend on the preparatory work of the Dutch presidency .
I hope that essential preparation will take place , and I am sure it will .
Madam President , I also wish to express my best wishes to the Dutch presidency .
In my view , what we should be expecting from this presidency is not that it should manage to resolve all the problems currently facing the European Union - something which would be physically impossible , for reasons of time - but that , by shaping wills and achieving consensus , it should be capable of giving a boost to the process of European integration , which is now at a critical point in its timetable .
And , precisely because it is at a critical point in its timetable , I believe that the Dutch presidency must proceed with a large measure of prudence , skill and tact .
I wish to tell you , therefore , Mr President-in-Office , that the remarks of your colleague , the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council , who quite improperly referred to the hysteria of certain Member States in wishing to join the monetary union , were hard to understand .
It is not , in my view , the task of the Council presidency to pass judgement on the capabilities of the Member States ; nor is it helpful to undermine a consensus unnecessarily , especially in respect of issues on which the Treaty can be the only judge .
In all fairness , however , it has to be said that the President-in-Office clarified matters in his speech this afternoon .
What we are assessing today are the Dutch presidency 's priorities and goals .
In this context , I should like to ask the President-in-Office two questions .
Firstly , has the Dutch presidency scheduled for the informal meeting of the ECOFIN Council in April an initial analysis of the revision of the financial perspectives , with a view to the future financing of the Community ?
Secondly , has the Dutch presidency provided for the possibility of the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference on the reform of the Treaties being adopted by only 14 Member States ? And , on the basis of its contacts with the present British Government , has it formulated any initiative for breaking the deadlock to which an outcome of this kind would give rise ?
I shall end , Madam President , as I began : by expressing my best wishes for success to the Dutch presidency , and reminding the President-in-Office that the challenge for the presidency - which , as he rightly said at the beginning of his speech , is in a way the challenge for the European Union as a whole - is to reconcile unity and diversity , using prudence , skill and tact , to make compatible the legitimate interests of the individual Member States , including those of the Netherlands , and to forge the European Union into a harmonious whole .
And to that end , Mr President-in-Office , our group advocates two principles : for ideas to be placed at the service of ideals whenever necessary ; and for the individual Member States to seek their advantage in advantages for all .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I too endorse the positive assessments of the prospects which you have outlined in respect of the IGC , monetary union , enlargement and , in particular , the strengthening of dialogue .
Within this positive context , however , there is a major source of regret , and I am sorry to have to strike a negative tone here : there is a risk that the European Union could take a distinct step backwards in sectors which affect its political , social and economic life , the internal market in particular , trade policy and the wretched problem of employment which we are trying so hard to combat .
Your programme does not devote a single word to tourism , which even in the past has been a marginal issue in the EU , a kind of foreign body in the Community organism .
Well , tourism is now dead - or rather , it has been killed off , murdered by the Council of Ministers in the middle of last month .
Its demise was announced in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which I think will just be called the Committee on Transport from now on , to the dismay of all those who have spent years working on two projects .
The first of these was a tentative project entitled ' Community actions in favour of tourism ' , which came to fruition in 1994 ; it was a modest affair with appropriations of just ECU 6 million .
If you consider that my region in the Alps , with only 450 000 inhabitants , earmarks ECU 1 m more than what the Union as a whole was allocating , you will realize just how vital it is to pay attention to tourism .
That action , however , made reference to tourism after the year 2000 , so the new child has died in the cradle !
Tourism is referred to in the Treaty on European Union , where it is described as a fundamental sector of activity .
The figures speak for themselves : 9.5 million workers , meaning just as many families , 65 % female employment , 296 million visitors every year within Europe , and revenue of USD 165 000 m , which is over 5 % of European GDP .
Evidently all of this carries no weight .
Tourism , as I said , has been killed off .
But it is not the tourism of Venice , Paris , Madrid or Amsterdam : that is constant , inevitable and guaranteed .
It is the tourism of depressed and outlying regions , where tourism enables people to eke out a living and , in many cases , is the only economic resource .
And it is this kind of tourism that I wish to raise with you , tourism which meets important needs as an instrument of cohesion - a word which is on all of our lips - as an opportunity to meet others , an incentive to safeguard and enhance our cultural , historical and artistic heritage .
Moreover , this form of tourism stimulates other sectors : transport , trade and agriculture .
And we sit here discussing - it has really happened - what becomes of juveniles in fish farms producing bass , or the percentage of cocoa in chocolate .
So please , Mr President-in-Office , listen to the 12 countries which said yes to tourism , and not the three which , through that absurd mechanism , unanimity , said no .
Madam President , unlike my colleague and fellow countryman , Mr Salafranca , I understood perfectly well the remarks made by the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council , the Dutch Finance Minister , which the Dutch Prime Minister naturally tried to cover up with diplomatic words .
He reminded us what economic and monetary union actually means and , further still , how it is interpreted by what might be called the Union 's economically and financially strongest Member States .
He informed us that economic and monetary union will mean a two-speed Europe and , moreover , that the strong countries are wondering whether a number of the weaker countries will be suitable for that two-speed Europe .
In other words , he told us what the President of the Bundesbank and other monetary and government officials in the Europe of the hard core might really be thinking .
I understood the message perfectly well , therefore .
And I believe that a great many Spaniards , Italians , Greeks and other Europeans will have understood perfectly well what sort of future awaits them in this kind of economic and monetary union .
Consequently , diplomatic words can do little to mask something that was said not speaking from the heart , but thinking of the wallet , and I say this as someone who certainly does not support the ill-fated chapter of the Maastricht Treaty on economic and monetary union .
I have devoted most of my speaking time to referring to a matter that I did not intend to address , and now I cannot fail to say two things .
We are also debating the situation in Serbia .
I believe that Parliament must call on the Dutch presidency to demand that President Milosevic recognize the results of the municipal elections of 17 November in their entirety .
However , we should not forget that another former Yugoslav republic has also been having problems - not least in joining the Council of Europe - because democracy is lacking : I refer to Croatia .
Everyone must be judged by the same standards .
I shall end by pointing out that , as a Spaniard , I was disappointed to find that the programme of the Dutch presidency fails to mention the development of relations with Cuba .
I am not sure if this is because , just a few days ago , President Clinton thanked the Union for the position that it has adopted - in exchange , of course , for suspending application of , but not annulling , the unacceptable Helms-Burton Act .

Madam President , Mr van Mierlo and Mr Patijn , your colleague Mr Kok said yesterday that it would be better for politicians to keep quiet about EMU , but I can promise you that I have no intention of doing so .
It would be a very bad thing for democracy in Europe if we did not talk about a subject which is causing people increasing concern .
And rightly so , since EMU in its present form will simply lead to social disintegration .
It applies a budgetary strait-jacket , but offers no measures to combat fiscal competition .
Much is said about employment , but no instruments are provided for it .
In the race for the euro , the Member States are leaving 20 million unemployed people in the lurch .
The single currency is bound to lead to division and discord .
The southern countries are afraid of missing the EMU boat , and Mr Zalm , as someone has already pointed out , called their fears hysterical .
He was being much too candid .
My friends in the south , if only you knew how the Netherlands talks about your plans to join the EMU .
They would much rather see you outside it than profiting from it .
Everything has to be sacrificed for the hard euro , even the Amsterdam treaty if necessary .
Mr Kok knows very well that quarrels about EMU are a real obstacle to the reform of the Treaty , while further political integration is needed before there can be monetary integration .
A monetary union which is not also a social and ecological union and which does not create jobs could well fall victim to divisions between the governments and suspicion from the public , so as far as I am concerned , EMU can stay on hold until we have a better treaty which makes the Union more democratic and decisive , a hard enough task in itself .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what can we hope for at the outset of the Dutch presidency ?
Bearing in mind the extremely , and increasingly , restrictive aspects of the Treaty , in what ways can we hope to shape the future of Europe ?
First , on the economic and financial front , the Dutch presidency is going to have to negotiate the single European market , and in this area it will certainly be much preoccupied by a great many monetary questions that dictate the future of the famous single currency .
What we hope is that European prosperity , employment and what remains of free enterprise in Europe are not going to be sacrificed on the altar of monetary stability , and that the situations of our various currencies are not going to be inflicted with new forms of monetary discipline that will prevent the necessary adjustments from being made .
The Dutch presidency , so we hear , will also be active in the Middle East peace process .
What we must hope for here - and it certainly won 't be easy - is that Europe will speak with a voice that is not the voice of the United States of America .
Our interests are not the same and we have a different part to play .
As far as organized crime is concerned , it will undoubtedly be necessary to review certain unwise provisions regarding the opening of frontiers , both inside and outside the Union .
As for enlargement , we hope the European presidency will carefully consider the dangers represented by allowing the accession of a country which , sadly , has recently been split in two by an inexplicable war .
Madam President , clearly and briefly , with a legal basis enshrined in the Treaties , the Dutch presidency is defining its programme text with rigorous challenges forced upon us by the way in which we are moving towards the introduction of the euro .
Normally very few people read - or if they do so they do it without special attention - the promises included in presidencies ' working programmes .
But this time , in our view , these texts are taking on greater importance because they include the political , public and universal promises of the Dutch presidency and also because they are contradicting the recent declarations by the Dutch Finance Minister , Gerrit Zalm , who , with no or with very little restraint , condemned the southern European countries to ostracism as far as the single currency is concerned .
Among other things he said two very serious things : the first was that he did not think it would be advantageous for the southern countries , where the sun shines in winter , to be included at the beginning in the first wave of countries joining the single currency , and secondly that he thought that there was a hysteria - climatic of course , I imagine - in the efforts made by those States to fulfil the convergence criteria .
The President-in-Office of the Ecofin Council cannot talk rubbish of that kind .
First of all , because only on the basis of the Treaty and the rigorous fulfilment of the criteria which Community law imposes can we define who will enter in the first wave or not .
We are all equal when it comes to these matters and there are not States which are more equal than others .
It is one thing for the Dutch Minister to express his opinion without an objective basis or a legal basis on a very sensitive subject concerning relations between Member States about the subject of non-existence Community norms .
Secondly , it was offensive vis-à-vis the efforts made by governments , citizens and countries which believe in a European compromise and are doing everything to fulfil the belt-tightening policies which are called for .
As any average person in charge of European affairs acknowledges , these policies are a vital contribution to the strengthening of European public finances , fighting unemployment and making the projects for a single currency credible vis-à-vis the US dollar or the Japanese yen .
I have taken note of the declarations made at the beginning of the presentation of the working programme and in this debate and I welcome them , just as I also recalled the comments made by the Dutch Prime Minister , someone for whom I have utter respect and consideration , Mr Wim Kok , who said that he thought that those declarations were a gaffe .
In fact , Mr Gerrit Zalm will need months if not years , certainly longer than the duration of this presidency , to understand the Treaty on European Union , to study the Maastricht criteria , to read the forecasts of independent bodies such as the OECD , for example , in order to conclude that at least in the case of my country , Portugal , we are just as ready as the Netherlands when it comes to most of the Maastricht criteria and far better than the Netherlands when it comes to public debt .
It is exactly for this reason that we think that the Netherlands is fully entitled , once they fulfil those criteria , to join along with us , Spain and Italy , the first wave of countries joining the single currency .
It is my desire , a desire which I make formally to the Dutch presidency and which in the end everything will be done so that the project to create a single currency will be a project covering the largest number of European citizens possible , based on requirements of rigour , but also based on the principle of equality among all the States in the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , I am speaking only on the subject of Serbia .
I welcome the Council 's decision of 9 January , calling on the Serbian Government to respect in full the results of the local elections in Serbia - in other words the victory of Zajedno , the alliance of opposition parties - to grant freedom of the press , to stop putting the independent media under pressure and to promote dialogue among all Serbia 's political groups .
After one foreign minister of this European Union brought the whole of the EU 's foreign policy into disrepute through his unnecessary trip to Belgrade before Christmas , coupled with his imprudent remarks there , my own visit to Belgrade last week was made very straightforward by the Council 's statement of 9 January .
The opposition alliance Zajedno , the students and also hundreds of thousands of Serbian citizens have been coming out onto the streets for several weeks now .
If our foreign ministers had experienced for themselves this atmosphere of a country reawakening , as I did last Thursday night , they would probably offer even more support for this democratic revival and also threaten - and actually impose - more stringent sanctions on Milosevic and his government .
All those who think that we know where we stand with Milosevic , but not with the opposition , should pause for a moment and consider this idea .
Is someone who brutally suppressed a democratic demonstration in his own country in 1991 , who ordered the attack on Slovenia and the war against Croatia , with the first mass graves in Vukovar , who bears the original responsibility for the war in Bosnia , with its concentration camps , mass graves and displaced persons , who was labelled the butcher of the Balkans by the US diplomatic service in 1992 - is such a person more credible , is he better suited to establishing democracy in Serbia , than the opposition leaders whom he has sought to deprive of their electoral success ?
However questionable the political stance of the two male leaders of the opposition alliance may have been in recent years - as I have said here before - the last few weeks have shown that they wish to give Serbia a new democratic face , through peaceful means and with the support of the civilian population .
I am expecting the West to put at least as much trust in them as in Milosevic , if not more , since they have joined in an alliance with Mrs Pesic , leader of the Civil Alliance , who has campaigned from the outset against war in the region .
I am also expecting the European Union to urge Milosevic , or indeed anyone else who comes to power , to solve the problem of Kosovo at long last , because that is where it all began and that is no doubt where it will end !
Milosevic is no longer the sole guarantor of the implementation of Dayton .
Responsibility for ensuring that now lies in Sarajevo , Pale and Banja Luka , and those in authority there must be called to account : they must be regarded as our partners in dialogue .
And everything would be much simpler if Karadzic were at last put where he belongs .
During my days and nights in Belgrade , I sensed that the people there wish to be released at last from the stifling atmosphere and the repression of the Milosevic regime .
Commissioner van den Broek , I hope that the European Union will in particular help the independent media - and especially Radio 92 , which is playing a leading role - to facilitate this democratic process .
It was at the time of the last Dutch presidency , and of Foreign Minister van den Broek , that the war in former Yugoslavia began .
Please , Mr President-in-Office , do everything in your power to smooth Serbia 's road to Europe , and also to bring real peace to Bosnia .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , the six-month period of the Dutch presidency is beginning at a crucial period for the European Union , as it faces the dual challenge of enlargement and intensification .
Against the background of the intergovernmental conference , it is important not to lose sight of the objective we must pursue : alongside a monetary Europe we must have a citizens ' Europe , a Union which satisfies the concerns and aspirations of its people .
A citizens ' Europe is a Europe which concerns itself with the weak , the needy , the excluded , its children and young people .
That , Mr President-in-Office , is why I have been paying careful attention to your proposals on employment and social policy .
The priority must be to create economic conditions favourable to the development of the job market .
At the same time , it is essential to protect and develop the European social model , as a creator of wealth for our societies and economies .
In this context , the intergovernmental conference will bear the heavy responsibility for providing the Union , at long last , with unchallengeable social powers , enabling it , in particular , to take more effective action in the campaign against social exclusion .
Thinking of the ravages caused by drug addiction among our young people , in terms of dependence , poverty and health , I am also glad to see that the Dutch presidency has made it one of its priorities to combat international organized crime and drug trafficking .
Practical cooperation between the police , customs and justice authorities of our Member States is essential if we are to conduct an active campaign against the drug trade , but - as the President-in-Office is aware - it is equally essential to harmonize national legislation on the penalties for drug dealing and use , because in the absence of such harmonization there can be no effective action and no safety for any of our fellow citizens , and especially for the young .
My final point in this connection is to call upon the Dutch presidency not to neglect the grave problem of the protection of Europe 's children - a problem which is not just a reflection of our concern at recent events but an absolutely fundamental issue for a united Europe .
Once again , I take this opportunity to call upon the President-in-Office to set up a European centre for the prevention and combating of violence against minors .
Such a centre , based on the model of the European agencies , would act as an authority for coordinating activities , but would also be a unique information exchange , which would be entrusted with the very specific priority mission of tracing missing children , by networking the national search centres and the schemes set up by associations and families in our various countries .
In the course of the vote on the 1997 budget , Parliament and the Council demonstrated their support for the implementation of schemes to protect children .
That determination must be translated into specific action , and I call upon the Council presidency to generate the necessary determination for the implementation of this project , so that the 80 million children living in the European Union can grow up in a Europe that welcomes them and is , of course , prepared for a better future .
Madam President , I would like to wish the Dutch presidency success during the coming six months .
The Netherlands are not one of the larger countries , but a country that is dynamic and could make a positive contribution , I would say , which might be rather different from and much more social than anything we have seen since the Maastricht Treaty , and one that is much more acceptable to Europe 's citizens .
We have noted sensitivity on the part of the Dutch presidency concerning a series of issues related to citizens ' rights .
Over some issues , however , we have seen a complete lack of sensitivity and we are hearing the Dutch presidency 's programme here in Strasbourg , in Strasbourg where European Parliament Plenaries have repeatedly raised extremely serious issues concerning human rights violations by Turkey and where the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg has in recent months proclaimed two decisions condemning Turkey , both in relation to the human rights of Kurds and in relation to the assets of Cypriots in areas of the Republic of Cyprus occupied by Turkish troops .
From that standpoint , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to ask you : You have been President-in-Office of the European Union for just a few weeks .
Yesterday , after an escalation of threats , we heard Turkey 's Islamic Prime Minister , Mr Erbakan , openly threatening war and territorial occupation against a Member State of the European Union , namely Greece , and against a country associated with the European Union , namely Cyprus .
To be specific , Mr Erbakan said : ' Greece has learned the lessons of 1922 when the Greeks were expelled from Asia Minor and 1974 when half of Cyprus was occupied , and Turkey is ready to repeat those lessons ' .
He is threatening war against a Member State of the European Union , and in the face of this threat of war we hear neither any protest nor any serious statement of attitude from the presidency .
The only things we see and hear from you are diplomatic circumlocutions of no importance , which merely prepare the way for the convocation of the EU - Turkey Council of Association .
Nobody wants Turkey to be isolated .
Nobody wants walls between Turkey and Europe .
But Turkey must respect the Member States , respect the European Union 's democratic principles like any other country , and what we want from the presidency is to have the courage , the guts to live up to its responsibilities and support Member States threatened by such warlike proclamations .
I expect an answer from you , Mr President-inOffice .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , the Dutch have sometimes been criticized in recent weeks for a lack of ambition in planning their presidency .
It could also be said , however , that their agenda is very challenging .
As Mr van den Broek has pointed out , pursuing simultaneously the aims of deepening and broadening the Union certainly requires a great deal of thought and effort .
I should like to know , Mr President-in-Office , if you are clear about the preconditions for enlargement .
Some of these have already been referred to : I am thinking of the institutional preconditions .
As someone who comes from a small country , I support you in your efforts to ensure that in future , even in an enlarged Union , the small countries should have a sufficiently strong representation .
With regard to regional aid , what ideas will the Netherlands feed into this debate , and will they shape regional aid in such a way that it is still workable in an enlarged Union ?
On assistance for agriculture , are you prepared to support a shift away from a policy of direct subsidies towards one of aid for rural areas , taking particular account of social factors ?
An area which is rarely mentioned , but where I would expect the necessary support from the Netherlands in particular , is environmental policy and the modernizing of nuclear power stations in the eastern half of Europe .
I fully support your efforts to find a real solution here , but I believe that this will depend on many elements being put in place .
Secondly , I would mention briefly something which is very important in the context of disarmament and war .
It is to be hoped that , with the support of the Dutch presidency , we shall achieve something which lies within reach : a permanent ban on production , trade in and laying of anti-personnel mines , as well as the destruction of all antipersonnel mines which now exist .
I would end by asking that , in respect of this important activity - currently being undertaken in the context of the United Nations , but where Europe must now show its true colours - the European Union should wage a successful campaign for the banning of anti-personnel mines , and I hope that you will be able to achieve this before the end of your presidency .
Madam President , over the next few months , Europe is going to be put to the test .
Will the Union be able to reform itself so that it can face the 21st century with confidence - a new era with a series of enlargements and all the problems of integration they will entail ?
Some of the reforms needed to adapt our administrative and democratic structure to the new situation could present difficulties for individual Member States .
The Netherlands has the considerable task of achieving consensus on this very difficult choice , but then consensus is something the Netherlands has always specialized in .
Some people say that this is precisely why the polder economy has been such a success .
The very fact that the Netherlands is accustomed to trying to reach compromises and consensus could make this Dutch presidency an historic one .
But it certainly struck the wrong note in the very first week of the presidency - and I think Mr Salafranca was extremely tactful in how he referred to this , for which I am grateful to him - for a finance minister to express his views so outspokenly and undiplomatically that we can only fear that consensus and confidence will now be very hard to find .
Even a child could tell which countries Mr Zalm was calling hysterical .
A country like Spain , which has just frozen its civil service salaries so as to be able to meet the EMU criteria , will find it very difficult to defend its actions to its people if the EU President-in-Office calls its government hysterical .
On behalf of my group , I must therefore ask the Dutch President-in-Office to explain his behaviour .
The single currency will also require a great deal of work from the Dutch presidency .
The regulations on the legal status of the euro , the finishing touches to the stability pact and a decision on a new European Monetary System are all matters which call for confidence and unanimity .
But even where the single currency has most support in the Union , there are still a number of concerns , and the Dutch presidency is perhaps particularly well equipped to deal with these problems .
Moving on to labour market policy and unemployment in the Union , the Netherlands is right to stress the need for structural changes in policy regarding rigid wage systems , changes in social benefits and greater labour mobility .
One thing I would criticize in the programme of the Dutch presidency is the lack of any mention of a Tourism Council .
People will eventually come to appreciate that tourism is the largest employer in the whole of the Union .
Given that both the Union and the Netherlands Government feel so strongly about ' work , work , work ' , it is all the more incomprehensible that the Dutch presidency seems to ignore the very existence of tourism .
To conclude , I very much hope that the Dutch presidency is going to give us a people-friendly Amsterdam treaty that is just as creative as the city itself .
Madam President , like other Members I would like to wish the Dutch presidency the very best of luck in a very important year for the European Union .
The work undertaken by the Irish presidency has already established many of the yardsticks we need to follow .
Judging by what was said in Parliament this morning in reply to the last President-in-Office , Prime Minister John Bruton , one can see that the emphasis is on a Europe which is closer to the people , which can take account of the people 's concerns , can react quickly and assuage fears but which , at the same time , can stir enthusiasm and passion in people .
So rather than repeat what has been said by other speakers , I just want to mention to the Dutch presidency two points on which I would like to see some action .
One has already been mentioned in the presidency document which has been given to Members : it is the fight against international crime and illicit drug-trafficking .
This is one of the biggest areas of concern to the ordinary man or woman in the street who is the embodiment of the European Union .
A programme on BBC World Television last Monday night emphasized the point again that 82 % of all crime in Britain is drugs-related .
Recent figures from the Irish Police Force say that 76 % of all crime in Ireland is drugsrelated .
With the Europol drugs unit based in Holland , I hope the Dutch presidency will continue the work started by the Irish presidency in bringing forward coordinated and concerted action , moving these issues from the third pillar to the first pillar and getting more and more coordination and more and more cooperation between the Member States in tackling what is an evil and vile illicit business .
Following on from that , my second and final point is that if this European Union is to mean anything , if the new treaty on European Union is to mean anything , it must protect those who are most vulnerable in our society , and that is our children .
We have the ongoing case in Belgium of the paedophile rings .
We have the ongoing everyday problems that children are facing not only with regard to sexual and emotional abuse but poverty , lack of opportunity and protection .
With the amount of goodwill present , there should now be an opportunity for a specific article in the new treaty which the Dutch Government will - we hope - be bringing in under its presidency , to ensure that the rights and freedoms of children are fully and individually enshrined therein .
If we cannot protect our future which is our children , what point is there in protecting the present ?
Madam President , the Dutch presidency is charged with the duty that stems from previous Summits and most recently the Dublin Summit , to further the completion of the Intergovernmental Conference , the third phase of EMU , and the European Union 's enlargement towards the Central and Eastern European Countries .
What is certain is that by acting accordingly , the Dutch presidency will make its own contribution to the edifice of a Europe of poverty and unemployment .
The peoples of Europe can expect no improvement of their living standards and working conditions from the activities of the next six months .
Concerning the situation in Serbia , I would first like to comment on the cautious way in which the President-inOffice approached the issue in his statement .
Madam President , despite the tremendous difficulties it is facing , both economically due to the embargo and because of the problems created by the embattled situation in the Balkan area , the Serbian nation is in a position to establish democratic procedures and extend its democratic rights if it is left free from outside pressures and international ulterior motives .
The Serbian Government 's decision to declare the municipal elections void and the reaction to that decision make it essential to find a solution of the issue within the scope of Serbian law and order and the specific choices of its political forces , to highlight the real problems faced by Serbs and free them from the present situation , which is creating fertile soil for any who are scheming against the rights of Serbia and its people , and to back its struggle for peace in the area , democracy and social prosperity .
From that point of view we cannot condone the intention to impose new measures and conditions upon Serbia with the excuse that we are recognising the democratic rights of the opposition parties .
This insistence on imposing additional measures which in the last analysis make life more difficult for Serbian people themselves , cannot but be regarded as questionable .
Whereas after the Dayton Agreement the Serbian people were hoping for the lifting of the sanctions against them , they see that not only is that obligation not being fulfilled , but on the contrary , no opportunity is lost to maintain and extend the measures against them , the more so just when every Press report nowadays shows that the Serbian Government is already moving towards recognition of the opposition 's rights and acceptance of the recent municipal election results .
It is already apparent that the election results have been accepted for the more important towns and cities such as Belgrade and Nis .
I think the European Parliament 's insistence on imposing new measures can be summed up in one word : that effort can only be characterized as hypocrisy , because otherwise words lose their meaning , unless we label that orientation and that view hypocritical .
Madam President , 1997 is an extremely important year for Europe , as various speakers have rightly pointed out .
It is also a year in which Europe is being led by small countries .
The troika consists of Ireland , the Netherlands and Luxembourg , small but strong countries which are determined to continue the tradition of sound presidency .
Ireland certainly did some very good work , and the Netherlands now faces the very special , perhaps even the historic task of concluding or preparing to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference .
All in all , we feel cautiously confident about the Dutch presidency .
We have confidence in its traditional , efficient and pragmatic approach , but we are also cautious , because we have read newspaper reports and interviews with prominent representatives of the coalition in the Netherlands , such as Mr Bolkestein , who have said things which are the very opposite of what we want to hear about Europe .


I am counting on you , Mr van Mierlo and Mr Patijn , not to follow Mr Bolkestein 's lead in your presidency of the Intergovernmental Conference , but to follow the Benelux memorandum instead .
I am pleased that you called for greater use of the qualified majority , which is essential if Europe is to remain workable .
But I was disappointed that at the very first press conference of the Dutch presidency , it was specifically stressed that unanimity would still be required on matters of fiscal policy .
Yet the Dutch presidency sets such great store by the link between taxation and employment , and also by the CO2 tax , and we have already established that all the problems we have had with this tax stem from the need for unanimity .
I should like to address a few words now to Mr Patijn , as president of the Budget Council .
Mr Patijn , you yourself have witnessed the great uneasiness that now exists between Parliament and the Council .
I would ask you to try , informally and quickly , to overcome this uneasiness .
We do of course share some of the responsibility for it , but the blame mainly lies with the Council , which has not really acted as it should have done in recent years .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , on 31 December , a group of Members of this Parliament drank a toast to the Dutch presidency , encouraged as we were by the success of the last Dutch presidency , which culminated in the signing of the Maastricht Treaty .
On 6 January - Twelfth Day , moreover - the Dutch Finance Minister and President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council made his début with some remarks which showed him to be in favour of creating a very small economic and monetary union , in order - and I quote - to ensure the credibility of the euro .
As if these remarks were not unfortunate enough , he added that the southern Member States which were seeking to form part of the first wave of the third stage of EMU were guilty of hysteria .
Acting as a kind of European team selector , moreover , he limited participation in stage three to Germany , the Benelux countries , France and possibly , with luck - so he said - Ireland and Austria .
You wondered in your speech , Mr President-in-Office , quoting Vaclav Havel , if it was possible to call for a passion for Europe - and this Parliament does of course have that passion . But it is not by means of remarks such as those in question that a passion for Europe will be conveyed to , or caused to grow among , the peoples of which Europe is composed .
The Dutch Finance Minister 's remarks , which you half-heartedly sought to play down the following day , were insensitive , clumsy and in conflict with the Treaty on European Union . Worst of all , they reflected an attitude which is incompatible with the statements of this Parliament , which , although it has always said that it wishes to see a stable , sound , strong and credible euro , has also said that it wishes as many Member States as possible to join the single currency , because this will prevent unnecessary divisions between the North and the South , the rich and poor countries , the Europe of grey roofs and the Europe of the Mediterranean .
It is said in a Spanish classic which you probably know - ' Don Juan Tenorio ' - that a modicum of contrition brings salvation .
The President-in-Office now has the opportunity to make a formal statement of the obvious and say that - whatever his Finance Minister may think - the only law governing participation in the single currency is that of the Maastricht Treaty ; or to make a somewhat more ambitious statement , and say that the Dutch Government wishes a large number of Member States to join the single currency ; or finally , in a fit of passion for Europe , to make the statement we would wish to have and interpret the Maastricht Treaty in such a way as to allow the maximum number of Member States to participate in the single currency .
In a show of generosity , he could also applaud the endeavours of governments such as that of my country , which are making tremendous efforts to form part of the first wave , full of enthusiasm for the latest phase of the process of European integration , which is the third stage of economic and monetary union .
If he does this , the President-in-Office will probably be saved .
If he does not , I am sure that he will be damned .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands on his detailed speech concerning his country 's presidency .
There is just one issue I should like to address today , and that is the question of Serbia , or rather the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Parliament feels that the Dutch presidency should set to work immediately on this urgent political issue , which we would like to focus on in this debate .
For weeks now , we have been following developments in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with some trepidation , weeks of huge yet peaceful protests against the falsification of the local election results .
For the Serbs , this has obviously been the last straw .
The Milosevic government has long been sheltered by the international community because of the Dayton Agreements , but this cannot go on .
Electoral fraud is electoral fraud , and the OSCE representatives judged that this was undoubtedly the case .
The Serbian Government must obey all the recommendations of the González mission , there is no question about it .
The Union cannot do anything with a government that has violated the rules of democracy so seriously .
Through its actions , the Serbian Government has cut itself off from Europe , and relations must remain frozen until President Milosevic concedes to every demand .
Commissioner van den Broek also shares this view , it would appear .
The Union and the Member States must make every effort to ensure that the IMF does not make any concessions to the present Serbian government .
We are not simply concerned about reinstating the election results : this was just one example of Serbia 's worrying democratic standards , which need to be improved .
The Union needs to make this clear , but it must also be prepared to help to strengthen democracy there .
It is everyone 's responsibility .
President Milosevic is wavering at the moment , but his concessions have made little impression on the demonstrators , and he obviously still needs a little more encouragement .
The presidency can help here by organizing a special troika mission to apply the necessary pressure on the spot .
I was a little disappointed with Mr van Mierlo 's statement that although he supports our resolution , he is not sure whether organizing a troika mission is the right thing to do .
I think the European Union must not wait too long , otherwise we run the risk of allowing the Americans to seize the initiative once again .
You can never really tell exactly when such a mission should be carried out or how successful it will be .
I think the people in Belgrade are entitled to expect a European Union presence , and I would repeat that we need to have a more visible profile there .
It is important for the opposition , but it is also an investment in future relations with what we hope will be a more democratic country .
Madam President , other speakers have criticized the Dutch Finance Minister 's political indiscretion .
In my opinion , however , this matter should not be allowed to obscure the reality of the programme of the Dutch presidency , and I would congratulate the President-in-Office of the Council on being the first of his kind to have interpreted , in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the Treaties , the essence of what the rotating Council presidency represents , in a way devoid of all self-will or populism directed towards domestic policy objectives .
Likewise , I believe that Parliament should not dwell excessively on national issues in these six-monthly debates on the Council presidency .
Having said that , Mr President-in-Office , and keeping to the broad outlines of your programme , I should like to examine various aspects of that European reality to which you refer , with a view to highlighting a number of the issues which Parliament considers to be important .
To my mind , it is essential for your presidency to devote itself to clearing the Council 's desk . The Council is the institution which most delays the adoption of draft directives and regulations .
It is not the Commission or Parliament which holds up the legislative process ; it is the Council .
This is an outstanding matter , therefore , and we are expecting you to do everything possible to resolve it .
You will also be performing a great service if you promote the spirit of the Treaties in the Council , as opposed to certain practices which fundamentally conflict with the provisions of those Treaties .
I am referring to the fact that , all too often , the Council seeks a consensus , even in cases where the Treaties allow it to decide by qualifiedmajority voting .
This is contrary to the Treaties and also unnecessarily delays a large number of decisions .
In the same spirit , Mr President-in-Office , you must nip in the bud the attempts of some Member States to bring certain policies back under national control .
I refer in particular to environment policy ; in this respect , it should be pointed out that we have been waiting for the realization of one of the proposals which you highlight in your programme - final implementation of the agreement on the CO2 energy tax - since 1992 , the year in which the Earth Summit took place , when we made a formal international commitment to bringing this legislative measure into effect in the European Union in the near future .
With regard to internal policy matters , it is in my view a matter of urgency finally to adopt the Convention on the Common European Frontier Agreement , as well as to implement measures to combat terrorism and , of course - as other speakers have said - illegal drug trafficking .
Lastly , Mr President-in-Office , I believe that the fundamental nature of the parallel competences of the national parliaments and the European Parliament must not be changed in the next Treaty .
Any fundamental altering or mingling of those competences would be very detrimental to the future of our work .
Madam President , first of all I should like to say that in the field of the environment , at least , I welcome the aims of the Dutch presidency .
I find their programme a curious mixture of worthwhile ambition and unrealism : unrealism because I think there are problems about timetables and the machinery of the Community that are not reflected in the programme they have published .
That realism really has to be developed .
It is laudable that they want to ensure that environment and health policies are properly integrated with other policies , especially employment .
That is very good .
I am very pleased they are taking that seriously .
But I have one or two specific comments I want to make .
I hope that during the six months of the Dutch presidency they will make progress with the fifth Environmental Action Programme , first of all by ensuring that the Council agreement of December is actually transmitted to Parliament so that we can begin work on the second reading .
I hope that they will work to reach an agreement on both drinking and bathing water .
We have already had the first reading in Parliament and I do not see any reason why they should not make progress .
I am very hopeful that they can .
Thirdly , I agree with them that implementation and enforcement of environment policy are tremendously important issues , but I would ask them not to reach an agreement at the first Environment Council but rather to wait until the second one so that they can have the benefit of consultation and discussion with Parliament on this very important subject .
Fourthly , I hope that they will try to deal with the auto oil programme , again , not at the first Environment Council but at the second one , because we can help there .
Lastly , I hope that they will recognize that we do not yet have the framework programme on water and that they will therefore encourage the Commission to reach agreement on that so that we can begin to work jointly .
I wish them well for their six months in spite of the obstructionism of certain Member States in the Council .
Mr President , following the detailed speech by Mr van Mierlo , I have a few comments to make that will perhaps give him the sort of passionate response I know he is so keen to elicit .
I would remind him that European integration was an extremely bold venture undertaken by earlier generations who hoped to realize a dream .
The idea was that there should be much less talk of swords , and much more of the efficient use of ploughshares .
This has actually worked very successfully , and I suppose you could say that we are now living in a kind of ' paradise found ' .
But in the hands of pragmatic bureaucrats , all this becomes in the long run is an empty shell , an edifice , as you said in your speech .
However , I think it is very important to help the Netherlands Government to maintain its momentum in the presidency , which I assume will be safe in your capable hands .
Turning now to the third pillar , which forms part of this edifice , I think that people are coming to realize that clinging on to national sovereignty does not serve the interests of public security .
This is why it is so important for a sovereign decision to be taken to tackle crime at European level .
It is particularly dangerous to go blindly forward in a sector which is one of the most traditional responsibilities of the constitutional state without giving the European Court the necessary powers and without the necessary parliamentary controls at European level .
You are familiar with our parliamentary committee of inquiry in the Netherlands into the conduct of the police and judiciary .
We must realize that it is very foolhardy to press on with measures in this field without having the scope for such inquiries at European level .
It is not our intention , and never has been , to take powers away from the national parliaments , but simply to provide a safe Community haven for those powers which have been abandoned on the wrong doorstep at the Council in Brussels .
I think you need to be rather more ambitious , and on the subject of asylum policy you made a rather amusing comment about the policy in the Netherlands .
You said that the Commission is to be made responsible for coming up with a fraud-proof passport .
Is that not simply the Netherlands Government acting in its own interests ?
From a historical standpoint , I cannot help but find this slightly amusing .
Mr President , the Dutch presidency is not going to be an easy one .
There is a serious risk that no major decisions can be taken before the British elections , by which time there will be only a few weeks ' working time left before the Amsterdam summit .
To finalize , during those few weeks , what others have failed to institute during several months sounds like attempting the impossible - and this is an area where the public expects much from the European Union .
What it expects is guaranteed personal safety , effective action against international organized crime , and against the crimes committed against children , drug trafficking , fraud and corruption .
Yet what does the record show ?
In all these areas , the intergovernmental conference has proved ineffective .
In judicial cooperation , in police cooperation , the story is always the same : organized crime has created its European theatre of operations , while those who should be fighting it are taking cover behind the rampart of their so-called sovereign interests and so achieving little or nothing .
To continue along this road , Mr President , is to face certain failure .
What we must have , if we are to solve these problems , are Community structures , not just to deal with visas , asylum and immigration but also , and most important of all , to deal with crime prevention and with cooperation between police and judicial authorities .
So there are two inescapable conclusions . First , let those who cling to their sovereignty understand that unless they pool something of that sovereignty they risk losing all of it .
And secondly , let the Dutch presidency , if it finds it has too little time to finish tying up an efficient package for combating organized crime , leave the job unfinished and hand it on to the next presidency .
Better to be patient and finish up with workable legislation rather than rush matters and then spend years suffering the consequences of a system that doesn 't work .
Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable Members for their comments - for their praise and appreciation , of course , but also for their criticisms .
We are at the very beginning of our period in office , and as President I naturally have my own ideas on all kinds of things to do with Europe , but as President I also have to listen to what people say , because all their comments will be relevant when it comes to finding a consensus .
I am therefore grateful for almost all the criticisms which have been voiced , apart from those which had a strongly national flavour .
One Member had a good deal to say in this vein , including , rather unnecessarily , that she felt Dutch through and through .
Well , she certainly made that clear .
But I am also grateful to her for her criticisms , which I shall also be able to use , and that applies to everyone 's comments .
I can be fairly brief in my reply , since many of the remarks made come under the portfolios of other ministers , whom you will be seeing here on many other occasions .
I have noted all your comments , most of which were on specific areas - almost everything that Mr Collins said , for example - and I shall be forwarding them to the relevant ministers in their capacity as Presidents of the Council .
They will be able to discuss the issues with you in much more detail .
Many speakers have pointed out - Mr Oostlander most forcefully , perhaps - that this is a crucial year .
The construction of Europe was started with great passion , no one would dispute that .
What I said was that we need not try to fire everyone with enthusiasm about it all at once , but at the same time those of us who are actively involved must feel passionately about it , otherwise it will not work .
What I need is passion of a practical kind , and I need to find it in others if I am to be able to carry out my task .
As I said , I cannot go into every point in detail , but I shall look at a few areas that were mentioned by almost everyone .
Employment was a topic which brought out various responses , with some people feeling optimistic and others disappointed .
Yet others were afraid that the environment would lose out .
Since the Essen summit , it has been increasingly clear that the whole issue of employment is a task for the presidency and the Union .
Any disputes have mainly been about how to provide for it in the Treaty .
It would appear at the moment , when I look around , that there are still some countries which are sceptical about whether the Union really can do something about unemployment , but they are not sceptical about the objectives or responsibilities , simply whether the Union can produce the right instruments to do the job .
Gradually , though , even those who are more sceptical are gaining a better understanding , and it seems likely that we shall be including a specific chapter on this in the Treaty .
I shall turn now to the subject of EMU , which many speakers seem to think is the enemy of our employment objectives .
This is a complete misconception , in my view .
Every country reorganizing its economy sees the shortterm negative effects which this has on employment , but the eventual result can have the effect of creating many more jobs .
We have been through this ourselves in the Netherlands , and we are now reaping the rewards .
The same will be true when EMU is introduced .
EMU is not the enemy of employment .
It may be that the kind of measures it entails could have negative effects in the short term , but it is actually expected to be more likely to increase the capacity for creating jobs .
I think at this point I should repeat - rather unnecessarily , since I made myself very clear during my first speech , but it seems , from what I have heard , that not everyone understood me - what the position of the Dutch cabinet is on the issue of admission to EMU .
I should firstly like to say something in defence of my colleague from the Ministry of Finance .
I was shown the reports in the various foreign newspapers - this was how I heard about it - and I was shocked and wondered if that was really what he had said or meant to say .
I asked him about it , and received an entirely proper explanation .
The word hysteria was used in the context of a description of countries which will not be ready until a year or two after the first year , but before the euro is introduced .
These are countries which are expected to be involved in EMU from the beginning , and in this context he said that he would prefer them to wait , rather than making hysterical attempts to be ready in one year .
I shall not comment on the substance of what he said , but he certainly meant it to be friendly , and the countries in question should not in any event take offence at his comments .
Now , as to the position which the Dutch cabinet has held for the last two years , the position held by the Prime Minister and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Finance , I explained it quite clearly , and I cannot put it in plainer terms : everyone who meets the criteria is welcome , and the more the merrier .
There are no hidden agendas .
This is what we have always said .
However , the view taken in the Netherlands is that we need to be strict in applying the criteria , and that there must be no cheating , and I am speaking here in particular to those countries which have had a whole week in which to savour their indignation .
There are a few points I should like to make about democracy .
This covers everything that people associate with the decision-making process , including transparency and parliamentary controls .
It is playing a very prominent role in the discussions at the IGC , and I am hopeful that some genuine results will be achieved .
The Dutch presidency is very enthusiastic about the idea of reducing the democratic deficit , and our proposals contain a number of suggestions for giving the European Parliament greater powers to exercise controls .
But we are not the only ones with ideas here , and everyone knows that opinions vary on the subject .
Some countries take a completely different view from others , but then this is true of so many things .
Our job is to achieve consensus .
But the main thing I can tell you at the moment is that you should have no doubts about the importance we attach to it .
Turning now to the comments made about human rights , this is something to which I devoted considerable attention .
I said that it was an area of growing responsibility for Europe , which was taken as meaning that the Netherlands prefers to leave human rights policy to Europe .
Let me just say one thing here .
We are not ' leaving it to Europe ' out of laziness , since I think that every country is finding it difficult to pursue an effective human rights policy on its own .
This is why we need to find new ways of addressing the subject with emerging economies such as China and the whole of South-East Asia , including Indonesia since it is so important , and we need to ensure that we can bring pressure to bear to protect human rights values or to reintroduce them where they have been lost .
So you must interpret what I said as a very positive statement .
There were a number of comments about the third pillar .
Let me repeat how important this topic is for the Netherlands , and not just as window-dressing or because various aspects of drugs policy have become a sensitive issue between France and the Netherlands .
You claim that our differences on this issue are set to continue for quite some time , yet I have to say that there is growing support for a drugs policy which may well be an entirely national approach and may be organized in a typically Dutch way , but nevertheless produces results which , to be quite honest , are very much better than those achieved in neighbouring countries .
It is extremely difficult .
What country could convince its citizens that it should give up a policy which has brought such good results simply because another country wants it to , or because it is so misunderstood ?
However , this does not mean that the Netherlands does not also bear a great responsibility where its policy has negative effects across the border in other countries .
I can assure you that I see this as a challenge , and I am proud that the Netherlands is now to lead the high-level group which is to develop a joint approach to both crime and drugs , and which can direct the framing of the joint action about which so much has been said .
I am sure that we can demonstrate that we need more intensive and effective cooperation in this field , without having to give up the main elements of our various national policies .
I should like to comment on the subject of Yugoslavia and war criminals ; Mr de Vries referred to this , but I think everyone feels the same about it .
We have been urged to take action on this issue .
Let me tell you this .
I think that if we do not do something about it , the fact that the war criminals are still walking around free could be our greatest obstacle in achieving the objective we have set ourselves in Bosnia-Herzegovina of creating a multi-ethnic state which can also function properly as such .
Not only that , but the fact that the war crimes tribunal which symbolizes the world 's conscience no longer has any criminals to try is an insult to our attempts to establish the rule of law and to protect civilized values .
That is why we are not sitting back .
I do admit that it is very difficult to secure the arrest of these people with the existing forces in Yugoslavia .
I shall not go into details here - you know some of what I am referring to .
However , the fact that no effective action has been taken up to now certainly does not mean that the European Union is happy with the situation .
This brings us to an area which it is difficult to talk about in public , because it involves other types of measures .
The only thing I ask is that you believe me when I say that we are not happy with the situation and that we cannot allow it to continue .
A number of comments have been made regarding flexibility and , as I said earlier , from an intellectual point of view , this is our most difficult problem .
The best way of summing it up is this : we need it , but it must be treated with suspicion , because otherwise the process of integration will be in jeopardy before you know it .
This is the attitude we should adopt if , as I said , we are to be able to reconcile the need for enlargement with the need for consolidation .
Different speeds can be used as a bridge here , if they are applied carefully and cautiously .
This is another area where I can see that opinions differ , but nevertheless I am sure that we can produce acceptably worded paragraphs on flexibility for inclusion in the Treaty , although the Community as a whole is extremely reluctant to include flexibility in the first pillar .

It is different with the second pillar , because there we are trying to escape from the stranglehold of the veto , which it is absolutely essential to do , as Mr Bertens and many others such as Mr de Vries pointed out .
We are determined to have a more effective and active foreign policy : it is not that votes are taken very often , but the very fact that the veto exists casts a shadow over the whole decisionmaking process in the Council .
All too often , consensus either means that no decision is taken , or that it is based on the lowest common denominator .
A word now about Cyprus , which many speakers referred to .
As I have already said , if we cannot find a solution to the Cyprus problem , there is at least a risk that our scope for expanding NATO and for enlarging the Union will be restricted .
We need to be very cautious here .
It is certainly true that we currently have a window of opportunity for taking action .
There are elections in Cyprus next year , and we really need to prepare the ground now for the negotiations that are to be held six months after the IGC is concluded .
The situation has improved slightly , but it is only a temporary reprieve , linked to the fact that the missiles which have been ordered will not be in position for another sixteen months , and the question of the overflying of Turkish and Greek aircraft .
I have called on both parties to refrain from any action that could cause an escalation in tension .
I should like to reply to a specific point which Mr Bertens raised , which is not really relevant here but does have a European element , and that is the possibility of supplying missiles to Turkey .
The simple fact is that we are talking here about a NATO country , which therefore falls into the category of countries to which arms may be supplied .
There is concern that the missiles could be used against the Kurds , but every official application to purchase arms is assessed on the basis of whether it would increase tension in the area involved , and these are the criteria that will be applied here , as everywhere else .
But no application to purchase arms has yet been made , and anticipating the decision that would be taken if it were would in itself heighten tension , so I refuse to do so .
Just one final comment about the Middle East .
Someone said that our interests there are different from those of the Americans , but if this is true , it only applies to certain details .
The situation in the Middle East is not only a threat to peace in the region in general , but failure to reach peace will threaten the whole world .
So I think that America and Europe basically share the same interests here .
I shall stop there , and although I know that I have not been able to answer all the points that were raised , I am sure I shall be returning to the House on many occasions and will have the chance to deal with all these issues in more detail then .
Mr President-in-Office , I am sorry to say that you have really only replied to Dutch colleagues , although we are after all a European Parliament .
' European ' means German , French , Portuguese and so on !
I made a very specific comment on Serbia , and I should like a specific answer from you on Serbia - not only from Mr van den Broek , but also from the President-in-Office of the Council .
Please , Mr President-in-Office , let us hear just a few words , but ones of substance .
I would ask Members to appreciate the fact that this debate has been very long , and time is pressing .
Mr President , you are quite right , it is a very important point , but your own timetable rather put me under pressure .
Mr Wiersma also said how disappointed he was that I have not agreed to take a troika to Serbia immediately .
On my visits to the various capitals , Serbia has always been discussed in detail , and I can tell you that views on the issue are very similar and that everyone is prepared to do whatever is most effective .
When we can go there and actually achieve something , we shall be sure to go .
But there is no point in going simply for the sake of going , because if you then come back empty-handed it could actually be counter-productive , whereas you might find that if you had only waited a few days , you could have achieved something useful .
In other words , we must be sure that what we do will be effective , but I can assure you that every country is 100 % behind those who have shown that there is another side to Belgrade apart from what President Milosevic has shown us .
You need have no doubts , everyone has said this so far , and I do not expect to hear anything different on the rest of my travels .

Mr President , I too would like to take up precisely the point raised by Mrs Pack : I do not think answers should be given solely for the benefit of Dutch Members .
Yesterday I brought up before the Minister the issue of the statement made by Mr Erbakan , and it is all over the European Press today that Turkey is ready to move against Greece , the Turkish army is ready to do what it did in 1974 against Cyprus .
The President cannot remain silent about that issue , that threat against a Member State .
I expect an immediate statement from the President .
There is one question that was raised by three groups but has not been answered , about the Dutch presidency 's position on Parliament 's hopes to see both its budgetary powers and its legislative powers extended .
You have said you support us , but a number of comments which have been made have cast doubts on your support for our budgetary powers , and we take a very serious view of that .
We should like to hear what Mr van Mierlo has to say about this .
There were three other groups as well as my own which raised this point .
Mr President , I restricted myself to asking two questions , but the fact is that I did not receive an answer to either of them .
The first was very simple : has the Dutch presidency scheduled for the informal meeting of the ECOFIN Council in April an initial assessment of the revision of the financial perspectives , with a view to the financing of the European Union in the post-1999 period ?
And the second - and important - question was : following the latest round of negotiations , and especially its contacts with the present British Government , has the Dutch presidency provided for the possibility of the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference on the reform of the Treaties being adopted by only 14 Member States ?
I shall be very brief , Minister .
You said that there was not a single dissenting voice .
Well , I seem to recall that five years ago , during the massacres at Vukovar , while this House was still supporting the Yugoslav Red Army , there were very few dissenting voices - those of my friends and myself .
Today , we are piling ridicule on shame .
Mr President , on the subject of Turkey , I have decided to ask the Association Council to discuss relations with that country .
Turkey is a member of NATO , and while there is much to criticize it for , you have to look at both the positive and negative sides , and this is why we need to hold a meeting of the Association Council with Turkey as soon as possible in order to discuss these issues .
Yesterday , I expressly urged the parties involved , including Mr Erbakan , not to do or say anything likely to increase tension .
However , we must not underestimate the increase in tension caused by the views both sides are currently exchanging .
Both sides need to curb their behaviour , otherwise we shall have no chance of finding a solution to the Cyprus question , for example .
On the subject of budgetary powers , I would simply say the following : the talks on the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure at the IGC have not indicated - and I think this is something you should be aware of - that the distinction is likely to be abolished .
This is not to say that everyone thinks that we should keep the status quo , but as I think I told you earlier , some aspects of the integration process are , by definition , gradual .
I do not for the time being expect there to be much scope for changing the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
The Finance Ministers need to decide in ECOFIN whether to hold an informal meeting on the financial perspectives .
The programme for the Dutch presidency does say that we might meet informally simply in order to take note of views , but there have been so many protests against the idea that it is now doubtful whether this meeting will actually take place .
I personally feel that if one country says that there was an agreement not to do this , and insists on the point , then we cannot change the agenda on the issue .
But if we did hold the meeting , it would simply be an informal and non-committal exchange of views .
A question was also asked about the situation regarding the United Kingdom .
It is difficult to answer this very briefly without treading on anyone 's toes .
I do not think it is a good idea for the Fourteen to try to take decisions together , leaving the United Kingdom in an isolated position on all the issues in question .
This would be counterproductive and encourage polarization in the United Kingdom 's election campaign , which would certainly not be in our interests .
I do not feel the slightest need to interfere in the election campaign in the United Kingdom .
It is none of our business , it is their democracy and values that are at stake , and it would be wrong for me to say who I hope will win .
The only thing I can do , and I am speaking for a good many people here , is to hope that they manage not to be too negative regarding Europe in the campaign .
If they are negative , and the most anti-European candidates secure the most votes - I am not saying that this is what will happen , but if it does - the winner , whoever it is , will have very little room to negotiate for some time afterwards .
And let us be honest , we need the British to help us build Europe and we want to keep them on board .
If we are to do this , we need to play our part too .
So we must try hard to forget that the problem exists .
Let them conduct their own campaign , and let us try to get through the various issues as constructively as possible and avoid creating situations where the British are left isolated on every key point just before the elections .
But otherwise I think we would do well not to worry too much about the British elections .
It is also wrong to think that the United Kingdom is the only country which is preventing consensus on a number of vital issues : this is simply not true , and we must refuse to allow this impression to continue .
It is not in the United Kingdom 's interests , and it is certainly not in Europe 's .
Thank you , Mr van Mierlo .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , I believe that the way in which we set our agenda and plan our business must be improved in the daily conduct of our work .
I would ask you to draw the Bureau 's attention to the need for debates such as the one that we have just concluded to be better prepared and allocated sufficient time , so that when , as at present , the Council presidency is willing to answer questions frankly and in a customary parliamentary way , it is able to do so .
Such debates should not be treated as ordinary ones , since they are very important to us .
I should also like to remind you that on the agenda of the next part-session is a debate with the European Council .
I hope that the European Council will be informed that it will have sufficient time to engage in a genuine open dialogue with Parliament , of a kind for which the House has repeatedly called and which is essential to our institution .
I would ask you to pass on this request to the Bureau .
Very well , I shall convey that request to the Bureau .
Distance selling
The next item is the report ( A4-0009 / 97 ) by the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text ( C4-0666 / 96-00 / 0411 ( COD ) ) , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the protection of consumers in respect of distance contracts ( rapporteur : Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ) .
Mr President , the conciliation procedure on distance selling has , to my mind , produced an excellent result .
We have achieved a great deal in these negotiations - more in fact than the Council wished to see - and it is the first time that the Council 's stance has changed between the common position after second reading and the conciliation procedure , in the sense that for the first time the Council , having initially rejected Parliament 's wishes , then nevertheless agreed to them unanimously .
Following all Parliament 's amendments , it has now for the first time adopted a proposal on these lines by a qualified majority .
I noticed in the delegation that insisting on explanations from the Council - explanations of why it was doing something - and following up with questions was an approach which could bear fruit , and thus of the 31 amendments , as many as 26 were included in the text either as they stood or in an adapted form .
Three amendments thereby became redundant , mainly for technical reasons , and two others were withdrawn by the rapporteur on practical grounds .
That is a good result , when one thinks that the Council did not wish to accept a single amendment in the first instance .
Ultimately , we now have a directive which meets an urgent need .
It is an important piece of consumer protection in an area where there are no European rules at all , but where they are very much required .
It is important in view of the tremendous upsurge in distance selling of goods and services .
More and more use is being made of existing and also new technologies .
We are buying records via television , we buy clothes through the Internet , and we book our holidays by telephone .
These are being used more and more .
And we are not just doing this in our own countries , but also approaching suppliers across borders and being approached by them .
When making purchases in the internal market , a responsible consumer must be enabled to proceed in an informed way and to make considered choices .
That is not only in the interests of the consumer , but also in the interests of those supplying goods or services .
For these choices to be identified , a number of conditions have to be met .
One of the main points is the right to thorough information .
The directive provides that , before a contract is concluded , the consumer must be aware of such things as the price , the most important features , the method of payment and , where appropriate , the cost of delivering the goods or services .
Also , where payment is made in advance , Parliament wishes the money to be reimbursed if the corresponding service is not provided .
We have laid down a number of conditions in the directive with regard to marketing .
A ban has been imposed on the use of faxes and automatic calling machines , and if the telephone is used for canvassing or marketing , there is at least now a rule whereby people can no longer simply be disturbed during their meals .
A very important point which the Council was in fact reluctant to accept , and which was previously only dealt with in the small print of a contract , is the supply of goods of equivalent value .
This means that if I have to conduct an election campaign in my country and need some green T-shirts , and they supply me with red T-shirts , then while I may well be able to dispose of them to the socialists , I actually wanted green ones .
It must therefore be possible for me to return the red T-shirts and get my money back on them .
This kind of case , normally only dealt with in the small print , is now included in the legislation , something which took a great deal of trouble .
Then there is the question of financial services .
An amendment which we had tabled on this issue was unfortunately rejected by a few votes - for which we have to thank a number of our colleagues in the Liberal Group , and from the other side of the House .
What we did manage to achieve - and I also say this to my colleague Mr Herman - is that we now have an undertaking from the Council with regard to the Green Paper on financial services , so that where there are gaps , there will be further scope for legislation .
Something which should now be settled , and which is completely new , is the question of taking legal action .
In this legislation , we have provided that consumer organizations can also take legal action in another jurisdiction .
I think this is something entirely new .
I would also draw attention to the system of self-regulation which , I believe , provides ample scope for dealing with any complaints , and to the delivery of flowers , which will be covered by the directive .
It is also quite a novelty that in a conciliation procedure , in joint discussions between the Council and Parliament , a good solution has been found in this respect .
Mr President , we have discussed great matters at great length this afternoon but it is appropriate now that one of the ornaments of Dutch politics should be making the first speech in this Dutch presidency in a cause which she has made very much her own in recent years .
I would like to congratulate her on the time she has devoted to bringing this directive to a most a satisfactory phase of conciliation .
I should also like to apologize to her in advance and to Commissioner Bangemann to whom I should like to ask a question because I have to go almost immediately to ask another question of President Santer in the temporary committee on BSE which is meeting simultaneously with this debate .
I just want to make a few very brief points because much has already been said by the rapporteur .
Firstly , the enormous increase in direct selling leaves the consumer with both the best and the worst of this new world .
The best , in that there is access to a whole range of new services .
The worst in that there is no protection in terms of knowledge about the selling techniques that are used .
Sometimes the consumer in this position faces what in English , borrowing from Dutch , we call a forlorn hope .
I think in Dutch it is verloren hoop .
That position , in which you do not know enough of what is happening to , and around , you is something this directive has attempted to rectify .
I am delighted that twenty-six of the propositions that went to conciliation have been accepted , particularly given the rather lamentable history and the two years ' delay in the previous Parliament when this issue was locked up in the Council .
That process has now been unlocked and I am delighted by the achievements we have made .
I would like to say a few words about the matters that the rapporteur has raised .
We have received a number of important additions to the text .
We have now given consumers seven working days in which to change their minds .
They are going to be properly informed when they are going to be sent substitute goods .
They are going to be reimbursed if they change their minds and they have the right to full reimbursement if the supplier goes bankrupt or fails to perform the service involved .
Those are marvellous points and together with the protection from ' cold calling ' by telephone , an amendment which I have been concerned with before , they add up to a real degree of protection .
There remains , however , the problem of financial services .
Commissioner Bonino made a commitment to come forward with a communication on financial services and , if necessary , a directive .
One year later we only have a weak Green Paper and no legislation .
On behalf of the committee and personally I want to ask Commissioner Bangemann where the Commission now stands on this proposal ?
This Parliament would urge the Commission and the new Director-General of DG XXIV - when appointed - to show the same determination about legislation in this field of financial services that the rapporteur has shown .
Lastly , coming from a country whose government is recalcitrant as far as consumer organizations being able to bring class actions in the courts is concerned , I welcome that possibility that is now available in all Member States .
As Mrs Oomen-Ruijten correctly says , this is a new departure and one which I hope will be taken up in all countries including my own .
I would urge the UK to allow legitimate consumer organizations , and not just the DirectorGeneral of Fair Trading , to take such actions .
As a result of the hard work of all those involved in this directive , but most notably the rapporteur , consumers no longer have a forlorn hope but a firm assurance that they will have the right measure of protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in contrast to some of the amendments put before the House at second reading , we are now discussing a compromise which shows more realism and is acceptable to all Members of Parliament .
I am particularly pleased that financial services have been excluded .
It is not that I wish to spare this sector , but the fact is that the special nature of financial transactions is incompatible with the general character of this directive .
Further inquiries , for example through the Green Paper , are bound to bring to light the problems which exist .
I am also in favour of Article 10 on the use of certain communications techniques and what is referred to as cold calling .
Unfortunately , the compromise which has been reached is in danger of being stillborn , since cold calling is dealt with in a different and less pragmatic way in the ISDN directive .
To prevent this , I have tabled an amendment to the Medina Ortega report , on behalf of my group .
In any event , my group supports the compromise which has been achieved on this directive on distance selling .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report that has returned to us from the Council under the conciliation procedure is concerned with the legal harmonization of the system of distance contracts , which is giving rise to a degree of unfair competition .
Many such techniques are in use today : mail shots , circulars , catalogues , phone calls with or without human or automatic intervention , radio , video phone , fax , TV telesales - and more to come in the future with CD-ROM , modems providing link-ups between personal computers , and so on .
I congratulate the rapporteur , and I note that the Directive provides for a variety of instruments to enable these objectives to be achieved : periods allowed for withdrawal , reversal of the burden of proof under certain conditions , distinction between professionals and amateurs , exclusion of certain types of contract , especially those relating to financial services , specific information , etc .
My only reservation concerns the fact that one piece of information that seems to me quite essential does not appear in the draft Directive and is not mentioned in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's excellent report .
This is the question of applicable law .
Is it the law of the place where the sale originates or its place of destination ?
The place where acceptance begins or the place where it ends ?
This question is absolutely fundamental , especially as regards the possibility that the contracts may be subject to the law of a third country , which would enable European legislation to be circumvented .
In any case , I believe we would benefit from greater harmonization of the rules of international private law rather than substantive law .
Mr President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten was too modest .
This really is an outstanding success , a result of her work of which you are entitled to be proud , and I warmly congratulate her on it .
I shall deal very briefly with two issues which were raised .
Mr Whitehead and others mentioned financial services .
As you know , we have presented a Green Paper on these , which is still being considered in Parliament 's committees .
As soon as these discussions have been concluded , we shall of course bring forward proposals , which will also take up what Parliament has contributed to this debate .
As regards what was said by Mr Gollnisch , this proposal does not change the general law .
In other words , on the question of which law applies , the general rules which already exist today are valid .
We do not need to take any further action on them , because they are sufficiently clear .
There is an international convention , and that naturally remains applicable here .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Novel foods and food ingredients
The next item is the report ( A4-0006 / 97 ) by the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text ( C4-0667 / 96-00 / 0426 ( COD ) ) approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Regulation concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients ( rapporteur : Mrs Roth-Behrendt ) .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the splendid negotiations which she undertook in the Conciliation Committee .
I also wish to thank the Commission , which facilitated that final agreement , because during the course of that conciliation its role and help was most acceptable .
Like Mrs Roth-Behrendt , I feel that this is an agreement which does not really need defending : it speaks for itself .
Had we not reached the kind of agreement which we did reach , then I could not say , as I now do , that labelling will be required when there has been change which is necessary to be indicated on the label .
The deletion of the word ' significant ' and the concessions which the Council made in agreeing to the deletion of that word - if I may be excused a pun - were significant .
We have some tortuous language as a result of the compromise that has been made .
Now we say ' if food is no longer equivalent to an existing food or ingredient . ' That wording has been substituted for the word ' significant ' .
I regret that . It is clumsy and it would have been better simply to have deleted the word ' significant ' and left it at that .
I must say to those who criticise us that I accept entirely what Mrs Roth-Behrendt has just said .
Can we reasonably expect the 15 Member States to suddenly coordinate their legislation and insist on labelling throughout the European Union ?
In fact it is the European Parliament , using the power of codecision in a positive way , which has insisted on the protection of consumers which otherwise would not have been achieved on the original Commission proposal .
If that sounds self-satisfied , so be it , but we are here to represent the wider European electorate and , in that respect , we have achieved our aims .
I am very grateful to all those concerned in the Conciliation Committee for the compromise which we have collectively achieved .
Mr President , as other speakers have said , at this final stage of the debate , we have to concern ourselves with the message that we are sending to the public .
And that message must be a message of safety : that the safety and information requirements for these products have been improved .
It must therefore be a positive message .
Similarly , we must emphasize that this regulation provides for effective scientific assessment designed to prevent any risk to the environment ; that it ensures that all consumers ' right to health will be safeguarded ; and that it lays down additional specific requirements to inform consumers whenever necessary .
Furthermore , with regard to labelling , which was the subject of a fierce political struggle , the important thing is for the product to be a quality product - just as the important thing in respect of road traffic is to have safe roads , and not bad roads which are full of danger signs and warnings .
And that is what we have attempted to do here : firstly , ensure the primary safety of consumers ; and , secondly , provide them with adequate information .
In this context , I also welcome the fact that we have struck a balance with the formula ' no longer equivalent ' to an existing food , whilst providing for mechanisms to interpret this criterion precisely .
I believe that we can rest assured in this respect , and that this is the essential message we must send to consumers .
With this joint text , moreover , the Union 's institutions are bringing to a close a debate which has gone on far too long , and it is good that Parliament has taken such an active part in that debate .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on the task that she has accomplished - despite some initial differences of opinion which we had - and of course to thank Mr Bangemann , who assisted us in the final stage of our negotiations with the Council .
It is only fair to acknowledge that .
The Group of the European People 's Party fully supports the solution that we have arrived at with this joint text .
Mr President , we can be pleased with the result which has been achieved here , and we can congratulate in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
This is of course a compromise , but when we consider that a few months ago , there was still a great deal of resistance in many Member States to the common position , I would say that we have achieved something .
The crucial point for us is naturally that products or ingredients which are modified must now be labelled .
That is vitally important for the consumer .
We in the Liberal Group see it as essential for the consumer to be able to make the choice between a genetically modified item and an unmodified one .
Of course this is a compromise - and I say this to our Green colleagues - but if you vote against this proposal , then that will be a step backwards .
It is either something or nothing .
If we have something , we can also apply better controls , and we shall have better legislation .
Just think , for example , of the decision on genetically modified maize .
Now we shall have something to work on with the Commission at Community level .
I would say let us all vote in favour of this proposal , and then we shall not be left empty-handed .
Mr President , the compromise text now before the House constitutes a regulation on ' nonlabelling ' and deceives consumers !
It will not ensure the comprehensive labelling of genetically modified products and is misleading .
Consumers will still be groping in the dark .
Milk derived from cows which have been treated with genetically modified growth hormones will not be labelled , nor will soya oil made from genetically modified soya beans .
To talk of comprehensive labelling here is quite simply fraudulent .
The ' novel foods ' regulation is based on this dubious compromise text .
With regard to more than 80 % of genetically modified foods , it is a regulation designed to maintain secrecy .
The majority of genetically modified foods will be foisted on consumers through the back door .
This is tantamount to force-feeding .
There is not a single phrase in the regulation about the content of the labelling .
Consumers have a right to clear and unequivocal labelling .
However , the content of the labelling will largely be left up to the manufacturers , and they will use vague and euphemistic terms such as ' produced using modern biotechnological techniques ' , or ' nutritionally optimized ' ; indeed , I have even heard some industry representatives say that the products should be labelled ' produced using environmentally-friendly techniques ' .
This makes a mockery of consumer protection and of consumers ' wish to have clear and comprehensive labelling !
One thing is clear , therefore : this compromise text will create confusion amongst consumers and give the genetic technology industry a free hand .
Nor does it provide for a responsible authorization procedure .
For the majority of genetically modified products , simply registering with the Commission will be enough , and the compromise text guarantees absolutely no consumer protection .
Where are the health inspection criteria ?
There are absolutely none !
To talk of consumer protection here is pure deceit !
The risks for people and the environment are predetermined .
Genetically modified foods will remain a game of Russian roulette for people suffering from allergies .
There is no provision for a public register or comprehensive liability .
This will hardly help to inspire consumer confidence either .
This compromise text represents a blow to consumer protection and is as full of holes as a Swiss cheese .
The statement that a bad regulation is better than none at all represents a show of political incompetence and is wrong .
This regulation will prevent the adoption of extensive labelling rules in the Member States .
I would recommend to the rapporteur that she look at her contributions to the debates at first and second readings .
This compromise text constitutes a betrayal of consumer protection !
It is a lousy , rotten piece of legislation that will permanently shake our citizens ' confidence in the European Union !
I would strongly urge the House to reject this misleading regulation , which is designed to maintain secrecy !
Mr President , in my country 85 % of the population does not want to consume genetically-modified foods .
If our assembly wants to respect the democratic principle of freedom of choice for consumers , we have to guarantee the transparency of origin of the ingredients of our daily bread .
That means that the consumer must have the right to know how the corn and the soya that he eats is produced .
The compromise directive which we are discussing right now does not give any guarantee in this sense .
In practice , the criteria for labelling genetically-modified foods would only be established after this directive had been adopted and would be worked out by the Commission .
We call that , in Luxembourgish , ' buying a cat in a bag ' .
Seriously , I do not think we should do that .
On the other hand , the criteria for compliance with food safety regulations do not exist yet and again are to be established by the Commission alone .
After all we have seen with mad cow disease , Parliament should not hand over this responsibility to the Commission .
Should the assembly vote in favour of this compromise , the procedure of registration would be the so-called ' simplified procedure ' .
This registration would not take place within food administrations of the Member States , but at the Commission itself .
I doubt whether the Commission actually has enough staff to build up the controlling bodies with the knowledge required .
In practice the Commission would have to trust the producers .
I personally would not do that .
For these reasons - the lack of transparency and the lack of safety for consumers - I recommend rejection of this compromise .
Mr President , the Conciliation Committee and Mrs Roth-Behrendt in particular deserve great praise for having removed the exemption from compulsory labelling for products which contain or consist of GMOs , where the genetic modification has been carried out only for agronomic reasons .
We know that European consumers are very sceptical about genetic modifications .
They have the right to make a qualified choice , and this has been achieved to some extent through the conciliation text - but not to such an extent , unfortunately , that we can now talk about a responsible consumer policy .
Labelling is consumer information , and should be compulsory .
It should include all types of products , and also indicate the manufacturing process .
For example , I would not wish to buy , under any circumstances , a foodstuff manufactured from a product to which a gene has been added making it resistant to ' Round Up ' , let us say .
When the day comes that there are such high concentrations of ' Round Up ' in our drinking water that we want to prohibit or limit its use , it will be virtually economically impossible for us to do so , simply because we shall then also no longer be able to use the genetically modified plants .
It is also a major problem that the products do not just have to be manufactured from GMOs , but have to be ' novel ' in order to be subject to an authorization procedure .
So any genetically modified products which are already being marketed fall outside the scope of the regulation .
Last but not least , I am opposed in principle to giving a blank cheque to the Commission and the committees .
That is precisely what is happening with this conciliation text .
Crucial and political decisions are being placed beyond the reach of politicians elected by the people .
It will thus be decided in closed committee meetings when a product manufactured from GMOs differs to a substantial degree from the conventional product , and how and whether these products should be labelled .
Given the demand for information and openness in all procedures , the Danish members of our group will be voting against the conciliation text , in spite of the great efforts made by the Conciliation Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , almost exactly ten months ago , we voted on Parliament 's amendments to the ' novel foods ' regulation at second reading .
Certainly , not all the amendments which many Members wished to see were adopted .
Nevertheless , I should like to begin today by congratulating Mrs Roth-Behrendt on the creativeness and ingenuity with which she has managed to extract the best possible result for consumers from the proposals that went to the Conciliation Committee .
I think that Parliament can be proud of this outcome , especially when we consider how little we started with .
I should like to make two points concerning labelling .
Firstly , the presence of all genetically modified organisms in foodstuffs , whether derived from an ' agronomic ' or any other kind of modification , will now have to be indicated on the label . This represents a substantial change from the Council 's common position .
Secondly , the requirement to label genetically modified ingredients - and note that I refer to ingredients as well as organisms - will be based on proof of their difference from conventional ingredients .
This is a very significant point , since the fact that the list of procedures by which such proof may be furnished is not exhaustive leaves broad scope for development , something which is very important for consumers .

My final point is that Article 14 now provides for the Commission to monitor the long-term impact of the regulation on the development of the internal market , as well as on consumer protection and public health . This will supply us with a great deal more information on the effects of these novel foods on human beings .
Mr President , let me begin by offering sincere congratulations to Mrs RothBehrendt .
And why ?
I know how things went with the directive on distance selling .
As rapporteur , you did not have the good fortune to have a Commissioner who worked with you .
No , it was rather a case of Mr Bangemann working against Parliament .
So I would congratulate you on the result which has been achieved .
That is my first point .
Secondly , six amendments were tabled at the time .
You were unhappy that we in the PPE Group did that .
However , I think the hatchet might now be buried , since when you were given the full support of the PPE Group to have these six amendments carried , you did indeed secure that , although that too was no easy matter .
So congratulations are in order once again .
I have just heard Mrs Breyer and Mr Weber reading out a text and acting as if consumers were being deceived here .
I would very much like to ask Mr Weber , who comes from another of the Benelux countries , to come to the Netherlands and see how this works .
Precisely what the consumer organizations have done there is included here in the legislation we are proposing .
So this is not deceiving consumers , but ensuring that at least something positive is done .
There are three key words .
The first is safety .
We have learned some good lessons from the BSE affair .
So I think it is essential that the agronomic characteristics , for which an exception was made at first , are now included in the regulation .
The second is information .
Information is necessary so that consumers can make a proper choice .
That information is now being provided .
No further exceptions are possible , so that consumers - and the Greenpeace study showed this - know what they are eating .
A third point , and here I have some concerns , like Mrs Roth-Behrendt , is what is now going to happen with flavourings and extracts .
This has still not been resolved , and some adjustments will be needed here .
Mr President , I too should like to echo the thanks expressed by various honourable Members to Mrs Roth-Behrendt for the efforts she has made , even though I do not share her conclusions at all .
We are being asked to vote tomorrow on the amended text of the draft Regulation , which has had a varied career , and I personally should like to dispel any possible misunderstanding between us : we are not giving an opinion on the work done by the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , because in my view its room for manoeuvre was inadequate for it to have any hope of success .
We are being asked to give an opinion on the finished product , and that finished product is not acceptable to us .
It is not acceptable for various reasons . First , it is clear that certain substances used in food processing , especially enzymes , are not covered at all by legislation .
Nor do we have any legal guarantee as to what legislation will be applied to solvents , additives and colorants .
Finally , regarding risk assessment , we know from the text before us that many foodstuffs produced via genetic technologies will merely have to be notified to the Commission .
At the time they are marketed , there will be no authorization procedure .
That in itself is sufficient , in our view , to make the text inadequate .
But there is more !
The labelling provisions are not adequate either . Some progress seems to have been made , but there are still many uncertainties in that famous Article 8 on which we have spent so much debating time .
And those uncertainties will , of course , allow too much room for manoeuvre on the part of the Commission , which , we have every reason to believe , is much more concerned with the functioning of the single market than it is with consumer safety .
The bottom line , I believe , is that everything is now ready for the use of genetic engineering in food to become commonplace .
When I say ' commonplace ' , what I mean is that legislation designed to regulate the use of genetic engineering is becoming weaker and weaker .
That seems unacceptable to me , since we know that there are still plenty of grey areas , especially as regards the long-term effects .
I should like to see the real lessons of mad cow disease being learned , and I must admit to being somewhat surprised at the prevailing optimism on this subject in this House . What conclusions should we draw ?
First , that the principle of safety first was not applied , that there was a total lack of transparency regarding the activities of the experts , and finally that there was an equally total lack of consumer information .
Yet these were elementary requirements that would have enabled the BSE crisis to be averted .
So , please , do let 's try not to rush straight ahead into a ' mad salmon ' crisis .
We , at least , cannot agree to go down that road .
We prefer to see no short-term legislation : better to have a legal vacuum for the moment if it leads to better legislation later !
Mr President , I wish to commend to the House this compromise arrived at by the conciliation committee on novel foods .
The compromise is essentially one in which Parliament has recognized the technical realities associated with this directive on labelling and the Council has accepted the right of people to know what is in the food they eat .
Development of genetic modification by technology has generally brought about the need for this directive and whilst public acceptance and the obvious usefulness of the beneficial effects of biotechnology in other sectors like medicine and pharmaceuticals is now clear , this is not immediately the case when it comes to plant and animal biotechnology or genetically engineered food .
It is argued by some that the commercial use and release of genetically modified seeds could be harmful to both other plants and human health .
These concerns , along with the economic and social aspects of biotechnology , pose new problems to policymakers .
For these reasons we have striven to obtain a labelling system which ensures that consumers will know what they are eating and are able to make a free consumer choice .
We have sought to ensure that there is as high a level of information as possible while remaining practicable and enforceable .
The main lessons for the people seeking to exploit the new biotechnologies are clear to me .
Only an open dialogue with the consumer and a combined effort by industry and science to be as open and honest as possible will create the atmosphere in which consumer confidence allows these products to be acceptable .
I commend this proposal to the House confident that it is a step forward by the European Parliament to realize the wishes of the consumers in the European single market .
Mr President , this Regulation will be a fig-leaf to industry .
After this , it will be possible to say that everything in the garden is lovely as far as consumer protection is concerned and that we need no longer worry when we sit down to dinner .
But this is far from the truth .
Mr Bangemann , could you say why the safety assessments of novel foods are not public ?
I consider this a flagrant insult to consumers .
Mr Eisma , it is quite clear that some Member States will have to weaken their legislation .
It is therefore wrong to say that the Greens are irresponsible for not intending to support the adoption of this Regulation .
A large proportion of genetically modified foods will not be marked as such , although many people do not want to vote through their wallets in favour of the production of such foods .
Fortunately it will remain possible for the vigilant consumer to buy products marked ' not produced with the aid of genetic modification ' .
But the biggest mystery , Mr President , is who really needs genetically modified food .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the result of the conciliation procedure is a resounding slap in the face for Commissioner Bangemann .
He wished to prevent the labelling of genetically manipulated or modified products .
Mr Bangemann should look at a packet of condoms sometime .
It says : length , over 170 mm ; diameter , 33 mm ; thickness , 0.07 mm .
I doubt that a loving couple would be interested in the length , diameter and thickness of a condom .
I am quite sure , however , that everyone has a right to precise information about the origin and characteristics of their food .
They wish to know and ought to know what they are buying .
With the compromise achieved on the ' novel foods ' regulation , we have recognized the maturity of consumers and ensured their freedom of choice when shopping .
That is as it should be .
We should therefore approve the amended regulation by a large majority tomorrow , so that we finally get a foot in the door and can make further progress on this issue .
Mr President , the debate we are holding today is , as we know , the final chapter in a long series of negotiations .
There are still some opponents in the House , fortunately not many of them , who like to present this issue as if we were dealing with a contrast between the interests of the internal market and those of consumer protection .
Well , that is not the case .
The result was worth the difficulty of the negotiations .
It is a success for the consumer and for Parliament , which has ensured that gaps in the scope of the regulation and in terms of labelling have been eliminated .
This issue has confronted us with a number of fundamental choices .
The first is whether to allow or prohibit these novel foods .
Nowhere in the world is there a general ban , and nor is it desirable .
It shuts the door on positive scientific applications and developments .
So there is only one alternative - to allow them - and then the question arises of the extent to which we have to measure out this freedom .
Clearly , the present situation of total freedom is a bad option , not least for the consumer .
Today , consumers can only assert their rights after the event , through the rules on liability .
Otherwise , they are left out in the cold .
In the joint draft text , the consumer is protected in two ways .
The products which are placed on the market are subject to strict authorization procedures ; and , secondly , the extensive but proper demands of consumers for information are being met .
Through these rules , biotechnology is being given justified opportunities , without the public health risks being underestimated .
The consumer is being provided with information , and the fact that we have played a part in this can only highlight our role in consumer protection .
I hope that the text will be adopted by a very large majority in the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , I hope that we will never have cause to regret the tide of optimism on which this measure seems to be likely to go through the European Parliament .
I regard this as one of the most important pieces of European Union law that we will have before us this year .
It will affect the food we eat and conceivably , the future of mankind on earth .
I am one of the optimists who sees genetic technology as offering us hope , not only of increased food supplies , but also a decreased use of pesticides and herbicides in food production .
But I have some misgivings .
I strongly believe that as representatives of the people of Europe it is our duty to remain vigilant and to see that this law , which in some places is rather sketchy - as I am sure the rapporteur herself will admit - actually works , with all the necessary safeguards for the health of the people of Europe in place .
There are at the moment , as I understand it , some eight pending approvals of genetically-modified products before the European Commission .
And there are some 40 genetically-modified products placed on the market outside Europe at the moment .
I imagine that we can see the likelihood of those 40 products being brought before us in Europe for approval before very long .
There are two things in particular MEPs will need to do once this legislation is on the statute book .
First , we need to monitor exactly how genetically-modified foods are labelled .
This must not be so opaque that the provisions of Article 8 are meaningless .
Secondly , MEPs need to penetrate the secret workings of the two vital European Union committees : the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs and the Scientific Committee for Food .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection 's experience of them is very unhappy .
We have never managed any real dialogue with them .
Yet if you read this regulation , they will play an absolutely key role in deciding whether or not these foods reach our tables .
I hope , therefore , that Parliament will be able to have a much closer liaison with these committees in the future .
The report of the Temporary Committee on BSE already points to the need for this .
Surely BSE and the fact that such a scientific enigma could appear so fast and cause such mayhem should give us pause for thought .
We do not know everything about the consequences of what we do .
We must take great care of the health of the people of Europe .
Mr President , my 80-year-old aunt has assured me that she will never buy genetically modified foods in her life .
My dynamic young nephew , on the other hand , sees these novel foods as providing the ultimate breakthrough to an age when failed crops , food shortages and famines will be brought to an end throughout the world .
The fact that the citizens of Europe will actually have the power to exclude a food from the market-place , simply by not buying it , will be thanks to the European Parliament , if it approves this joint text tomorrow .
Never before have consumers had so great a power ; never before will they have been so clearly and comprehensively informed .
No category of genetically modified foods is excluded from the content of the regulation .
Anyone who says otherwise is not telling the truth !
The safety and inspection criteria are clearly set out in the regulation .
Anyone who claims otherwise is not telling the truth !
The regulation specifically provides that producers can advertise their products as being normal foods .
A fascinating contest will develop : a race for the patronage of consumers .
Nobody must be afraid that they will eat genetically modified foods in future , if they do not wish to .
Anyone who claims otherwise is not telling the truth !
However , the human urge to explore cannot be prohibited .
Mankind does not accept closed doors .
All progress involves risks .
People must be protected from those risks .
There can be no compromises in that respect .
But there have always been courageous people who have dared to seek progress , and who have then achieved it .
Genetic engineering represents a revolution in medicine .
Perhaps it can also genuinely help to reduce food shortages and famine .
It would have been monstrous to have done what the Commission and Council were close to doing - simply depriving consumers of choice .
Tomorrow 's vote will represent a great moment in the history of this Parliament : a victory by Parliament over the Council and Commission !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too believe that this compromise text represents a success for the European Parliament .
It is of course arguable whether it is a great success or a moderate one .
I believe that we have secured the key point : whenever a genetically modified organism is present in a food , this must be indicated on the label .
This will enable consumers , and especially people suffering from allergies , to eliminate any possible risks , however small these may be .
It is not a question of Russian roulette , Mrs Breyer .
You are lying in that respect !
No one should be seriously claiming that the rejection of this compromise text will lead to a better outcome .
Rejecting the text would simply produce what the US industry and many of those responsible in the European Union have long desired : no labelling at all .
And that is undoubtedly the reason why all the European consumer associations are pressing us to approve the compromise text .
Nor is the frequently drawn comparison with the patenting directive at all helpful , since in that case , firstly , we had a bad compromise text presented to us for a decision ; and , secondly , we had the alternative of retaining the concurrent national patent laws for a certain period of time - some two to three years - until a better European law was introduced .
In this case , the compromise text is the alternative .
The other option is simply to have no labelling at all , since surely even the Greens do not seriously believe that all 15 national governments and parliaments are suddenly going to introduce rules on labelling .
I have often defended the Greens , and also Greenpeace , against unjustified criticism .
Not everything that the Greens and Greenpeace say is nonsense .
However , I should like to end by saying that the campaign by Greenpeace and the Greens against this compromise text is irresponsible propaganda !
If they are successful tomorrow , then the present intolerable situation will be perpetuated : genetically modified soya , maize and other foods will be free to go on supermarket shelves without labelling , and the chance to do something about it will have been lost .
We must therefore approve this joint text .
Mr President , this concluding debate has once again shown how difficult it is to reach an agreement in this field which satisfies everyone , since the differences of view - from force feeding to a glorious victory for Parliament - are indeed quite considerable .
Moreover , it is not a question of who has won or lost in this debate , but of achieving a solution which , on the one hand , meets the legitimate demands of consumers and , on the other , is a viable one - since a solution that delivers nothing is no use to consumers .
I have said that from the outset .
I am very pleased that we have achieved a compromise .
The wording is different from that which we proposed : instead of the criterion of ' significant difference ' , a procedure of testing and proof is now being introduced . The one is being replaced by the other , but the regulation is still as sensible as the one we originally proposed .
However , it would not have been sensible without such a restriction , as the labelling requirement would have been virtually limitless .
We have always been in favour of labelling - and I say that to those Members who wrongly and untruthfully claim that we proposed no labelling requirement .
But we have always said the labelling requirement must be practicable . This means that it must not lead - as the use of biotechnology becomes more widespread - to 80 % to 90 % of foods having to be labelled .
That would not be in the interest of consumers .
Then no one would take it seriously .
We have achieved that objective , though by a different means from that which we proposed .
I am therefore midway between those who say that this is a major step forward and those - like Mrs Breyer - who say that is worthless .
I put my faith in the rapporteur .
That is what I have done throughout the procedure .
Paragraph 24 of the explanatory statement describes precisely the situation that Parliament will be faced with tomorrow : should it approve a compromise text which does not meet all its wishes - justified or otherwise - or should it settle for nothing ?
Should it therefore take a first step forward ?
And indeed , the text on the table is not the end of the story - and not only with regard to enzymes or other substances not yet covered by the regulation , but especially as regards the implementation of the provisions , which will be far from easy .
After all , this is not a legal text which tells the Commission and the scientific committees exactly - down to the last detail - what to do in each individual case .
That will not be easy , and I would therefore urge the House to approve this joint text . I should like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , since this text undoubtedly represents a major step in the right direction .
And that is what should ultimately be the decisive factor , not whether we have managed to push through absolutely everything that we had in mind , since democracy is not based on individuals being able to be get their way completely , but on people agreeing on things that will improve the lives of everyone .
Mr President , in the seven and a half years that I have been a Member of this Parliament , I have never had to make a personal statement .
I try to use such means as little as possible .
Today , however , I have to do so .
Given the lateness of the hour , I shall not attempt to respond to the points made by Members who have spoken , or to the speech by the Commissioner .
I should specifically like to thank the majority of those Members for their comments .
My personal statement concerns the accusation by Mrs Breyer that , in supporting this compromise text , I am deceiving people , that I am committing a fraud involving consumer safety .
I would ask for my protest at this accusation to be recorded in the Minutes .
Mr President , I should also like to make a personal statement . Mr Liese accused me of lying .
He said that this regulation would not result in a kind of Russian roulette for consumers and people suffering from allergies .
The opposite is the truth !
You know that there are no health criteria .
But you also know that there are no methods of proof enabling the allergenicity of genetically modified foods to be established in advance .
At least the American health authorities recognize that .
In the absence of methods of proof enabling the allergenicity of genetically modified foods to be established in advance , the latter will be placed on the market and tested on consumers .
This is a particularly serious problem for people suffering from allergies .
As regards Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's allegation , I did not accuse her of lying .
Mrs Flemming also indirectly criticized those who have doubts about this regulation , who have made it clear that there will not be 100 % labelling of genetically modified foods .
I gave the example of growth hormones produced by means of genetic engineering .
Even Mr Bangemann will admit that the use of these cannot be detected and that there are no methods of proof in this instance .
And yet they are genetically modified products .
I simply referred to the statement by the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , that this regulation offered total protection .
I believe , and other speakers have also made this point , that there is no such thing as total protection .
The relevant criteria do not exist .
I did not intend - and now Mrs Roth-Behrendt is not listening to me - to make a personal attack on the rapporteur , and I do not believe that I did so with any of my remarks .
However , it is my right as a Member of Parliament and as a consumer to draw attention here to the fact that there are no health criteria .
Consequently , it is simply not possible to say that we are ensuring health protection with this regulation .
I would ask you , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , to name the corresponding health criteria .
There are none set out in the regulation !
I should like to ask Commissioner Bangemann whether he accepts that Article 8 now , as a result of the conciliation , provides for comprehensive labelling but that if , in the light of experience , there prove to be gaps in the system of protection of public health , then consistent with the statement which is being attached to the conciliation agreement , the Commission will come forward to ensure that there will be always comprehensive labelling ?
Mr President , once again I put a question to Mr Bangemann , and once again he did not answer it .
I must therefore repeat it : what do you , Mr Bangemann , think about the fact that these safety assessments of genetically modified foods are not being published ?
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
If it will help matters , I shall withdraw the comment that Mrs Breyer was lying , although it does not appear in the script for my speech .
Nevertheless , I wish to insist on the fact that it is untrue that this regulation will result in a kind of Russian roulette for consumers , and that it is irresponsible propaganda to claim that something better can be secured if the joint text is rejected .
Mr President , to deal firstly with Mrs Hautala 's question , I did not in fact give her a reply because , in view of the limited time available , I did not think that we needed to enter into a further discussion on the substance of the matter .
The fact that these notifications are not made public is quite normal .
This is also the practice with other kinds of application which the Commission has to examine .
However , they are made public later , since a copy of them is forwarded to the Member States and the scientific committees , so that everyone can inform themselves .
In other words , we do not oblige applicants to publish their notifications in any official journal , but everything that we do subsequently is published .
I can only confirm what Mr White said .
I have already said this in response to the rapporteur 's request , and it is also set out in Article 14 .
We shall follow everything that happens .
There will be comprehensive monitoring of all developments .
If any loopholes become apparent , we shall draw the necessary conclusions and bring forward new proposals .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Cross-border credit transfers
The next item is the report ( A4-0004 / 97 ) by the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision on cross-border credit transfers ( C4-0660 / 96-94 / 0242 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Peijs ) .
Mr President , the Conciliation Committee , on which I sat as rapporteur , endorsed the joint draft text of the directive on cross-border credit transfers .
If the European Parliament does the same this week we shall have this directive in the bag at last .
The result is something with which Parliament can be pleased .
The Member States have to implement the directive by 1 January 1999 , the completion date of EMU .
Germany expects problems with the timing and has promised in a separate declaration to do its utmost to meet the deadline .
We appreciate its difficulties .
What exactly is the aim of the directive ?
Over time a degree of confusion has arisen about this and I will explain it briefly if I may .
The aim of the objective is to improve the services which handle cross-border credit transfers by making them more efficient .
This is of course most important in preparation for stage three of Economic and Monetary Union .
As a result of the single market and very shortly now the Euro the volume of cross-border transfers is steadily increasing , both the number of transactions and their value .
To maximize the benefits of the single market it is essential that business and industry , and specifically medium- and small-scale undertakings , should be able to effect transfers between the various parts of the Community reliably and cheaply .
Until such time as this is guaranteed a major obstacle persists to the free movement of goods and services within the Community .
For the man in the street the directive will put an end to all the aggravation caused by double charging and often high costs , lengthy transfer times and the impossibility of legal redress if the transfer fails to go through .
The directive applies to all transfers of less than 50 000 ECU and provides primarily for a procedure which seeks to improve the transparency of costs and the speed and reliability of transfers .
I think the information covered by the directive is the essence of the directive .
An institution has to provide the customer with sufficient information both before and after a transfer is made and Member States must put in place appropriate and effective complaints and redress procedures to settle any disputes .
I think it is a very good thing for our citizens to know where they can obtain satisfaction .
Double charging will be prohibited in future .
If something still goes wrong with the transfer , the institution of the originator is obliged to credit the originator , that is to say the institution 's customer , with a sum not exceeding 12 500 ECU in respect of the amount of the crossborder transfer , plus the interest which the customer has lost and any costs incurred .
All this within a period of 14 banking days , naturally once the period agreed between originator and bank has expired .
Of course every originator , every customer of the bank , is entitled to go to law in his own country to recover the rest of the money .
So this directive seeks to achieve greater transparency and greater reliability and speed in cross-border transfers .
Once greater transparency and clarity has been secured , the price will fall too .
In fact we are already seeing the effect of the imminent introduction of the directive .
Many banks - I see it in the Netherlands , and I see it in Germany - have already introduced a Euro-transfer which already meets the directive 's requirements .
So it is fair to say that this is an important directive which will improve the freedom of movement in goods and services in the Community .
The end result now before us is a very good one overall .
When we began the conciliation procedure the wishes of the European Parliament and the Council were still rather different .
I welcome the fact that both sides have moderated their stance somewhat and that the main differences have been resolved .
What were those differences ?
For example the applicability threshold , now 50 000 ECU , so all transfers of less than 50 000 ECU are subject to the directive ; the mandatory refund amount : 12 500 ECU , and the date of the directive 's entry into force .
Thus , on the first day of full EMU this directive will also come into force .
We hope in Germany too , but maybe it will take a little longer there .
We have a directive which protects consumers and businesses adequately and will encourage internal trade in goods and services within the Community .
In the name of Parliament and the voters we represent I call on Member States to comply as swiftly as possible with the requirements contained in this directive which serves the best interest of all citizens and businesses in Europe .
Mr President , the cross-border credit transfers directive is good news for Europe , good news for its citizens , good news for small businesses and good news for the European Parliament .
Why ?
First of all , as regards citizens and consumers : everyone of us has at sometime or other tried to send money across national boundaries .
Climbing the north face of the Eiger might have been easier .
Recall how the faces drop behind the counter when you go into your local bank and announce , as I once did , that you want to send money from England to France to pay for a holiday .
Lack of enthusiasm is followed by lack of information about how such a transaction might be effected , what the costs are , how long the transfer will take , and what guarantees you have that the money will not be lost as it wings its way across the Channel .
Remember your astonishment that both the sending and the receiving bank want their cut in commission for performing this elementary task in the electronic age .
It is time double-charging was singled out for the chop , and so it will be through the instrument of this directive .
We in the Socialist Group would be particularly keen to protect the consumer by ensuring a pay-back guarantee of up to ECU 12 , 500 on any such transaction .
The biggest boost for the consumer , however , will reside in the demand for transparency in bank costs and conditions of transfer .
Information posted up-front will truly permit the customer to shop around for the cheapest and best service .
Competition will shed light on the gloomy and cobwebbed world of the high street banks and sweep away the delays habitually associated with such transactions .
So frustrated was my constituent , Mrs Dorothy Evans of Ellesmere Port , in sending cash transfers to Sweden for her magazine subscriptions that she resorted to sending Kroner notes in the post .
Help is at hand Dorothy !
Good news too for SMEs whose fear of sending money abroad can inhibit them from functioning fully and effectively in Europe 's single market .
Why risk profits when a credit transfer to buy goods or services wipes out the incentive to trade across borders ?
Playing it safe virtually means : ' don 't play at all in the single market ' .
Good news for the European Parliament and congratulations to Mrs Peijs for her persistence with the Council .
By invoking the conciliation procedure and arriving at a sensible compromise with the Council we have shown Parliament capable and cunning in the deployment of its new conciliation powers .
Once again the European Parliament is manifesting itself as of the people , by the people and for the people .
One final thought : the greater transparency introduced into the act of sending money from one country to another will itself be all the more apparent once the single currency is introduced .
No longer will banks include conversion charges in their total fees .
Even better , the true costs of the service provided will be laid bare .
Truly the spotlight of healthy competition will fall on the dark vaults of European banks .
This directive will also be good news for banks which will become more competitive in Europe 's great enterprise , the single European market .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating you on your re-election and wishing you all the very best .
As we know , there are some 400 , 000 , 000 cross-border credit transfers in the European Union annually , and 50 % of individual transfers amount to less than ECU 2 , 500 .
On the basis of current trends , it is estimated that , in the early years of the next century , the total number of cross-frontier banking transactions , excluding cash payments , will be in excess of one billion .
That will be the product of an increase in cross-border activity and the expansion of trade in goods , services and money between the Member States , within the single market .
It is therefore becoming crucial that we encourage regulatory measures which protect citizens as the consumers of banking services , whether we are talking about small or big business or just savers .
That aim is fully compatible with the introduction and circulation of the single currency .
A banking transaction between two different cities within the Community should be treated in the same way as a transaction between two different cities in the same state , and management of those transactions should not be left entirely to the discretion of the credit institutions , that leaving them to determine transaction procedures , monetary value and costs .
We therefore approve of a large part of the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee and shall be supporting it .
For that , I thank the rapporteur above all and , I venture to say - the French government which made this one of its priorities during its presidency , in the first half of 1995 , when it reached agreement with the governments of almost all of the Member States and with this House , which gave its support , firmly convinced that what we want is not a Europe of bankers but a Europe of citizens .
To begin with , Mr President , our group was rather critical of the amounts involved and worked very hard to try to get the amounts to which the directive will be applicable increased .
Nevertheless I believe the result we now have is to be applauded and together with my fellow-Members here I must compliment Mrs Peijs on her achievement .
Our Group believes that it is extremely important that the rights of consumers and small businesses should be adequately protected , at least up to given maximum sums .
But I strongly believe that the banks themselves might offer rather more by way of guarantees and security in their contracts with their clients .
If we want a single Europe and a single market , there have to be guarantees for credit transfers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the previous debate I mistakenly did not use up nearly all my speaking time .
So I hope you will bear with me if I use a little more than my allotted time now .
On the business in hand : more would have been better .
But I think that in the Conciliation Committee we did achieve something for the people who elected us .
Although the original proposal has been improved , there is still one aspect that worries me , however . The liability thresholds have been set too low .
That means that a financial risk that could under certain circumstances prove to be a question of economic survival is being shifted from the economically stronger to the economically weaker parties .
Fortunately , legislative rules do not apply for ever .
At the appropriate time they can be improved .
And I hope our counterparts in the Council will keep to their word .
They promised in the Conciliation Committee that they will not insist on the 30-month time-limit for implementing the directive , so that where possible it can be incorporated into national legislation everywhere by 1 January 1999 .
In the hope that the directive will be reviewed in the near future to provide greater consumer protection , I think we ought to approve the outcome of the conciliation procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which was asked for its opinion , naturally expected the directive to do more to protect consumers .
Yet I approved it in the Conciliation Committee and would now ask Parliament to do the same .
We need a directive on cross-border credit transfers and I hope that as promised the Member States will implement it by 1 January 1999 , i.e. on the date of monetary union .
Parliament managed to carry through its demand that the directive should take account of any transfer below ECU 50 000 .
That means it covers the majority of transfers to the private sector and the SMEs .
The mandatory refund amount for transfers that are debited from the sender 's account but not credited to the receiver 's account , namely ECU 12 500 , is a compromise that will have to be improved on when the directive is reviewed .
During the conciliation procedure it sometimes seemed as though the Council believed we were still living in the days of the stagecoach and the money was being carried in cash .
It would be most welcome if the banks voluntarily agreed to increase the amount .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I should like to thank Parliament for its efforts to ensure that the conciliation procedure produced the results which have permitted this compromise between the three institutions .
This has also made it clear that the conciliation procedure is sometimes a positive thing and a method that is quite capable , via the inter-institutional dialogue , of producing good news such as this .
I think that Mrs Peijs described at length the agreement reached in the conciliation procedure , and most of the Members who took part in the debate have made clear the benefits which consumers , individuals and undertakings will enjoy once this directive is approved .
Therefore you will pardon me if I do not reiterate the results of the conciliation process .
I think that the benefits are obvious .
There was a demand for this , above all from those who , as explained by the various Members , use this type of service .
The situation now is much more clear .
It is much more transparent for citizens and , furthermore , what is more important - and I will finish with this remark - it is a positive step towards gradually reinforcing the border-free internal market .
Thank you , Mrs Peijs , for your explanations , thanks to all of you and also thanks to the conciliation procedure which has enabled this positive decision to be taken today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
EU-Latin America partnership
The next item is the report ( A4-0416 / 96 ) by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ' The European Union and Latin America - the present situation and prospects for closer partnership 1996-2000 ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0495 - C4-0489 / 95 ) .

Mr President , before we begin the debate on the Bertens report , I should like to draw your attention to a procedural matter : we are about to debate two reports by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy but we have yet to hear the opinions of either the Delegation for relations with Latin America or the Delegation for relations with Central America .
It may be that as far as the rules are concerned , that omission is justified ; but I believe that , looking at the substance , that is the way in which our work is managed , it is right that the views of those delegations with an interest in the issue should be heard in these instances .
Therefore , Mr President , if you consider my point to be justified , perhaps the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities could look at the matter to establish the actual function of the parliamentary delegations within the structure of our work .
Mr Manzella , I am sorry , but there are members of those delegations who can table amendments before tomorrow 's vote , and that should satisfy your requirements .
I do not think the debate can be postponed since the members of the delegations have that right .
Mr President , I did not ask for referral back to committee .
I simply asked whether you thought we should continue the debate and refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities so that it can study , can examine the role the delegations should in future play in these areas .
It seems to me incompatible with the way in which the work of the House is managed that the delegations concerned with the issue of Latin America should not be involved .
It was only a point for the future , Mr President , I was not seeking referral back to committee .
Mr Manzella , I will put your request to the President .
Mr President , speaking personally and on behalf of my Group I must congratulate you on your reelection as vice-president of Parliament .
My thanks to Mr Manzella for stressing that the delegation on Latin America needs to address this report .
Let me reassure him ; I was a member of it for seven and a half years , it does a good job , and moreover I spent fifteen years of my short life living in the region we are discussing .
Anyway , we shall be talking about this in more detail , I am a Dutchman and you are an Italian and maybe we can communicate in another way .
My thanks to the Commission and above all to Commissioner Marín for the statement on future relations with Latin America .
That continent is changing fast and it is vital for the Union to have a coherent vision embracing all aspects of our relations with it .
Europeans are still over-inclined to view Latin America with the prejudices of the seventies and eighties .
Latin America is no longer a continent of dictators , human rights violations , massive inflation and of interesting but oh so secret contras or contra-contras .
That is partly thanks to Europe .
The Union has since the early eighties shown here how a common European foreign policy can be successful .
Mr Marín knows that better than anyone , the San José dialogue .
Mr Carnero , another old Latin America hand , has written a very good report on it .
In it he describes how the common European foreign policy , which must not be institutionalized , can work .
And we must now build on this success .
Meantime Europe stood still whilst Latin America was rapidly changing .
A policy of reconciliation , democratization and respect for human rights provided the basis for political and social stability .
Economic reform and macroeconomic stabilization created opportunities for economic reconstruction .
These developments lent a powerful impetus to regional cooperation , the Andean Pact , Mercosur and so on .
But , again , Europe did not match these advances and failed to seize many of the opportunities afforded by these recent developments .
Cooperation was one-sided in the form of development cooperation .
We gradually lost the Latin American market to the United States which jumped in with NAFTA and the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative and plugged the gap which Europe had left .
The US is currently way ahead of Europe in terms of investment in and trade with Latin America .
New structures in Latin America remain fragile .
35 % of the population are below the poverty threshold .
Not enough is done on education and training .
Drugs , corruption and crime which goes unpunished undermine the political structures in Latin America .
We need to continue focusing on democratization .
A new peace in Guatemala is a most welcome fact , but it will of course remain weak unless we help to underpin it .
Europe must deal with Latin America as a fully-fledged mature partner .
The Commission statement is a beginning .
We cannot allow so important a region with its still fragile structures to be ignored by the common foreign and security policy .
But the Commission 's moves towards a new Latin America policy are too vague and too loose .
I urge the Commission to prepare a programme of action , proposing specific initiatives as part of a new policy .
In my report I suggest a number of specific initiatives of this kind .
They cover foreign policy , the economy , integration , development cooperation , security and defence .
In terms of foreign policy Latin America must be seen as a priority area .
We must not convert the transatlantic dialogue we have with the United States and Canada into a transatlantic dialogue with Latin America .
But Latin America must feature prominently on our agenda .
The Union must continue to foster regional integration on economic and other matters and must maintain contacts with these regions .
I agree with the Commission 's priorities for development cooperation .
As the biggest donor the Union must encourage all other countries to intensify their efforts .
The contribution of the US in particular is too modest .
Security and defence . But I will take security and cooperation on drugs together .
Cooperation on drugs must be broadened to parts of Latin America other than the countries of the Andean Pact alone .
Security and defence must also feature in the dialogue between Europe and Latin America .
In a truly mature relationship with Latin America these topics too must be discussed .
Cooperation on preventive diplomacy , peacekeeping and the like are matters for the world community .
So contacts between appropriate organizations are a very good idea too .
Mr President , in the opinion of the Committee of which I am the draftsman , I will refer , naturally enough , to the energy , research and development aspects .
With regard to Latin America , we are talking about a market of 450 million inhabitants .
Thus 450 million consumers .
Mr Bertens said that the European Union had neglected these markets .
Not in relation to energy , Mr Bertens .
Many of the European Union Member States have made considerable investments in the field of energy .
I think that the investments they have made are so significant that they have become the real protagonists in this area in recent years .
This enormous region , which is enjoying substantial economic growth , has a low level of economic development , thus there is scope for a major increase in energy consumption .
Our committee is anxious to ensure that the energy will be used efficiently .
There is already the ALURE programme ( Optimal Use of Energy Resources in Latin America ) launched by Commission Directorate General I concerning cooperation between Latin America and the European Union , which is important but not sufficient .
It is not properly funded .
We need more resources for this programme , Commissioner , because we consider it to be extremely important .
We also consider that renewable energy sources , particularly hydroelectric energy , should be developed . It has enormous development potential in Latin America .
This energy source does not cause pollution , unlike others .
Moreover we have the Amazonian rainforests which drain off a huge amount of carbon dioxide .
This should all be exploited in our future cooperation based on the relevant agreements .
As for the most active role we should develop in the area of research and development , we have proposed that seminars be organised to exchange views on mutual cooperation , exchanges of research staff and the launching of programmes in the area of food technology , biotechnology , energy and , above all , the environment .
Mr President , we are dealing with a very important report - this is the view of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
It is high time that the European Union started to regard Latin America as it does other American nations , such as the United States of America and Canada .
The rapporteur rightly highlights the fact that our relations have already overcome their rather hesitant beginnings and are now turning into mature relations between regional organizations with a will to ensure understanding .
We are determined to ensure understanding because we have similar cultures which have been brought closer together with the accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Union .
While there is a traditional understanding between Latin America on the one hand and Spain and Portugal on the other , similar to that between the Commonwealth and the United Kingdom , the Community has perhaps not responded to Latin America in the same way .
Support must be reflected in a strengthening of the various bodies which can ensure that this understanding becomes something quite natural .
I am referring to organisations such as the European Investment Bank , the ECIP and AL-Invest , from which I infer directly that the European Union is in favour of the development aid being granted . The EU is in fact the leading donor - 54 % compared with less than half this figure granted by the United States .
Despite this , however , we note that not only are European investments in these countries not increasing , but they are actually diminishing .
The United States of America accounts for 43 % of global trade and 75 % of direct foreign investment .
Why is there such an imbalance here and why are we not in fact on an equal footing with the US ?
I applaud the report , and I wish to say that the Committee on Development and Cooperation supports these steps to intensify and normalise relations with Latin America .
Mr President , Commissioner , Fellow Members , I was interested to read the text of the report produced by Mr Bertens and the opinions of the various committees which contributed to shaping it .
In my view these are useful and interesting texts which attempt to put forward ideas on how to reinforce relations between the European Union and Latin America .
Looking at the situation in Latin America today , it is obvious that it is not , as Mr Bertens said a moment ago , the same situation as in the last few decades .
It is a much more complex , more active world , with good things and bad , but also with enormous possibilities .
A world where identities are shared , yet it is not right to try to reduce Latin America to some vague kind of uniformity , forgetting the differences .
Latin America is an emerging Chile , a Nicaragua with very severe poverty levels ; it is Guatemala which is concluding a peace agreement , and Costa Rica which is a real example of democratic stability .
It is also true that Latin America is Colombia with flashpoints of violence linked to drugs trafficking , and Peru where we are witnessing the unacceptable use of violence and hostage-taking as political instruments .
But it is also Mercosur , an ambitious project , and the Free Trade Treaty with Mexico , Canada and the United States .
I think that the European Union must adopt a global approach to its relations with Latin America which appreciates the very plurality of this continent .
We have political dialogue instruments .
One example is the San José dialogue which Commissioner Marin is also developing , but perhaps it is not enough .
We cannot accept the risk of Latin America continuing to regard the United States as a priority and the European Union as just a faithful companion .
It is very useful to know about the evolution of investments and trade flows between the European Union and Latin America in order to embark on an analysis of the potential prospects for the future . We have a lot of ground to cover if we are to discover all the potential of parliamentary dialogue .
For instance , if political cooperation between the European Union and Latin America is important , why is it in many cases reduced to a ministerial or governmental dialogue ? Parliamentary dialogue is useful in the context of consolidating democracy and establishing regional integration .
Latin America and the European Union need each other , and on the basis of an equal footing and with commitment to a climate of cooperation , they need to reinforce the instruments of political and trade cooperation .
Anyone who has examined or witnessed the cooperation between the European Union and Latin America will have discovered that cooperation takes place on a large scale and yet - the Commission is also aware of this - this is often not very visible to citizens wishing to determine the levels of cooperation .
Another problem that most of the Latin American countries suffer from is the burden of debt .
The European Union must become an active partner capable of formulating and submitting coordinated , innovative proposals to alleviate the burden of external debt of Latin American countries .
Because , in most cases , these are countries with very divided societies which need help to carry out economic reforms capable of reducing the unemployment figures and the poverty figures . Economic reforms which will create the conditions needed for consolidation or even , in some cases , for the introduction of collective policies based on solidarity , similar to what we in Europe call ' the welfare state ' .
Some Latin American countries have very serious drug trafficking and corruption problems , but we dare not raise a hypocritical accusatory finger until we can deal rigorously with this , because the coca being produced would not be converted into drugs unless there were was a demand for these .
I will finish , Mr President , by saying that the age of military dictatorships has now virtually ended , but there may be a risk of the emergence of another type of populist regime which does not solve the structural problems of Latin America .
The European Union and Latin America should come together in every possible area of cooperation .
The Commission 's proposals and the contribution by Mr Bertens are a step in this direction .
Mr President , when people talk about Europe 's relations with Latin America they can never be sure what past or present family affairs they may be interfering in .
There are disputes , talks , deals and criticisms .
There are sisters , brothers , cousins , godparents , relationships that have endured for decades or centuries , refuges and enterprising immigrants and emigrants .
But what we are concerned with today is the future , namely the attempt to revive the relations between the EU community of states and Latin America , marked by years of conflict between dictatorship and democracy , the fight for human rights and the construction of common markets in Latin America , by creating a partnership until the year 2000 .
That is important to our common foreign policy and our foreign trade policy alike .
It affects them both .
In our view and in line with the wishes of the European Parliament , as set out in Mr Bertens ' very good report , the EU must pursue both policies with a view to initiating a new transatlantic dialogue , which must also involve the United States .
Since its direct election , the European Parliament has endeavoured for many years to promote this dialogue .
Article J.1 of the Maastricht Treaty calls for a dynamic policy towards Latin America .
That had long been lacking .
Developments in Europe led to a decline in interest in the political processes in Latin America .
In spite of its undisputed economic and democratic upswing in the 1990s , Latin America has to some extent taken a back place in international politics .
With its Communication on ' The European Union and Latin America - the present situation and prospects for closer partnership 1996-2000 ' the Commission has pointed the way to reviving these relations .
The opinions of the two committees consulted , the continuous activities of the delegations for South and Central America , the interparliamentary dialogue in the framework of the EP-Latin American Parliament interparliamentary conferences all show how much importance we attach to the proposals set out in the resolution .
We have strongly supported the development of Mercosur , the formation of regional parliaments in Central America , the Andean parliament , the Central American parliament .
But we must not forget some important questions .
We must not forget drugs , cross-border crime and corruption , the expansion of trade in sensitive sectors , the struggle for greater human rights and democracy .
Last year 's hearing in the Subcommittee on Human Rights on impunity for the crimes against humanity committed in dictatorships against political opponents but also against many ordinary people who happened to be in the wrong place , showed the complex and sensitive nature of these problems inherited from the past .
Democracy and an independent judiciary are closely interlinked .
A democratic Europe must support the stabilization of democracy in order to increase the number of democratic states in the international organisations and formulate a common security and defence policy , with a view to conflict-prevention .
It is our duty to do so and we in the European Parliament have always insisted on this to the Commission and the Council .
We wish the report much success .
Mr President , current developments in Latin America are one of the happiest trends of the last years of this century .
Long regarded as a powder keg , a theatre of endless guerrilla warfare and putsches , Latin America is now seeing real progress towards peace and democracy , a process which the European Union must support and help to strengthen .
Like Mr Bertens , whom I congratulate on his excellent report , I welcome the Commission 's initiative and the tone of its communication , designed to reestablish good relations between the European Union and Latin America .
In the brief time allowed me , I cannot - much as I approve of them - go into the three main priorities on which the Commission proposes to base the Union 's cooperation .
I shall therefore confine myself to stating what I believe to be the essential prerequisite for any reform - the support which Europe can and must give to the consolidation of the democratic process .
The European Union is often accused of being first and foremost an economic union , motivated by trade interests .
This view takes no account of its contribution to the spread of democracy throughout the world , through the conclusion of cooperation and association agreements with countries where democracy was or had been under threat .
This is the situation with the Latin American continent , where some democratic regimes are still fragile and where the Union can made a decisive contribution to strengthening the processes taking place .
The Commission 's proposals regarding the establishment of a political and trading partnership between the Union and the Latin American countries meet this requirement .
However , there are two points in the report about which I have certain misgivings .
First , Mr Bertens proposes to go beyond the ministerial framework within which such dialogues take place - he would like to see more inter-parliamentary meetings organized , with the European Parliament and its Latin American counterparts participating in the ministerial meetings .
This may create undesirable institutional confusion at a time when links that had previously been somewhat stretched are being reestablished .
Secondly , there is the fight against the narcotics trade .
In his explanatory statement , Mr Bertens suggests that the problem of the drug trade is a matter of supply and demand , and that the first need is to create the right conditions for other forms of development , without launching an outright war on drugs because suppression , as he puts it , never works .
This way of looking at the problem worries me , because although it is true that there is a need to create other forms of development in the areas where these products are cultivated , it is equally true that the drug trade must be obstructed by every available means , without exception .
Part of the European Union 's mission is to help these countries rid themselves of a scourge that never makes any contribution to the advance of democratic awareness .
Mr President , Commissioner , the recent years have been marked by a rapprochement between the European Union and Latin America , mainly due to the accession of Spain and Portugal which increased and accentuated the cultural similarities between both continents .
Therefore we would like to express our agreement with the spirit of Mr Bertens ' report .
We consider that the essential priority objective must be to extend and reinforce the various activities which promote development and the consolidation of democracy in Latin American countries , as described in the Commission communication also dealing with this matter .
To do this we consider it vital to reinforce European efforts to bolster the economic reforms of the Latin American countries , thus ensuring the success of the structural reform currently under way and promoting the development and progress of the various Latin American regions , paying particular attention to the considerable economic and social disparities in the region .
To achieve this , we in the European Union must engage in more energetic and ambitious activities to ensure that relations with Latin America become the main objective of the new common foreign and security policy .
We must remember that , after tripling in the ' 80s , Latin America 's traditional trade surplus with the European Union diminished at the beginning of the ' 90s , practically disappearing in 1993 .
In the past three years a deficit of some 1500 million dollars was recorded .
At the same time , the European Union ceased being the main investor in Latin America , which demonstrates that the current efforts to reinforce association with Latin America are not sufficient , and lack the ambition and dynamism needed .
In conclusion , Mr President , we consider it vital for the Commission to formulate an action programme for Latin America which , as already mentioned , contains practical , common proposals which promote , on the one hand , economic development and , on the other , peace , democracy and the strictest possible respect for human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bertens 's report deals with a communication from the Commission on relations between the European Union and Latin America .
This communication is certainly worthy of independent consideration , but it also has to be seen in an overall context that includes the communications on relations with Canada , the United States and Central America .
This set of texts reflects the European Union 's legitimate concern to redefine its relations with the Americas as a whole in the aftermath of the Cold War , and to provide a counter-balance to a powerful zone of economic and trade development centred on the Pacific .
I welcome the stated intentions regarding efforts to promote development and stamp out the drug trade , the defence of social justice and the environment , and the restoration of closer cultural links .
But I am concerned when our ACP partners warn us of the long-term erosion of the Lomé agreements by the granting of trade preferences here , there and everywhere , and especially of the devastating effects of the drugs GSP .
We know today the undesirable effects of this system , conceived as it was with the best of intentions .
Not only has it helped to reduce significantly the production of drugs , but it has also , conversely , destroyed whole sectors of European horticulture and fisheries .
I am also concerned when the development of our trade relations is presented as being necessarily destined to result in an intercontinental free trade area , even though this prospect is at present formulated in somewhat vague terms .
If the Commission 's real intention is to implement a package of trade and customs agreements creating a transatlantic free trade framework which will double the multilateral trade disarmaments of the GATT , it should tell us the reasons , the advantages , the drawbacks , the costs and profits .
What will the consequences be for employment in Europe ?
What quid pro quo are we going to ask for ?
In particular , can we quantify the consequences of such agreements in the agricultural sector when we know the productivity of the South American agricultural sector , its labour costs and its social and environmental standards ?
It is for all these reasons , Mr President , that the Europe of Nations Group , while acknowledging the quality of the work done by Mr Bertens , will be very vigilant regarding the concrete proposals based upon it by the European Commission .
Mr President , the scant attention paid in recent years by the European Union to the countries of Latin America again raises the problem of the absence of a general foreign policy strategy for Europe , at least at a political , commercial and security level .
Admittedly , the Commission communication to Parliament has at least the merit of stating - after years of guilty silence - the need to relaunch the relationship between the European Union and Latin America , and we have to acknowledge that Mr Bertens , the rapporteur , has had the courage to focus clearly on and identify shortcomings and limits in the Commission communication and put forward real and specific solutions .
It is a serious mistake to view Latin America - and this is what has happened so far - as just one of several partners in discussion on the other side of the world with which we maintain relations typified by programmes that are frequently ill-defined and not particularly innovative .
Only political short-sightedness could prevent the European Union - and its Member States - from looking to Latin America as a geographical area of major importance , politically and culturally at least .
I would go so far as to say that , in addition to the strategic reasons , there are historical , cultural and linguistic features which mean that the subcontinent is the most Europeanized area lying between the two Oceans : for generations , millions of Italians , Spaniards and Portuguese - to name but a few - have been living in those countries , millions of European emigrants , then , who share with the local people the struggle against poverty and social marginalization .

And so long as Europe fails to fulfil its role as privileged partner , its place is being rapidly taken by the United States which now accounts for 43 % of trade with Latin America and 75 % of direct inward investment .

We need then to recover lost time : the Commission and the Council should draw up a global action programme for a common foreign and security policy with Latin America . This can no longer be abstract and general ; we need a policy of economic cooperation for the next four years that is adequately funded as compared with the current ECU 1343 m ; there has to be a joint effort to combat drug-trafficking and to promote humanitarian , social and cultural activities .
In any event , Europe should register its interest in taking an active role in the development of Latin America .
In the coming months , we shall see whether the conditions and political will to play that role really exist .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Bertens for his report .
Both this report and the Commission document fulfil an important function .
The cooperation which was initiated in the middle of the 1980s , within the framework of the San-Jose dialogue , must be revived and developed .
The political and economic instruments which have been developed and are now in place must be updated and used so that the Union can support the move towards democracy and the protection of Human Rights which has commenced in the region .
Fresh steps must be taken to ensure that values and standards in these areas , on both continents , are brought closer together .
The EU is currently the largest donor of aid to Latin America although , politically speaking , the region is of less importance to Europe now , despite the fact that culturally and ideologically we have grown closer in recent years .
Some important aspects of the links between the Union and these countries , such as the encouragement of democracy , increased respect for minority groups , concern for the environment , the fight against drug trafficking and international crime , have served to widen and expand the relationship between the two continents .
Because of this , as the rapporteur has pointed out , there is a need for a deeper political dialogue between the EU and Latin America in order to take advantage of and provide continuing support to these positive developments in the future .
But I question some of the aspects of cooperation covered in the report .
To discuss , in this context , the inclusion , in the political dialogue with these countries , of EU security and defence aspects of the cooperation is , in my opinion , a step in the wrong direction .
It is obvious to me , that the EU supports the international peace movement , and is working to prevent conflict and strengthen democracy .
As the rapporteur himself mentioned , the best way to do this is to develop a global strategy of economic and political cooperation with these countries .
I consider it illogical and incorrect that the have to be and should be resolved at international level by a body which has the necessary mandate for this task .
The report also takes up the question of control over the export of weapons .
It is very important that this export is restricted .
A voluntary register has been developed within the UN for the registration of heavy weapons .
The EU should strive to see this register developed , to make registration obligatory and to see that the register covers all weapons both heavy and light .
This must be seen as the first step towards a global restriction of the trade in weapons .
Defence aspects are not within the competence of the EU and consequently must be tackled at interstate level .
I find it impossible to support the EU 's tendency , through its influence on aspects of a region 's security and defence , to take upon itself the role of a world police force .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Bertens on his report because this is one of the few reports in this House which underlines the need not only to reinforce relations with the countries of Latin America , but also to reconsider these relations .
Mr President , Latin America is the poor relation in the European Union 's external policy .
As I often say , Latin America does not need handouts , it needs opportunities . Of the three vehicles for European Union action in the coming years - political dialogue , cooperation and trade relations - I think that what will mark the direction for developing these relations is political dialogue , with the parliamentary dimension referred to by other colleagues .
Because it was political and not economic reasons which led to the San José dialogue ; because it was political and not economic reasons which are behind the consolidation of the Rio Group dialogue , and because it is political and not economic reasons which must lay down the guidelines for political transition to democracy in Cuba , with full respect for fundamental rights and liberties , as requested by this Parliament .
However important this political dialogue is , Mr President , it will end up being reduced to nothing and withering away if it is not accompanied by cooperation action to sustain it .
I am very happy to see Mr Bertens here because he was also present at the debate with the Dutch presidency , during which no mention at all was made of the Latin American priority .
When it comes to voting on budgets , I think it very important that we ensure together that enough is done so that the amendments submitted - and I would remind Mr Bertens that the general rapporteur is a member of his Group - will be successful .
With regard to the trade aspects , I think that the European export figures for 1995 released at the beginning of January are very satisfactory .
But we are not stimulating production by Latin American countries because , in fact , they are competitive in many products and , in many cases , we are closing our markets to them .
I think that we should be satisfied by what has been done .
There is still a lot to be done , however .
I reiterate my congratulations to Mr Bertens on his report .
Mr President , this debate has confirmed that , right now , Latin America is the frontier of the world : what I mean by that is that there is no institutional , economic , social or artistic culture which ought not here and now be taking notice of what was until just a few years ago considered to be the ' missing ' continent .
The way in which the world is interdependent is also plain from the mass of political issues Latin America raises for us .
There are the two hundred million poor - increasingly poor - people , and yet there is vigorous development over increasingly large areas of the continent .
There continue to be clusters of nationalism which are frequently the source of serious violations of constitutional principles , and yet there are also experiments in regionalism which are gaining ground . There is , in many instances , a delay in creating a fully-developed legal system , and yet a substantial degree of civil awareness is becoming established .
We , the European Union , should take full responsibility for these contradictions : we have to understand that the world has become smaller and they are to some extent our contradictions also . That is why I agree with Mr Bertens on three crucial points .
Firstly , Europe 's transatlantic dialogue should be conducted with both North and South America .
Secondly , our policy in Latin America should be a global policy , programmed in accordance with the Community approach of objectives , deadlines and resources . Thirdly , we should have both a ministerial and an interparliamentary framework , the latter offering civilian populations the opportunity to have a voice and be heard and strengthening and supporting the American regional models , such as MERCOSUR , which are becoming established , through our model of regional parliament .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report and the communication from the Commission .
I believe it is important to continue expanding relations between the European Union and the Latin American continent to avoid the risk of being edged out of this continent by the United States .
Moreover , I agree with the rapporteur that in many areas the Commission 's communication fails to make any concrete proposals .
We will urgently need an action plan here in the near future .
For example , there are no proposals on dealing with the drug problem , which is very acute in these countries .
That means that the general socio-economic structures have to be improved .
But a specific programme also needs to be formulated with the aim of substituting alternative crops for narcotics through a specific agricultural development policy .
I welcome the proposal concerning the importance of information about that continent and mutual understanding , with a view to strengthening the rule of law and involving civil society in the development of a genuine human rights structure .
My experiences in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and in the South America delegation have shown me how important it is to promote exchanges , especially between young people .
That is why I would suggest developing the existing programmes of scientific and technical cooperation and aiming them in particular at universities , to give young people and budding scientists a chance to be actively involved in the new partnership and benefit from their mutual experiences .
In general , we need research on Latin America and a comparative study of European-Latin American development , bringing out both the common features and the differences between the two cultures , so that we can base all our future measures on the findings .
That is the only way to ensure that Latin American culture is acknowledged and treated as independent .
Finally , I want to address one other aspect where I think improvements are needed : the much-criticised European bureaucracy makes it difficult for good ideas to be translated into action in this area too .
It is important to simplify the system of applying for projects and the administration of the research programmes .
Only then can the applications be processed rapidly and projects be approved quickly .
Mr President , I should like to join in congratulating Mr Bertens and thank him for incorporating amendments which I moved as part of the Committee on Development and Cooperation 's opinion on this report .
Amendments to ensure the principles of development underpin our relations with all Latin American countries highlighting the very severe social impact of the structural adjustment policies , supporting far greater involvement of civil society in our dialogue and agreements as well as the sensitive question of fair trade access for products of the countries own choosing , not ours .
I would also like to say how much I agree with the rapporteur 's comments on the importance of alternative development as part of combating the drugs problem , and we should wish success to the European-funded alternative development programme in Bolivia announced late last year , the most significant programme yet of its type .
However , I regret that we have not found priority in tonight 's resolution to incorporate two of my other amendments to support specific programmes for women , including reproductive rights , and to reassert our commitment to ILO Convention 169 and to combat the flagrant abuse of the rights of indigenous populations which continue to occur in nearly every country in the region .
I would also like to support the rapporteur when he questions the Commission on how far vague concepts will be applied in concrete terms .
In Recital C we say what is the point in democracy and social clauses in our agreements when there appears to be little attempt to monitor and enforce such clauses ?
In Recital I we call for the protection of the environment and yet Europe is still supporting mass hydro-electric schemes in the name of development , one of which - local communities and NGOs say - will devastate one of the largest and most precious environments within the region .
There are 200 million people in the region living in poverty .
How far is this compatible with Commissioner Marin 's own statement to the Development Committee on 29 October last year that Mercosur countries have been struck off the development aid list to concentrate on poorer countries like Bolivia and Peru ?
An apparently wealthy country like Brazil has more poor people than any other country on this planet and Europe cannot be silent on this question .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Bertens for his report which highlights something which the Commission has no difficulty in accepting .
Anything that will reinforce relations with Latin America , augment the content of these relations , increase the European presence and guarantee the quality and quantity of our political , economic , financial , trade and cultural relations must become quite natural for the European Union , mindful of the historical and cultural links for some and the economic and trade links for others .
In reality , the Commission 's communication concerning the way in which we will conduct our relations in the last five years of the century is simply a practical guide to where our activities should start and end .
Rather than launching new ideas now about Latin America , what the Commission intends to do is consolidate the enormous amount of work done , particularly in the last two years , when we renewed everything from the San José Convention to the various regional integration efforts .
What would be the point now in launching new initiatives when the San José Agreement was renewed in the Council of Minsters in Florence in the second half of last year ?
What would be the point in new ideas when we are still at the analysis stage , about to embark on the final negotiations with MERCOSUR , Chile , and the new option which has emerged for the Andean Community , and when we are trying to find a negotiating formula for the last remaining agreement , the one with Mexico ?
I would prefer in the coming 3 or 4 years to consolidate the work already done , which has been very important because , in fact , it is scarcely 2 or 3 years since the European Union started shaping a much more specific strategy for the Latin American continent .
As Mr Cabezón said , Latin America is not a homogenous concept .
There are many Latin Americas .
Consequently it was necessary to work very flexibly so that , while maintaining exclusively the horizontal level - the Rio Group - as a specialised forum for political dialogue , the European Union could offer a suitable cooperation platform to every country , from the North to the South of Latin America , in line with the regional , territorial and political needs as well as the level of economic development of these countries .
Thus we started to produce a sub-regional integration plan which we have been gradually consolidating , and which we regard as pioneering work .
There is no antagonism between the position of the United States and that of the European Union regarding , for instance , NAFTA .
We are not concerned about NAFTA , Mr Bertens .
NAFTA has not been extended to any other Latin American country in the past three years .
In these 3 years , however , the European Union has become involved in MERCOSUR , Chile , a new San José agreement , an agreement with Mexico , and a new agricultural GSP .
We will have to check our figures , but according to the OECD figures the European Union accounted for up to 61.5 % of development cooperation in the last three years .
Next comes Japan with 19.5 % and then , in third place , the United States with 14 % .
It would be very difficult to reproach the European Union for not concerning itself sufficiently with the Latin American continent when , based on the OECD figures for last year , we represent 62 % of cooperation , much less attempt to compare it with the United States which was even surpassed by Japan last year , and which accounts for only 14 % .
The European Union cannot be reproached for this because the efforts made were very considerable , even outstanding .
One thing I would admit you are right about , Mr Bertens , is that although we are the main cooperation partner with 62 % , this is not known , or not very well known .
You are right about this .
But how can you achieve visibility in today 's world ?
In order to be visible and present in world communications , in addition to determination you need money , money , money .
It is very difficult for the European Union to ensure the visibility of what it is doing if the communication instruments - which are vital in a media-oriented society like the present - are , quite simply , very fragile .
On another level , in relation to our external action , you have proposed in your report up to 22 measures concerning the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the political dialogue .
I pray that this issue is solved by the Treaty of Amsterdam because the common foreign and security policy is not an area in which the European Union 's credibility is at its best .
Second , I cannot accept either the statement that there has been a fall-off in financial and trade relations because , and I would stress this , this is not reflected in the OECD figures .
At this moment , with regard to Latin America , the European Union is the main trading partner of nine countries , and the second biggest partner of eight countries .
These nine countries include the most important in economic terms - MERCOSUR , Chile , etc .
In trade terms , the flows between the two continents increased by 40 % in the last three years , which is spectacular .
In terms of stock , the increase in direct European investments in manufacturing sectors in recent years has quite simply been extraordinary .
Several European Union countries have even tripled their direct productive investments . I do not need to quote examples as these appear in the media every day .
I would like once again to bring up the question of comparison with United States policy .
Mr Bertens , this year - 1996 - the United States surpassed us in investments , but you know that investments consist of direct productive investments and investment funds .
The European Union is still Latin America 's most important partner , hence the quality of our cooperation due to our direct productive investments , in other words capital which is invested to create wealth , jobs and development .
Let us turn then to the OECD statistics on financial flows because such flows are not always equivalent to development processes as they may simply consist of fleeting capital which comes and goes depending on interest rates .
I think that there is no doubt that much remains to be done , but we have nothing to reproach ourselves for , having made a leap which I would describe as nothing less than spectacular in some sectors .
Things are going well in economic terms , and we must now develop what we started in the last few years .
There is one fact of which little has been said , but which I consider essential in relation to Latin America .
There is no doubt that the continent 's differential is now positive , and Latin America is no longer the continent of galloping inflation , military dictatorships or trade debts .
There is political stability , and a lot of progress has been achieved . We have witnessed the peace processes , and the trade debts have been repaid .
The problem facing Latin America in the coming century - which is very important and which I think we will have to discuss in future - is its social debt .
Latin America has not paid its social debt .
There is a lot of poverty and marginalisation .
The level at which wealth is increasing is spectacular , sometimes an average of 7 % to 8 % for the whole continent . In this respect it is similar to the Asian model .
But I am very much afraid that this wealth is not distributed properly .
I really believe that this will be the unfinished business to be dealt with in Latin America in the next century .
Economic adjustments have been made , financial adjustments have been made , and ' political ' adjustments are being made so that we can get along with each other .
In future we will have to concern ourselves with the internal stability of the continent , which means combating poverty , because otherwise it will be difficult to sustain the economic and political successes achieved in recent years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
San José dialogue
The next item is the report ( A4-0418 / 96 ) by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council on the renewal of the San José dialogue between the European Union and Central America ( COM ( 95 ) 0600 - C40102 / 96 ) .
President , a quick glance is sufficient to see that there is big difference between the Central America of the beginning of the eighties and the Central America of the midnineties .
In fact , from an isthmus plagued by military regimes , open armed conflict and continuous violations of human rights , it has become a region taking its first steps towards pluralist political systems based on universal suffrage , where human rights are increasingly being respected and agreements have been reached which have silenced the weapons and enshrined national reconciliation as a principle and an objective .
The end of the Cold War and , of course , the strength of the Central Americans themselves , are at the root of this change for the better , from darkness to hope .
The action of the European Union has also contributed to this , marked for over a decade by the San José process .
This process is one of the Union 's most creditable external policy actions .
Above all when it is considered that the process was launched , got off the ground and was maintained under the adverse conditions of the aggressive United States policy which characterised the Reagan era .
Despite the success of this we cannot ignore the fact that much remains to be done in Central America , as regards both political and socio-economic aspects , in order to achieve an acceptable situation .
Democracy must be consolidated by reinforcing the rule of law and obtaining full respect for individual and collective human rights , which requires , among other things , the creation of an independent judiciary with which to combat effectively the abominable phenomenon of impunity .
The European Union will also have to help ensure compliance with and the implementation of the peace agreements which have been concluded , the last one of which was signed on 29 December between the Guatemalan Government and the URNG commanders - obviously excellent news .
Above all , it will be essential to combat the enormous economic and social shortcomings which are a result of persisting under-development , and which lead to increased inequalities , poverty , marginalisation and exclusion .
Not only must we renew the San José dialogue , but we must also strengthen and extend it as much as possible , underlining its basic objectives and making available the instruments necessary to achieve these .
In addition to the objectives referred to above in the political and social fields , there are two others which in fact cover these areas : the proper and acceptable integration of Central America into the international economy , not by means of adjustment and regulatory policies , but based on strategies which promote models of development sustainable in human and ecological terms , and the boosting of regional integration itself .
The various proposals contained in the report I am presenting on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs are a step in this direction , but there is one more point I would like to emphasise .
The formulation of a comprehensive Common Foreign and Security Policy action programme for Central America , adequately funded , like the relevant cooperation framework agreement , should be accompanied by a financial protocol which would involve a substantial increase in the resources assigned to cooperation with Central America .
Such a programme should include measures to modernise and consolidate the rule of law which would be aimed , for instance , at combatting impunity , promoting human rights , supporting refugees and the return of displaced persons , ensuring democratic control over the armed forces and cut-backs in military expenditure , as well as providing protection for indigenous groups and sections of the population such as women ; extending to the Central American industrial sector the new Generalized System of Preferences of which the Andean countries are beneficiaries ; cancelling , at least partly , the external debts of the countries in the region ; providing impetus in the fight against the drugs trade and , lastly , any measures that would enhance the quality of life and also achieve more equality , combatting , as I have already said , poverty , exclusion and marginalisation .
Similarly , in adopting a stance in favour of intensifying the political dialogue between the European Union and Central America , we must suggest that both the European Parliament and PARLACEN should play an increased role in this , these being the only parliaments in the world directly elected on a transnational basis , and that a Civil Society Consultative Forum be set up , in which initiatives such as the ICIC and bodies such as the CIFCA can be included and take part .
We must not forget either our wish to see the European Commission being given the human and material resources to accomplish its work in this area in the best possible way .
Mr President , I think that we need to continue the positive work achieved so far , and that it is now necessary to stimulate , continue and complete this work which should not be halted because Central America and Europe still have a lot to achieve .
Mr President , the contribution made by the European Union through the San José dialogue to ending the horrific civil wars in Nicaragua , El Salvador and , more recently , Guatemala is very considerable and demonstrates quite clearly the positive role that the European Union can play on the world scene .
Ironically enough , however , the advent of peace means that the attention given to the area is likely to decline quite steeply , despite the fact that many of the underlying problems have by no means been resolved .
This report is important because it identifies the basic needs in the region and specifies in clear terms the policies which the European Union should now pursue .
The San José process should continue providing an opportunity for an exchange of views and discussion not only through the conferences - at two of which I have had the opportunity to speak on behalf of Parliament - but also through greater involvement of civil society in the region .
It is vital that every possible step should be taken to devote attention to the prevention of new human rights abuses and to resist the covering-up of those which occurred in the past by means of general amnesties and the like .
Efforts must also be concentrated on social issues .
Huge numbers of people - particularly the indigenous populations - are grossly afflicted by poverty .
Poverty alleviation , health-care and educational reform are vital and cannot be achieved by neo-liberal solutions imposed from outside .
It is clear that regional integration is in the overall interests of the population but not unless special measures are taken to defend the interests of all who are vulnerable .
The debt problem and the need to safeguard the environment are other issues which must not be overlooked or forgotten .
This report points the way in which policies should be developed .
The European Union can , and should , play its full part within this region .
Mr President , much of what has been said about Mr Bertens ' report also applies , of course , to Mr Carnero González ' very good report .
So I will confine myself to a few comments on the problem specific to this region .
Even more than South America , Central America has for years been the subject of fierce debate in this Parliament between the European parties and their Central American partners on the right road to follow .
Today democracy and peace prevail in most of the countries .
A democratically elected president has just been freely elected in Nicaragua for the second time and the EU has signed an agreement with Nicaragua aimed at supporting the education system and improving the judicial system .
The San José dialogue that has begun between Latin America and the EU and its results since 1984 may well be regarded as one of the few truly successful examples of a common foreign policy .
The framework agreement between the partner countries of the 1993 general agreement on Central American integration forms an important cornerstone of this cooperation .
It must be extended and updated .
What we do not have , however , is an institutionalized parliamentary dialogue , and that is what the EP would like to see .
But where there is light , or at least a little more light , there are also shadows : the high indebtedness , poor economic conditions , social conflicts , the integration of returning refugees , unemployment , an integration policy that does not always work and the retraining both of former soldiers and also of resistance fighters are a threat to democracies that are not yet stable .
There are still human rights infringements .
The European Parliament has discussed these questions on numerous occasions , e.g. , in relation to the street children of Guatemala .
But it is Guatemala that has just introduced a peace process on which we again want to congratulate the negotiating partners .
We welcome and support that process .
But the most difficult task is to carry it through .
After years of military action , terrorism , countless deaths and distrust , a common policy needs to be formulated , which will not be easy .
Here it is up to the European Union and its joint committee to act as a suitable instrument of conciliation .
We must persevere in our cooperation with the government and the parties , unions and social organizations .
We must propose measures to promote the rule of law and an independent judiciary , human rights and their enforcement by the police and the military .
It is essential for a civil society to develop that really is prepared to assume political tasks and responsibilities and to resolve economic and social problems on its own .
We must do our share with programmes for local development , decentralization , land reform and the equality of women , and they must not just be programmes for times of crisis .
They must be real programmes , for unless we can persuade this civil society to take on responsibility for itself , if we , the EU do not help , then all the splendid words spoken in this Parliament are useless. that is why we ask the Commission to give real support in this area .
Mr President , sometimes it is gratifying to see that things are going well in the world and that is the case in Central America .
Ten years ago I was in Nicaragua and El Salvador as rapporteur on the conflict there and now peace has actually broken out in Guatemala .
Now that peace has come it is important that constitutional rule and democracy should be consolidated .
The dialogue between the EU and Central America has already borne fruit .
Still more can be achieved if the Commission is prepared to go along with the suggestion for a detailed multiannual programme for Central America which Mr Carnero makes in his excellent report .
Then , I think , we must above all be careful to ensure that as many social groups as possible are able to take part , the trade unions , for example .
Because most of the governments in this region do not see the importance of this at all .
In Guatemala , for example , a trade union organization was banned outright by the authorities only last year .
It would be particularly unfortunate , and here I agree with what the Commissioner said in his earlier comments on Mr Bertens ' report , if the same thing were to happen in Central America as happened in Latin America , namely growth but without fair distribution .
If that happens people will continue to suffer .
Commissioner Marín hit the nail on the head : this is not the way to do things .
So I hope the Commission will be vigilant to ensure that this social dialogue gets going , with the trade unions , but the employers too , taking part .
You may find this strange , but there is no degree of organization among the employers in Latin America either .
The best thing would thus be a social dialogue of the kind we have in Europe between employers and workers .
I am delighted to see that not only the Commissioner , the Latin America expert , is here but also the new vicepresident of Parliament who is a member of my Group .
I hope this report of Mr Carnero 's will be favourably received by the Commission .
Mr President , the San José dialogue process was a model of integrated policy for the European Union : to undervalue it therefore and reduce it the level of a mere experiment in development cooperation would be a mistake on our part and a mistake for the countries of the Central American isthmus .
If we consider that Latin America currently holds a central position in the mainstream of world development , those countries lie at its very heart : they represent the most sensitive and the most fragile link but one that is crucial to our policy and needs therefore to be viewed with all its implications - in terms of the CFSP then , in our jargon , and not just cooperation .
If we move in that direction , Commissioner , Parliament will give its wholehearted support .
That means that as far as Central America is concerned , we need concepts and a programme whose economic and institutional objectives are consistent and in step with one another .
That programme must be based on three principles : first of all , encouragement for regionalization as the only institutional model able to turn to good use the positive effects of globalization and attenuate its negative effects ; secondly , encouragement for regionally-based parliaments which offer the most modern system of applying a policy of safeguarding human and political rights in those countries and providing a framework for social dialogue - in that connection it is frankly deplorable that the Florence document made no mentioned of PARLACEN ; and , finally , aid targeted primarily at municipalities and local communities and subject to sensible and detailed monitoring by the Commission and this House , as appropriate , to prevent the diversion of aid triggering fresh tensions in countries , such as Guatemala , that have just emerged from civil war .
Mr President , Members of Parliament , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Carnero Gonzalez , on his report .
The Commission agrees not only with its general terms but also with its specific aspects because , finally , what Mr Carnero 's report makes clear is , first of all - I am referring to what I said earlier in my comments on Latin America - the need to renew and upgrade the San José dialogue which , in the words of one of the Members , is perhaps , in all modesty , one of the most solid and convincing actions which the European Union has conducted under foreign policy .
If we compare the state of the San José dialogue when the Esquipulas Group was set up , remembering what happened in Central America , with the contemporary political situation , it can in fact be considered that an enormous leap has been made as regards the political stabilisation of the Central American isthmus .
It is true that the end of the Cold War was a help and it is also true that with peace in Guatemala , the last civil conflict which existed in Central American countries has now been settled .
How was this achieved ?
The San José dialogue was started ten years ago and maintained during the Cold War on certain bases , the main aims of which were to end the civil wars , establish democratic systems and produce a plan for economic development .
Central America has changed a lot in the last five years .
Very difficult and complicated political situations had emerged which have been solved democratically , and civil wars have been ended .
And now we have the phenomenon of Guatemala : next week , on 20 and 21 , the donors ' advisory committee is to meet in Brussels , under the aegis of the European Commission , which demonstrates , if not the leadership , then at least the increasingly important role of the European Union in delicate processes such as this peace process .
A whole new dimension is needed .
Hence the Florence agreement for a new vision of our relations with Central America .
Mr Carnero , what Central America actually needs is the concept of state .
Consequently , our fundamental objective , very briefly , is to foster decentralised cooperation with civil society .
My idea is to gradually involve NGOs , preferably local ones .
The micro-projects ( we are now conducting almost 400 of these ) cost a lot in terms of money and work , and are , of course , difficult to control from Brussels .
We have ideas and we have enough money , but we need more officials .
Therefore I want to transfer a lot of the small projects to local NGOs , concentrate on the rule of law , essentially in relation to parliaments - we intend to cooperate on the reform of various parliaments following the example of Paraguay - on the reform of government administration , justice , tax administration and financial administration .
This will essentially be the central element of cooperation in the next five years , the aim being to have one idea accepted : that a democratic State needs more than anything else a State which is starting to demonstrate the credibility of all the peace and political processes in the region .
The response we have had from the other side of the Atlantic has been truly extraordinary , the proof of this being that it was not necessary to insist in order to get the Guatemalan authorities to propose to us , on the very day they signed the peace accord , to organise the donors ' advisory committee in Brussels under the new parameters of the San José Process , which means that once again , the European Union will be at the helm in this exercise - and we can do this because the financing involved is relatively modest , and we have the people to do it .
Central America 's problem is once again poverty and marginalisation , but this is much more acute than in other Latin American countries .
I am convinced that the Latin American continent will produce strong , democratic and efficient States , otherwise development aid will not work very well .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of privacy in telecommunications
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0415 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector , in particular in the integrated services digital network ( ISDN ) and in the public digital mobile networks ( C4-0470 / 96-00 / 0288 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Medina Ortega ) .
Mr President , I would like to say that if we had wanted to find a name that was not clear , that was against transparency , it would be impossible to find a more entertaining one than the one on this directive or proposal for a directive , which is called ( at least in Spanish - I do not know how it sounds to the Commissioner in his native tongue ) directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector , in particular in the integrated services digital network ( ISDN ) and in the public digital mobile networks .
This is something very mysterious and very specialised .
In reality , what we have here is a directive to guarantee the protection of individuals in the telecommunications sector .
I would like to take advantage of the fact that the Commissioner is present to say that in the interests of fulfilling the principle of transparency and familiarity with Community law , the best thing would be for him to accept the amendment of the title , as proposed in Amendment No 2 of our text , which speaks of the directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector .
I think that Amendment No 2 will help Community citizens to understand what we are talking about .
This directive complements another one which we approved not long ago , the directive on the protection of personal data and privacy in general . It is being applied to the telecommunications sector here .
Another amendment to achieve simplification , which I do not think the Commissioner has before him because only the Spanish version is concerned , is Amendment No 1 , which replaces the expression ' public telecommunication services ' by ' accessible telecommunication services ' .
In any case , I would say that good work has been done in relation to this directive . We have taken our time , and I think that it was a good idea to take our time because the mist has gradually dispersed .
The first draft Commission communication dates from 1990 ; it accompanied the general directive on data protection .
The Parliament took its time and completed its first report in 1992 .
The directive on data protection subsequently followed its own course of development and was kept separate from the directive on data protection in the telecommunications sector .
In fact the amended Commission proposal to Parliament and Council dates from 1994 , thus there are four years between the initial proposal and the amended proposal .
Finally , the Council 's common position was adopted in 1996 and has arrived at Parliament at a time when everything is perfectly clear to us .
We in the Committee on Legal Affairs discussed this in an atmosphere characteristic of our committee , which is one of considerable consensus extending across the political spectrum , the concern being to guarantee the privacy of individuals .
The most important innovation of this directive is probably the fact that it applies not only to natural persons but also to corporate persons .
One thing that does not make sense , and I think that the Commissioner would agree with me on this , is to speak of subsidiarity in this area .
It is absurd that , in the case of a telephone call from Paris to London , one country applies one law and another one applies a different law , because if we are trying to protect the privacy of people , it is only normal to apply the same law .
It is pointless to speak of subsidiarity in this connection .
In my view , the reason why some British politicians like this word so much is because it is very difficult to pronounce in English and nobody knows what ' subsidiarity ' means .
If a phone call is made from Paris to London , there is no reason why one law should be applied in Paris and another in London .
This is not the place for subsidiarity , therefore , and this is the purpose of our Amendment No 7 .
There is no reason for subsidiarity .
This directive is different from the other one in that it applies not only to natural persons but also to the protection of corporate persons , and the Committee on Legal Affairs did not disapprove of extending the protection in this way .
But what does not make sense is that in some countries corporate persons can be protected and in others they cannot , because this brings us back to the same problem .
In other words , if a multinational company calls London from Paris , the message can be protected in Paris but perhaps not in London .
This is absurd , and therefore several of the amendments are aimed at preventing it .
Although as the rapporteur I must recommend all the amendments , I can tell you now that a political group , in fact the one to which I belong , is going to try and remove all national legislative options which enable a distinction to be made between national powers .
Lastly , we believe that good work has been achieved .
I think that not much remains to be done . We are proposing several amendments to simplify the rule and make it a little more rational : there is no room for subsidiarity or for different national laws .
Mr President , already today , the information society is characterized by telecommunications and data transfers , which between them provide almost unlimited possibilities of communication .
These possibilities are as hard to predict as they are numerous , and that is why it is important for the individual to be protected against abuse , and for us to ensure that democratic controls can be applied .
With the achievements of progress in the field of telecommunications , it has become possible to obtain and distribute personal information on such things as people 's interest in certain web sites , their sexuality , and so on .
For the Internet too , rules need to be drawn up on protection of privacy , but this should not be done in such a way that some people are indirectly denied access to information , because this automatically leads to anyone interested being able to obtain information affecting privacy .
However , that should not prevent us from applying sensible democratic controls to what is supplied on the Internet , controls which must provide safeguards against the unlawful supplying of information .
Today , it is possible to find anything on the Internet , from bomb-making recipes and methods of torture to threats against employees and child pornography - anything at all which can be distributed - because no address is given for the provider .
If we wish to stamp out child pornography , for example , it needs to be specified that when material is supplied on the Internet , an address is always given , a personal code or something of the kind , so that it is the supplier who is responsible .
The principle of freedom with responsibility must also be applied on the Internet .
Mr President , as mentioned by the rapporteur , who has carried out commendable work on this report and on the common position we are concerned with today , doubtless the result of a laborious consensus , it is not just the title but the entire text which is confusing and ambiguous , and it is difficult to recognise it as the initial proposal on which this House gave its opinion after the first reading .
Having said that , it is necessary to stress that this directive deals with a complex and delicate situation requiring an urgent solution .
It forms part of a legal space which is completely asymmetric , in which national regulations differ radically , because telecommunications are being projected onto a veritable technological and economic battlefield .
And to this scenario must be added the ups and downs suffered by this directive .
The general directive on the protection of personal data came into force between the first and second readings , which makes this directive a sectoral directive , geared more to the management of these data in the specific field of communications than to actual protection , in relation to which constant reference is made - it could not be otherwise - to the general directive .
Moreover , unlike the initial proposal , this directive - as pointed out by the rapporteur - includes corporate persons and is also extended to cover certain services which were not covered by the first version , for instance videos on demand and a few other services of this kind .
Against this background , the European People 's Party will tomorrow vote for the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs , with the purely technical Amendment No 12 which was submitted by the Group to the House .
Some are intended to improve the text , in other words improve legal security , and in this connection I would point to the amendment to the title : if the content has changed , it is only right that the title should reflect this change .
Others , as mentioned by the rapporteur , refer to the proper use of the concept of subsidiarity .
Lastly , the remaining ones serve to protect the legitimate interests of consumers and user companies .
The European People 's Party will also vote for the removal of the third paragraph of Article 12 , and the corresponding one in recital 20 , since we do not think it right to have a distinction here between the way in which the legitimate interests of natural and corporate persons are treated and protected .
Finally , Mr President and Commissioner , we will vote in favour of Amendment No 11 , submitted by the Liberal Group , which we consider necessary , not only in strict application of the provisions of the single market , which are not really in keeping with the two possibilities in the current text , but also because we think that it provides a fairer compromise between the legitimate interests of companies and the legitimate interests of personal data protection for natural persons and users .
Mr President , as has been stated already , there are exciting changes taking place within the telecommunications industry .
Unfortunately , I have to say that , sometimes I have the feeling that we are approaching the future backwards ; we are so out of step in our attitudes .
We have created the term ' public service ' .
We want everyone to have access at reasonable , that is to say , low cost .
But there are no ' free lunches ' .
We must remember what has happened in Eastern Europe , where it was thought that there were ' free lunches ' .
Future generations will have to pay the price for such abuse there .
The Directive under debate here today , to some extent addresses this problem , but it is only partially covered , in Article 8 for example .
The description to be found here and in many other Directives covering the Telecommunications market does not in any way correspond to the situation which exists in those Member States which have come furthest along the path of liberalisation of the telecommunication market , Scandinavian countries for example .
As there are very different circumstances in each country it is absolutely essential that the principle of subsidiarity is applied .
We can even give examples of the fact that we have come a long way in Scandinavia and that free competition has given opportunities for an improved service and for the promotion of regional equality : the cost of national and international calls has been reduced considerably and there have been very significant developments going on .
I would like to point out that last year , 600 000 mobile telephones were sold in Finland , which has a population of 5 million people ; the Finnish Members of the European Parliament are obviously not the only ones with this type of equipment .
What can we learn from this ?
That , for this sector , where technical progress is moving forwards we find ourselves out of step which will lead to misuse of our resources and which will alter Europe 's competitiveness .
I hope , therefore , that we will bear this in mind during this discussion .
Mr President , the Telecommunications industry is growing and it is now vital to ensure that the personal details held in digital telecommunications networks are protected against improper use .
It is also vital that people , if they so wish , can gain access to the information held in the various telecommunications registers .
I think that the principle to use for this is one of openness , in other words , everything which appears in the telephone directory such as telephone numbers and addresses should be publicly available unless decided otherwise .
Anything which is not considered to be in the public domain may still be given out with care and the principle of personal protection must not replace the principle of openness and the right of each and everyone to gain access to information .
This is clearly regulated in the Swedish principle of openness and the Data Protection Act has worked well .
As I see it , the rules of harmonisation should go no further than maintaining the principle of openness .
Obviously there should be restrictions on phone tapping and subscribers should have the right to an ex-directory number .
In my opinion , the formulation of detailed regulations should , as far as possible , take place at national level .
Mr President , as the House will know , the original proposal for this directive , as Mr Medina Ortega said , dates back to 1990 and the revised proposal was submitted in 1994 .
The arrival at a common position has - to say the least - taken rather longer than usual and , understandably , that has caused some inconvenience for this Parliament .
In view of that fact the Commission is all the more grateful to this House for the constructive attitude that has been shown both in the first and second readings and we are particularly grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , who was also the rapporteur for the general directive on data protection , for his particular patience and for the perceptive and productive way in which he has dealt with the proposed directive on second reading .
We will be rendering a service to both economic operators and to consumers by adopting this directive .
It is obviously essential that the rapidly expanding telecommunications sector keeps the confidence of users and it is equally clear that those users must be certain that the increasing amount of information they are confiding to networks is handled with complete integrity and will not be used for any purposes which they do not intend or do not desire .
In addition , public awareness about privacy and data protection is increasing and Member States have to respond effectively to legitimate concerns .
To avoid great divergences in national provisions which could hinder the free provision of services in the internal market , it is essential for us to ensure that there is agreement on a basic set of principles that can be respected in practical terms throughout the Community .
In short , we need to ensure that the information society offers equal opportunities and mutual benefits to all .
In that process , the basic rights of users need to be adequately defined and equitable competitive conditions for all operators have to be guaranteed .
Those are the main purposes of this directive and against that background I now offer the Commission 's responses to the amendments .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 and 12 are viewed by the Commission as useful clarification and improvements to the text and therefore they are readily accepted by the Commission .
Amendment No 9 removes the ability of operators to charge subscribers for not having their particulars entered in the public directory .
The Commission agrees with Parliament than an individual subscriber should not have to pay for the right to privacy and we can therefore support that amendment .
I have to tell the House , however , that the remaining proposed amendments are not acceptable on grounds that I hope the House will recognize to be rational and will come to agree with .
Firstly , on Amendment No 5 , I have to remind the House that the draft directive allows Member States to limit the application of Article 11 on directories to natural persons , i.e. to private citizens .
The reason for this clearly is that the facility for legal persons , commercial companies and so on , to determine whether they are included or not in the public directory is not a fundamental human right but rather a legitimate interest .
As a result , it was felt that the arrangements for accommodating the legitimate interest of legal persons would not need to be as prescriptive as those for guaranteeing the right to privacy .
Moreover , the argument for offering extended public directory options free-of-charge would be less compelling in the case of legal persons than it is , obviously , in the case of private citizens .
The amendment before us introduces a new element , namely a right of information of the user which is not covered in any way by the substance of the directive and which would seem to suggest if interpreted a contrario , that Member States may actually be allowed to oblige legal persons to appear in the public directory .
That is not the intention and it certainly confuses the issue .
On those grounds therefore the Commission cannot accept this amendment .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendment No 8 - simply because it contains a drafting error .
However , the amendment is replaced by Amendment No 12 which the Commission can support .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 11 .
The amendment would delete the possibility for Member States to offer a higher level of protection to individual subscribers against unsolicited calls .
The common position allows Member States to choose an opt-in or an opt-out system for unsolicited calls made for direct marketing purposes .
That means that governments can either prohibit such calls in general unless subscribers have indicated that they do not mind receiving those calls or allow those calls in general while providing the opportunity for subscribers to indicate in a public list that they do not want to receive unsolicited calls for direct marketing .
The House may recall that this approach has also been chosen on the same issue in the Distance Selling Directive which was discussed here earlier today .
The Commission cannot support this amendment because it would delete the option with the higher level of protection and would do so without any imperative reason that relates to the operation of the internal market .
As to the proposal to delete paragraph 3 of Article 11 , the Commission cannot support this because there are valid reasons not to apply the detailed provisions regarding the privacy option for natural persons in exactly the same way as they would be applied to legal persons , as I indicated in response to another amendment .
For legal persons it is not the right to privacy which is at stake but a legitimate interest to determine how they should appear in public directories .
They will not necessarily need the same options as private citizens and the offer of all options free of charge may not always be warranted .
Therefore , a differentiation is made in Article 11 of the proposed Directive .
The Commission would be able to support a clarification of Article 11 ( 3 ) to explain that the legitimate interests of legal persons should be taken care of in all cases but not necessarily in the same way as the right to privacy of natural persons .
Such an addition to Article 11 ( 3 ) could read : In this case Member States must ensure that sufficient options are available which take account of the legitimate interests of subscribers other than natural persons with regard to their entry in public directories ' .

On a final point relating to the amendments , the Commission cannot support the deletion of paragraph 3 of Article 12 , again because there are valid reasons not to apply exactly the same provisions to legal persons as to natural persons .

In order briefly to clarify the points at issue , it would be acceptable , in the Commission 's view , to add a sentence to the third paragraph of Article 12 so that it would read as follows : ' Member States may limit the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 to subscribers who are natural persons to the extent that the legitimate interests of subscribers other than natural persons and , in particular , those of small and medium-sized enterprises remain sufficiently protected ' .
I hope that on reflection Members of the House will accept the reasoning of the Commission on the minority of amendments which are not acceptable .
I further hope that it will be possible to take advantage of the basic convergence of the views of the Commission and of this House , and to secure adoption of the Directive very early this year .
I thank the rapporteur and his colleagues for the work that they have done in improving this proposed Directive .
Mr President , the Commissioner has just proposed an oral amendment to one of the amendments .
I hope that he will put it in writing for me so that we can formulate our opinion on it before the vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Air traffic management
The next item is the report ( A4-0381 / 96 ) by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission 's White Paper on Air Traffic Management - Freeing Europe 's airspace .
Last week , Mr President , I received the latest figures on delays in air transport .
Last November more than 20 % of European scheduled services were delayed by a quarter of an hour or more .
I fear that following the improvements made in 1993 and 1994 the delays are getting a lot worse .
That means great inconvenience to travellers and it costs a packet .
Experts predict that savings of 2.5 billion ECU a year could be made here .
In other words , 50 million ECU a week are being wasted .
Of course delays are not good for safety either , the number one priority for all of us .
According to some estimates there are usually 60 to 70 extra planes in the air as a result of the congestion .
Congestion also means more air pollution and excessive noise .
The reason for this congestion is not insufficient airspace but the unbelievably inefficient way in which European airspace is managed .
Air traffic control in Europe is still organized nationally .
We have come an awfully long way towards abolishing borders on the ground , but in the air nationalism is still flying high .
Thus Europe still has 49 ATC centres , 31 national systems , 18 hardware suppliers , 22 control systems and 30 programming languages .
I will not deny that considerable results have been achieved since the ECAC ministers took the decision to work together more closely in 1988 .
We certainly need to continue with that , but it is not enough .
All the indications are that air travel will expand enormously , and experts predict that it will double over the next ten years .
If policy remains unchanged , with increased fragmentation of Europe 's airspace , the consequences will be disastrous .
The Commission 's White Paper makes that abundantly clear .
A genuinely European approach is desperately needed .
Only an integrated ATM system can provide a lasting solution .
European airspace must be operated as a collective entity without national borders and differences between civilian and military airspace must be eliminated .
As I understand it the ECAC ministers propose to take a decision on 14 February on the future institutional structure of European ATM .
Given the European Union 's responsibilities in this area I should like to ask the Commissioner a few questions : how does he propose to safeguard the Community 's interests here ?
Take the necessary separation of regulation and management .
How are we to ensure that the responsibility for planning and the division of airspace rests with the authority ?
How are we to prevent a veto by one Member State from obstructing implementation by another Member State ?
How is democratic scrutiny at Community level to be ensured ?
And should we not go for a Eurocontrol convention which can be modified faster to take account of technological , political or economic changes ?
Is the Commissioner prepared to keep Parliament informed of developments and to debate the question of accession with us again once we know what the new convention looks like ?
The Benelux countries and Germany recently devised an integrated concept for ATC centres which provides for free route airspace above 30 000 feet .
Is the Commission prepared to encourage regional developments of this kind which will increase capacity in the short term ?
They are desperately necessary , not least in the interests of safety .
1996 was the worst year in aviation history as regards safety .
57 accidents with more than 1800 people killed , and that is not counting accidents involving sabotage .
For the sake of safety too , a system of European air traffic management with a clearer distribution of responsibilities is an absolute must .
After so many years of talking I hope the Member State governments will at last find the courage to put the interest of their citizens first .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately the limitless skies referred to at times by Pam Cornelissen all too often turn into a real hell .
Last year a colleague from my group , Brian Simpson , and I tabled a motion for a resolution following the crash in the Caribbean in which all 189 passengers of a Birgenair aircraft lost their lives .
We did so in order to make it clear that air safety is not the responsibility of air traffic control alone but that other basic aspects must also be taken into account , such as technical safety standards , together with high-level training of pilots and all the ancillary workers in the aircraft industry .
Some of the demands we made were satisfied .
Some Member States have taken steps to draw up a black list .
Let me also give due recognition to what the German transport minister , Mr Wissmann , has done , in forbidding the take-off or landing of aircraft that revealed certain weaknesses following more stringent checks .
But all these are only first steps .
I would ask the Commission to take action and in particular to draft a directive that would persuade the giant companies to indicate in their brochures the air carrier which will be used .
This is done in some Member States .
In our motion for a resolution we call for this practice to be extended throughout the territory of the European Union .
We need a uniform air traffic monitoring system on everything that can happen these areas , a kind of air traffic management system .
For years Parliament has been calling for greater efficiency , compatibility and higher productivity .
I think we owe that to the consumers , but also to the airline companies which , of course , also have an obligation to fulfil .
We know that the European airlines are facing very strong competition and the cost burden referred to by Mr von Cornelissen does indeed speak for itself .
The first step must be to improve coordination in order to avoid further mistakes .
But I think that it must be established very soon that the Commission bears the central responsibility , and that like the mandate it was given for negotiations with third countries , the Commission must also be given a mandate to consider these aspects .
I believe we do need a common airspace with the Central and Eastern European countries and with the Mediterranean area as a whole .
We should also ensure that the technical equipment is properly compatible .
At the same time I hope that European technology can be used here .
Why , given our efficiency in this technology , do we have to buy in from ' outside ' ?
I do not think that is necessary .
As an everyday example : my son is a commercial airline pilot .
He keeps telling about the thoughtlessness of some air traffic controllers , saying that when planes fly over certain countries , especially Italy and France , the controllers give instructions in their mother-tongue .
If only as a matter of terminology , the air traffic control language used should be English .
All this must included in the list of measures that can be introduced .
I have little sympathy for the casual acceptance of this kind of risk .
I see it as irresponsible .
Our aim is standardization within a European , possibly even a Community European civil aviation authority .
That is our common aim .
Until then we will have to take a few interim steps in that direction , but I think we agree on the ultimate aim .
My dear Mr Cornelissen , thank you very much for all the work you have put into this report .
I would like to take this opportunity to give very warm thanks for your two and a half years of hard work as chairman of the committee .
Our friend Mr Cornelissen has retired from this office .
I thank him warmly for his much-appreciated work .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , for his report on such a complex and difficult subject as the White Paper on air traffic management .
It must be admitted that the Commission 's analysis in the White Paper is comprehensive and extraordinarily rigorous .
I have no option , however , but to agree with the rapporteur 's view that the solutions proposed in the White Paper do not match the brilliance of the Commission 's analysis .
It is not possible to propose , as a solution to this problem , that the European Union should simply join Eurocontrol .
Everyone knows - and this was made perfectly clear at the hearing we held in the Committee on Transport and Tourism - that Eurocontrol was unable to fulfil its commitments to guarantee a harmonised air traffic control system in Europe because many of the Member States withdrew the supranational powers they had granted to the organisation in the past .
Mr President , I have always said that this is a serious and urgent problem .
Serious because it affects the operating costs of our undertakings , which are paying a very high price for the lack of a harmonised air traffic control system in Europe , and urgent because each time there is a disruption , not only does this involve losses for our undertakings , but also incalculable inconvenience for our citizens .
I believe , Mr President , that this issue should be taken very , very seriously indeed .
Until powers are clearly delineated and institutional , political , administrative , scientific and technical solutions are arrived at , we can do nothing .
I have always said , Commissioner , that these powers lie with the European Union and that it must assume them with determination , that Eurocontrol has the means but not the power , and that the European Conference of Transport Ministers has neither the means nor the power , but has a lot of ideas .
Commissioner , I invite you to put forward proposals in a determined bid to preserve Community powers and find solutions to a problem that affects the costs borne by our undertakings and the patience of our citizens .
Mr President , I too must start by complimenting Mr Cornelissen and thanking him for the two and a half years of hard work he has put in as chairman of our committee .
This report is an example of that hard work , though the subject of better air traffic management is one which Mr Cornelissen addressed years ago in the Dutch parliament too and has continued to address with great industry .
Regrettably we have to say that not a lot has come of it and that Eurocontrol , a body of which we originally had high hopes , has in effect never really got off the ground , in this case almost literally , one might say .
A propos of this I have a further question for both rapporteur and Commissioner regarding the Dutch presidency 's programme which has been outlined to us here this afternoon .
This says that one of the Council presidency 's objectives is that the European Union should become a member of Eurocontrol as soon as possible . But paragraph 17 of the rapporteur 's report actually says something rather different .
He too says that we should accede as soon as possible , but he then says in his report that we should add something else or construct a new organization within the EU .
I should like to have this clarified , because ultimately it is absolutely essential to passenger safety that we should have a better regulated system and less protectionism .
Mr President , I will be short and to the point .
The fragmented nature of our airspace management at present is a major problem .
It pushes up the cost of air traffic control and leads to expensive delays .
But to be fair , problems at airports and the huge expansion of air travel also play a part here .
Nevertheless there is no doubt that we need a more efficient system of management .
We think that the Commission 's proposal to separate the regulatory and operational activities of air traffic management will be helpful here .
I also think it is wise on the Commission 's part to place just the regulatory activities on a supranational footing .
Parliament 's efforts to get the practicalities of air traffic managed by a single European body may well be the most economic solution , but the national authorities want to retain responsibility for managing their airspace .
So this proposal certainly means progress .
But the countries of Central and Eastern Europe need to be involved as well .
Lastly , Mr President , if air traffic is indeed expected to double by the year 2010 , by then it will be too late to start talking about what that means for infrastructure planning and damage to the environment .
Mr President , this report is actually a compromise on the part of the committee , as there are always a good many votes .
I am not satisfied with the Commission 's three options for solutions .
However , I do believe that the Commission 's one proposal can be taken as a starting-point .
The report is a very wide-ranging one in both technical and political terms , and is extremely comprehensive .
Nevertheless , we are all agreed that there is a challenge facing us here : there are indeed problems .
There are three points I wish to raise .
The first is that the main thing is for a political decision to be taken on whether we should continue in this direction .
We cannot discuss technology : we should urge the Council to take a political decision .
There may be differences in technology , or reluctance , but nonetheless we should move forward .
Parliament should be encouraging and supporting the Commission here , and we must do more work on this .
My second point is that the EU is not enough .
In this respect , I do not agree with the rapporteur .
We should not have a democratic body which focuses only on the 15 Member States .
We are talking about the whole continent of Europe here .
Because after all , when I am at 30 000 feet and approaching the Polish border , the safety problem is just the same .
So we cannot just concentrate on the Community .
The third point concerns the airlines , which in the sacred name of competition are actually making the situation worse .
They have too little equipment and too few staff , but operations are being stepped up and at the same time they cannot keep to their slots .
When we talk about traffic jams in the air , Mr Cornelissen , these are often things that are caused by traffic not being able to leave the airport because of inadequate equipment .
People try to make savings here and there , and then they cannot keep to their slots .
Those airlines which have enough equipment and staff are able to get airborne on time .
We need to have consistency from check-in through to check-out .
It cannot be right that we send people to the moon and to the Mir space station , when we cannot ensure their safety in our own heavily congested airspace .
I wish the Commissioner good luck in his attempts to press the Council to find a sensible solution .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Cornelissen as rapporteur .
I hope that this will not be the last report that he is going to do for the committee .
I also welcome the Commissioner here this evening and thank the Commission for their proposals .
However , there should be more common ground between the Commission and the European Parliament in our proposals .
Mr Lüttge has concentrated on a single language .
I would like to add to that the fact that there should be much greater compatibility between the computers and the various systems used by the national air traffic controllers .
I accept ECAC 's proposal that there should be a common performance model with different systems .
I hope that the Commissioner is not perhaps wilfully misunderstanding - not that I for a moment suggest that he might - what we in the European Parliament are proposing : that is , not a monolithic structure but simply a single system , but with multiple suppliers .
There should be more in Europe of what we see in the United States : a single air transport management system , leaving each Member State to organize and run its own services , but having guidelines and budgets set jointly .
The bottom line , however , for all of us who travel - not least the business community and leisure and tourism travellers - is that the investment required by the Member States is urgent .
The increase in air transport and in those using our system , which is already overloaded , cannot wait for these budgets to be fixed .
I commend the proposals in Mr Cornelissen 's report to the House and hope that it will get full support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , anyone who has to fly two or three times a week as we MEPs do , is highly aware of the issues of European air traffic management and air safety .
Delays are an everyday occurrence .
They affect every fifth flight in Europe .
Delays , longer flight routes resulting in extra congestion , and the increasing number of accidents and incidents are a burden on the European economy , on the airlines and not least on us consumers .
The fault lies with outdated air traffic management and air traffic control and anachronistic national systems .
All this has been known for a long time , like the expected doubling of the air traffic flow in the next fifteen years .
And Parliament has issued strong calls for a change of course on many occasions .
Without a qualitative improvement in the ATC-ATM systems , these problems will increase exponentially in coming years .
Even if we decided right now to opt for a uniform system in introducing the most recent technology , it would still take about ten years to implement it .
The solution we are seeking today must , therefore , be geared to the next thirty years .
That is why we also need a qualitative improvement in relation to changing the institutional framework of Eurocontrol , as discussed in the White Paper .
We need a uniform solution on a European basis , and we need it soon .
The technical options exist , ranging from satellite-based navigation to the use of telematics in management .
Nor should the financial cost of implementing them present any serious problem .
I , for instance , could envisage a minimum tax on kerosene being imposed specifically for setting up this kind of ATC-ATM system .
The savings such a system would engender would compensate for the extra burden on the airline companies .
The main difficulty remains an institutional one and in principle it can therefore be resolved politically , provided we want to do so .
Of course that would mean that the transport politicians would also have to understand that the airspace we gaze up at can no longer be seen as national .
Looking ahead to the millennium , I think it would do us good to have a European wind or even gale behind us to impel us to resolve the airspace problems .
I thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Cornelissen for his superb work in drafting this report and , as usual with him , in everything he does .
I think that Parliament 's position on the issue we are debating is well known .
This House has on various occasions come out in favour of creating a single air traffic management system in Europe in order to avoid the current dispersal of control centres , national systems , suppliers of electronic supports , operational systems and programming languages .
There is dispersal too when it comes to selecting technology and standardisation , and also in relation to responsibility between various international organisations and the Member States when decisions are needed on a global air traffic management policy .
This dispersal must be avoided since it has adverse effects on the safety of air traffic , on the quality of the services provided to passengers and on the costs .
It also has a negative effect on the environment as a result of the air traffic congestion it produces .
Moreover , if significant changes are not made to the current situation , it will be impossible to cope with the increase in air traffic which it is calculated will amount , by the year 2010 , to more than double the current traffic .
Furthermore , we must be aware of the fact that about 10 years will be needed in order to plan and apply the measures necessary to achieve the harmonisation of air traffic management in Europe , since there are many difficult legal , institutional , political and technical barriers to be overcome .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I think that a strategic plan should be submitted urgently with a view to achieving the harmonisation of air traffic management and to ensuring that this management remains within the transEuropean transport network , since these objectives are impossible to achieve on the basis of the content of the White Paper because , as the rapporteur believes , the White Paper does not contain any practical measures or action programmes .
Mr President , there are a great many dimensions to improving air traffic flow in Europe .
Air traffic causes problems , and noise nuisance and damage to the environment are among the greatest .
These must be solved both at national level and through European cooperation .
This is very important to us in Finland , as we are geographically in a very vulnerable position as air traffic congestion increases .
On long journeys by air , delays recur and onward connections become more difficult .
The integration work which Mr Cornelissen has called for to solve the problems with the aid of a European air traffic management system deserves support .
The situation can be improved by adopting more direct routes and developing the civil aviation systems of Eastern European countries .
From Finland 's point of view , greater involvement of the Baltic States , in particular , in European air traffic control cooperation is especially desirable .
Consideration should also be given to what can be done to modernize the fleets of the former Soviet republics , in particular , and to improve air safety there ; for example , pilots ' proficiency in English , the international language of air traffic control , should be improved .
A silent time-bomb is ticking away there , and the Union ought urgently to devote some of its resources to defusing it , in the manner of the TACIS and PHARE programmes .
The situation should also be examined at national level .
The benefits of coordination conferred by Eurocontrol and ATM , in whose work Finland also participates to some extent , are indisputable .
However , they have not managed to harmonize their Member States ' air traffic control systems or increase their safety .
Finland is the only EU Member State which is still not a member of Eurocontrol .
The reason lies in the fear that , inter alia , costs on internal routes might rise , military aviation might become subject to supervision , and it might become more difficult to subsidize little-used air-fields .
Finland , the most northerly and easterly EU Member State , is rather large but sparsely populated , so that maintaining a dense and effective national air network is of vital importance to it .
Despite centralization , the greatest responsibility lies with the individual Member States .
Each country must itself shoulder its responsibility and invest , for example , the revenue from route levies so as to ensure that traffic flows smoothly within its own air space .
The solution lies not only in the forum for European cooperation but close to those who suffer from the pollution and noise nuisance caused by congestion of air space .
Mr President , I wish to add my voice to those Members who , in the course of this debate , have offered their tribute to Mr Pam Cornelissen for the way in which he has chaired the Committee on Transport and Tourism over the last two and a half years and , particularly in my case , the way he has done it over the last two years .
Before I met Mr Cornelissen I had been known to use the phrase that we employ sometimes in English ' double Dutch ' and to use it in a rather derogatory fashion in order to signify confused communication .
Having met Mr Cornelissen and had the pleasure of working with him for two years , I can say that ' double Dutch ' will also mean to me from now on twice as clear and twice as wise as any other statement - or almost all the time , in any case .
I reserve the right to make an exception to my own rule on some occasions .
I must say immediately that , of course , my view of ' double Dutch ' also applies to Mr Florus Wijsenbeek .
How could it be otherwise ?
I value the judgement of Mr Cornelissen and his colleagues on this issue , as on others , and I am , therefore , particularly pleased that the report they have produced has given strong and broad endorsement to the Commission White Paper on air traffic management , which we called ' Freeing Europe 's airspace ' .
As I do not have to tell the House , the development and modernization of air traffic management is a vital issue to the millions of travellers in the European Union and , indeed , from elsewhere who use our airspace ; to airlines , to airports and , indeed , to everyone associated with the industry .
I hope , therefore , that we can look forward to substantial and speedy progress with the necessary improvements for all the reasons that have been outlined in such an effective way by Members who have contributed to the debate tonight .
Since civil aviation in the Union has grown , is growing and will grow with great vitality over the next ten or fifteen years , it is essential that airspace management is continually improved to combat congestion , to sustain and indeed to advance safety in civil aviation and to reduce the environmental and economic costs that are very substantial and that , as several honourable Members have said , result from delays both on the ground and , indeed , in the air over the European Union .
Members will recall that the efforts of recent years have secured some commendable changes since the crises of the late 1980s .
The fact is , as Mr Cornelissen rightly reminded us this evening , that the number of delays has risen again over the last year and that must alert everyone against complacency and it must also spur all responsible authorities , including Member State governments , into working for sustained improvements in the management of European airspace .
As part of the effort to achieve such improvement , the Commission has argued for several years that the European Community should have greater direct involvement in air traffic management affairs and this argument has been put forward at all times - so far as the Commission is concerned and this House is concerned - not because of aspirations to power or anything so small-minded but simply to provide practical solutions to chronic problems .
That approach is clearly evident from the tone and the content of the White Paper which we produced in March last year , as it is indeed clear from the report we are considering tonight .
In summary , the White Paper we produced outlined various widely-acknowledged shortcomings in the air traffic management arrangements at European level ; it considered a variety of possible solutions and it came to the pragmatic conclusion that Eurocontrol - the organizational body which is currently primarily a provider of air traffic management services - should be given significant , new , additional legislative and regulatory responsibilities .
The White Paper also emphasized that since many of these new responsibilities would cover areas of established Community competence , the Community itself should become a member of the new Eurocontrol in its own right .
Members of the House will know that the Commission 's initiative on air traffic management has been developing at the same time as the INSTAR study being undertaken by the European Civil Aviation Conference in which the Commission has been closely involved and to which we have , indeed , made significant financial contributions .
It is now generally accepted that both initiatives will have important influence on the future European arrangements for ATM in terms of refining the responsibilities , powers and structures of Eurocontrol , and I am reasonably confident that the Commission 's view of the future institutional arrangements for ATM at European level can be amalgamated with those of ECAC with particular regard to improving Eurocontrol , to majority voting to ensure effectiveness of decision-making , to enhanced coordination and improved information supply - all issues that have been raised in the course of tonight 's debate by Mr Cornelissen and others - and , of course , Community participation .
The major question of Community membership of the new Eurocontrol , which itself raises issues of competence , has , of course , not yet been resolved - as some honourable Members have noticed .
However , this discussion will , we hope , be further progressed in the Transport Council under the current Dutch presidency and the Commission has recently produced draft negotiating directives which would give effect to the two main recommendations of the White Paper that I mentioned earlier in my contribution .
I know that this Parliament , like many others , will maintain a very close interest in the Council decisions on the issue and I am , therefore , all the more grateful for the thorough and supportive report which Mr Cornelissen and his colleagues have made on the Commission 's proposals .
The least I shall do by way of reciprocation is , as Mr Cornelissen requested , to keep the House and the Transport Committee fully informed on all developments that take place , knowing that we have Parliament 's support in our efforts to ensure the significant and urgent improvements that are necessary in air traffic management over the European Union .
Mr President , I put a very clear question : the Dutch presidency apparently wants the EU to join Eurocontrol , as such , whilst paragraph 17 of the report refers to a new organization .
What is the Commission 's view ?
As Mr Wijsenbeek will know from his reading of our White Paper , we came to the pragmatic conclusion that the best interests of all could be served by Community participation in what we call ' a new Eurocontrol ' .
The Dutch presidency , to its credit , clearly acknowledges and understands that it is a new Eurocontrol of which we speak and which is the subject of discussion by the Member States .
We look forward to continuing to have the support of the Dutch Government and the Transport Minister in particular , Mrs Jorritsma , in our efforts to ensure a convergence between the discussions taking place in ECAC and the proposals made - sensibly and productively , I believe - in our White Paper .
We are glad to have the support of the House in these ventures .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Public transport and state aid
The next item is the report ( A4-0419 / 96 ) by Mr Castricum , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on public transport and state aid .
Mr President , many of our people feel that Europe is increasingly a matter of markets and money .
There is less and less sympathy for that development .
Whilst the benefits of freedom of movement for individuals , goods and services were formerly perceived as self-evident , it is the drawbacks which now seem to be receiving an increasingly high profile .
Liberalization of the market and the consequences of striving towards a single currency are leading to uncertainties and doubts which are gnawing away at the roots of the Union .
Against that background there is also a debate on public services , not least public transport .
The owninitiative report we are now discussing was unanimously approved by the Transport Committee .
Its scope can perhaps be broadened further if tomorrow we adopt the single amendment put down by Mr Wijsenbeek , and I recommend that we do so .
In my report I sought to reconcile more harmoniously , across ideological lines , the primacy of government and the opportunities afforded by market forces .
I hope I have more or less succeeded .
In numerous documents , and recently the report on a citizens ' network , Parliament has emphasized the social importance of public transport .
The need for greater involvement of the European Union here is obvious , a logical consequence of the single market and of greatly increasing mobility , including mobility across borders .
From the economic , ecological and social points of view it is absolutely vital that public transport should play a more prominent role .
But at the same time we have to appreciate that mobility cannot be an absolute right .
The report says in essence that political responsibility for public services must remain with governments , that a liberalized public transport market offers no guarantee at all that interconnected networks will function properly and that where circumstances change the interests of public transport workers must also be a central factor in those changes .
The nub of the document is the idea that public transport in its broadest sense cannot function without state aid , but that a bottomless pit , if that is what we have , is better filled by a sensible policy .
The citizen is entitled to public services , including public transport .
The same citizen is also entitled , however , to expect that everything possible is done to organize and operate those services in a responsible manner .
Financial efforts must be geared to getting results .
Necessary rationalizations must be carried out in a socially responsible manner .
In all this we must remember that research has shown that forms of support for public transport in the Member States of the Union vary very considerably .
It would be a good thing if the initiative were taken to assemble comparable data and see if more comparability can be brought into quantities which are currently often not comparable .
Slowly but surely this would make for a situation in which markets and money had their own place , but the interest of the citizen and the responsibility of the state were central .
Lastly I should like to thank the Transport Committee for their constructive response to my draft report , and to all those who supplied the building bricks for it I am grateful for their cooperation and creative input .
I am more than happy to echo the tribute paid earlier to Mr Cornelissen for his leadership of the Transport Committee during the first two and a half years of this parliamentary term .
Mr President , I think that Mr Castricum 's report makes a useful contribution to the debate on public transport .
In Parliament , we frequently discuss the issues of public services and public transport .
In a series of reports , the latter has been confirmed as being part of the network for our citizens .
The report therefore does not deal with whether aid can be provided , but rather how it should be given , when it has been decided to grant aid for public transport .
In general terms , it can be said that state aid which is given automatically , time after time , has been the cause of monopolies being created or maintained , and therefore should in principle be avoided .
As we all know , we are on our way in that direction .
However , it is important to make it clear that public transport is not always a profitable business .
Large parts of the transport market have been liberalized .
This means that transport is a problem in many places , especially in the sparsely populated areas .
A model for solving this problem has not been found everywhere in the EU .
With the adoption of this report , Parliament is establishing that we should be able to safeguard public transport , if we wish to keep this service .
The requirement should therefore be that public involvement is transparent , and that it does not give rise to distortions of competition .
In my opinion , we have overcome the hurdle whereby everything should be privatized and based on market forces .
Now we are committing ourselves to the provision of a public service , a public service obligation , and I very much welcome that .
Once again , I congratulate Mr Castricum on his report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of our group I thank Mr Castricum very warmly for his report .
I think it is an excellent report , in which the European Parliament sets out its basic approach to the transport services which the towns , regions and Member States have to provide for their people and on the state aid that is also necessary to the provision of these public transport services .
We Christian Democrats agree with the other groups in this House that the towns , regions and Member States must define the tasks of local or regional public transport in the interest of the general public and ensure they are carried out .
Thank God the Social Democrats have managed to ensure that these public transport services are not necessarily to be provided by the public sector .
Instead , towns and regions should contract out the transport services to the undertaking , whether public or private , that offers the most efficient , user-friendly and cheapest service and also provides it .
If this House agrees on the principles , and I hope , Commissioner , that the Commission does not dispute them either , then we Christian Democrats , unlike the Social Democrats , see no need for the intergovernmental conference to draft a separate article giving a general definition of the public services and to include it in the Maastricht Treaty .
Nor do we think it is in the public interest for the Commission to set out new legal bases .
I am eager to hear whether the Commissioner believes it is essential for the European Commission and the European Community to draft new provisions .
I believe that introducing new European Treaty Articles and legal provisions goes against the principle of subsidiarity .
On the other hand , we Christian Democrats agree with the other groups in this House that the running costs of public transport must be financed largely through the fare and that where state aid is still required to cover shortfalls , this must be linked to efficiency and accessible to every supplier , be it a public or private transport undertaking .
Where special infrastructure is required for local public transport , the construction and management costs may certainly be borne by the state , while the transport undertaking - and here we entirely agree with Mr Castricum - has to pay an appropriate amount for its use .
I believe this House basically agrees on the principles .
So we are now waiting for the Commissioner to tell us whether the European Commission also approves Mr Castricum 's excellent report .
Mr President , this report received broad , indeed unanimous , support from the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
A complement to it and to some extent a document which overlaps with it is the report on the ' Citizens ' Network ' which I myself had the pleasure of presenting at the November partsession .
Despite Mr Castricum 's willingness to support my amendment , and I am very grateful to him for that , I think there is a fine distinction between our two approaches .
Firstly , are we or are we not to strive for what one might call systematic subsidizing ?
Secondly , how far does the ' duty ' to provide public services and public transport go ?
I think we established in the Green Paper on the Citizens ' Network that in certain situations we would be better off not having public transport in certain areas , but rather private transport which could be provided in accordance with need and which might even be given a measure of state aid .
In any case , I think we agree on a number of areas and on the question which needs to be asked about how far a network must extend to qualify for subsidies and what constitutes a network .
That is of course a very elastic concept and you might say that a network is the entire network of a Member State or merely a specific link within that Member State which is necessary in order to maintain a network .
Mr President , support for any action which makes a universal public service possible , in other words public transport with guaranteed access to all citizens and which fulfils the objective of social interest , must be one of the main objectives pursued by Community action in the transport sector .
The public service , whether provided by a public or private entity , must be regulated by rules laid down and endorsed by the Member States that make it possible to establish and develop an integrated , efficient and safe transport system , and which consequently promote the use of this by measures to improve the price-quality ratio of the services . This would make citizens aware and convince them of the very real potential advantages of using the public transport system .
It is important to remember that the actual Treaty on European Union sets down explicitly the obligations of undertakings to guarantee a general economic interest service .
It might perhaps be advisable that the guarantee in the next version of the Treaty on European Union , which will be produced at the end of this year , should refer more explicitly to the public service .
Mr President , I should like to underline the importance of the guarantee of public transport for peripheral and rural regions , areas which are less developed and particularly weak as regards public transport networks .
When providing a public service , more extensive transport networks should be considered and planned , in which peripheral regions and rural areas are included ; these are perhaps less spectacular but of vital importance to the inhabitants .
Therefore - and with this I will end - it is absolutely vital for the Commission to monitor constantly and investigate thoroughly the various aids which each State receives in the transport sector in order to assess properly the effect and implications of these .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is so much agreement about this no doubt quite excellent report by Mr Castricum that I need not take up much of your time .
This report points towards future developments , not just in transport policy but also in relation to the merits of public and private services in general .
A few years ago , people were still talking in terms of ' market versus state ' and ' market or state ' alternatives .
Today , as this report makes clear , the aim is to find the best combination of market and state in order to provide the best possible services .
Just as it is clear that services must be geared to the market , it is equally clear that this cannot be done entirely without subsidies or public contracts .
This is particularly true in transport , whether urban , regional or cross-frontier .
A few comments on this . Public undertakings must also realise that they have to produce for a market .
In the past that was not often the case .
Public undertakings have to reform .
Only then can they expect the citizen to accept them .
They have to do their own part too .
Looking at railway undertakings in my own country : they have to make use of the land they own .
They cannot just sit on it and expect that the state , meaning the people , will give them money so that they can pocket the subsidies .
My second point is that the public authorities must respect the principle that the subsides they give should contain incentives ; they should reduce the subsidies rather than allow public undertakings to take it as a matter of course that they receive a certain amount of money every year and , they hope , even more the following year .
In that regard the report basically points in the right direction , which could also be set out and defined in an article in the Treaty , although good practice is more important than articles of principle .
If Europe adopts this practice , it will be following the right road .
Mr President , let me begin , as previous speakers have done , by thanking rapporteur Castricum for the work that he has put into this report .
There are three points which I would like to emphasise as being particularly important in the discussion on public transport .
The first may seem trivial but , it can truly be said that public transport is extremely important .
It is one way of resolving congestion and environmental problems , but a number of conditions must be met , for example , public transport must be accessible .
It must be available when needed , otherwise it will never be seen as an alternative to the private car .
It must also be cheap , or at least competitively priced .
Otherwise it will not be chosen by those embarking on a journey .
The second important thing is that there must be competition .
Public transport has all too rarely been opened up to competition from other types of public transport or from other operators on the public transport market .
This is something which must be encouraged .
Thirdly , it is important that we learn from each other .
There are large discrepancies between Member States in the extent to which public transport is subsidised , perhaps because the service is purchased in very different ways .
The average cost , if we take bus traffic in Sweden as an example , is 46 % . It is considerably higher in Belgium or the Netherlands .
There is no reason to accept this in times of tight finances throughout the EU .
I am convinced that , if we can meet the requirements , public transport has a significant and considerably more active role to play in the future .
It is worth underlining , however , that we will only achieve this goal by making public transport better and more efficient , not by punishing motorists with more taxes .
Mr President , I should like to begin by welcoming Parliament 's initiative in bringing forward a report by Mr Castricum - and an excellent report it is - which provides an extensive and timely review of the important subject of the financing of public transport in the Union .
It is clear to everyone that in order to achieve the objectives of the common transport policy high quality public transport which provides a real alternative to dependence on private cars is absolutely vital , and it is equally obvious that improvements in the efficiency of public transport and the transparency of public transport finances are therefore in the economic , social and environmental interests of the Community as a whole .

As the House will be aware - and as Mr Castricum and indeed Mr Wijsenbeek reminded us - we have sought to articulate that with our Commission Green Paper on the citizens ' network produced about this time last year which outlines a comprehensive strategy to fulfil the potential of public transport and to cover amongst other things , the need to review some existing rules , including those concerning financing .
A White Paper on a strategy for revitalizing the railways also analysed the improvements required in the way that most of the Union 's railways are financed as part of the efforts we believe are needed to enable rail to increase its role successfully in our public transport system .
Thirdly , as a further example of common objectives and common thinking between the Commission and Parliament , our recent Commission communication on services of general interest gave transport as an example of a sector where the Community had adopted a specific approach designed to take account of public service needs .
Because of time constraints , I should like very briefly to set out how the Commission sees the general issue of public transport financing before I make a few specific comments on the report before us tonight .
Firstly , as Mr Castricum 's report makes clear , we should not forget that many excellent privately and publicly-owned public transport services are provided without any financial support from public resources .
Services that are welldesigned , well-run and affordable to travellers are obviously more likely to attract fare-paying passengers in the numbers that are needed to cover costs .
We make that basic but significant point in the citizens ' network Green Paper .
There are , nevertheless , other cases where public authorities , quite rightly , take the view that there is a public need for a service which is not necessarily viable in purely commercial terms in urban areas and , as several Members have said in the debate , in rural areas too .
In such cases it is clearly appropriate and necessary for public authorities to finance some services provided by operators of public transport and it is worth stressing that such financing is not , strictly speaking , state aid .
The decision about whether or not to finance those services is for all the obvious reasons best taken by competent and accountable authorities in Member States .
However , the Commission , too , has clear responsibilities .
Firstly , to try to establish a legal framework that is appropriate to the circumstances facing public transport throughout the Union .
Secondly , to lay down the provisions necessary to ensure that payments for public service are not used as a hidden and unaccountable method of covering losses caused by inefficiency , and that such support is proportionate and that ' transparent ' means for essential specified services provided for society at large .
Similarly , it is often appropriate for public authorities to contribute to the cost of public transport infrastructure projects since it is clear that whilst , in a variety of direct and indirect ways , users make a payment for the transport infrastructure that they use , such payments are not always enough to cover full costs .
As far as Member State financing is concerned , state aid should contribute to the development of public transport in the common interest , and the Commission shares the thinking of the draft resolution about increasing transparency in the financing of public transport , especially by improving the data provided in the annual competition report and in state aid reports .
Time forbids me from responding at length to Mr Castricum 's report but I would like to reply to the particular suggestion of including in the Treaty an article specifically concerned with public services - an issue raised again tonight by Mr Castricum and , indeed , by Mr Jarzembowski .

I have to tell the House that the Commission does not share the view that a new legal basis of the kind suggested is necessary .
Instead , in our communication on services of general interest , we advocated that a reference should be inserted in Article 3 of the present Treaty to the effect that a specific activity of the Community should be a contribution to the promotion of services of general interest .
This approach is certainly valid in the case of transport , where the right balance between liberalization and general interest is provided not only by Article 90 of the Treaty as it stands but also by the sectorbased Article 77 .
I hope that on reflection the House will agree that this is the most practical approach to achieving the objective expressed in the draft resolution , an objective with which I have to say that I broadly sympathize .
More generally , I can assure the committee that the Commission is continually working to improve and to try to complete , the existing rules concerning public transport .
Whilst fully respecting the subsidiarity principle , we also take account of course of the problems which can arise in frontier regions and other regions with specific transport requirements .
Like many others involved in this debate , my colleagues and I believe that public transport has an essential role to play in tackling the problems of congestion , pollution and transport safety , and getting the rules right is patently an important part of achieving that .
That is another reason for welcoming Mr Castricum 's report and consequently I commend it warmly to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.15 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have a question and a comment concerning page 7 of the Minutes , at least in the Dutch version .
I refer to the letter from Mr Pasty to President Hänsch which was read out yesterday by the President .
And particularly to the following sentence : ' I am therfore entitled to wonder what the real reasons behind this letter ( of President Hänsch 's ) are and what its purpose is . '
We heard the text yesterday , of course , but perhaps not everybody took it fully on board .
There is a clear insinuation here against the integrity of the President of Parliament .
My personal reaction to this is that I consider it a disgraceful letter and I ask myself , and I ask you and the Bureau of Parliament too , whether Members can be allowed to question the integrity of Parliament 's President in this manner with impunity ?
In other words : can he get away with this ?
Are such procedures acceptable in this House or not ?
My own view is that this is quite disgraceful and unacceptable .
I ask you to put this question to the Bureau : is it acceptable for the integrity of Parliament 's President to be questioned in this way ?
If not , I think the Bureau should consider the consequences .
Mr Metten , your comments are not related to the Minutes but to the interpretation of what was said or maintained yesterday .
I note your observation .
It goes without saying that from the Chair I cannot accept any doubt about the integrity of the President or whoever was in the Chair at the time , and that is a position with which the entire House agrees .
Mr President , I wish to draw your attention to an error in the Minutes .
During the debate with the President-in-Office of the Council I did not complain that he had not answered the questions put by a Dutch Member but that he had not replied to my questions on Serbia .
That would make more sense .
Mrs Pack , you are absolutely correct .
We will see that it is put right .
Mr President , on a point of order .
The point I wish to raise concerns Rule 19 - Duties of the President - and specifically Rule 19 ( 4 ) which states that : ' Parliament shall be represented in international relations , on ceremonial occasions and in administrative , legal or financial matters by the President , who may delegate these powers . '

Two days ago the Legal Service of Parliament , acting as the agents of the House and , under that power of delegation , made a presentation to the European Court of Justice in respect of a case brought by Eurotunnel on the sensitive question of duty-free sales .
I wish to put on record , as someone who has a long-standing interest in that policy question , that I ask whether I am entitled to receive a copy of the written and oral submissions which were made on behalf of the House on an issue which is of grave concern to many Members .
Secondly , I wish to place on record that , in respect of the reports which I have heard on the question of the oral submission , I find a number of points within that submission quite disturbing in terms of interpretation of the will of Parliament .
For that reason , I wish to ask , firstly , as I have done already , for copies and , secondly , to ask , not necessarily now but perhaps to be advised at your discretion in writing , what procedures are open to a Member of the House to follow through .
If this were the Commission or the Council , I could table a question - I could look for an oral question with debate .
But , since it is our own institution , how does the institution account to itself in the matter of delegated powers ?
Mr Cox , I take note of your request .
You have raised an issue that would require much debate at this time to be made clear .
I recommend that you address a letter or table a question so that you can receive an absolutely prepared and serious answer .
The matter is a serious one and must be considered very carefully .
May I remind speakers that they must not speak for longer than one minute .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Fisheries Council of 19 / 20 December 1996
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the outcome of the meeting of the Council of Ministers for Fisheries of 19-20 December 1996 .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too have appreciated the points that you , Mrs Bonino , have put to the House .
But , like other colleagues , I have to say I regret the fact that there was no debate at the last partsession on an issue as important as MAGP IV which could , in that way , have been analysed more closely .
Naturally , as Members of Parliament , we asked for an opportunity of holding a debate in this Chamber because , as a result of problems of organization of work , the debate could not be held in the usual manner .
Of course , the outcome of the Council meeting is , in some respects , contradictory : on the one hand there are some positive strands , such as the approval in principle of the proposal to reconvert the swordfish fleet which concerns Italy : this is an important decision making the reconversion of that fleet with a significant environmental impact on the Mediterranean part of a possible solution .
And the problem of satellite monitoring has also been resolved . In that connection , Commissioner , you mentioned the problem of satellite monitoring which is very important and less expensive in technological terms also .
I would also point out that we are providing a response to safety issues also in this way : satellite monitoring may offer important possibilities as regards safety and , of course , checks on vessels .
I move on now to the more difficult issue : we need the results of MAGP III , Commissioner , as they are , of course , important when it comes to following up the work done and programming MAGP IV .
There is no doubt that reconciling conservation of stocks with the need to maintain a strategic position in the fishing sector is a complicated and difficult issue .
From that point of view , the socio-economic conditions have , of course , to be assessed , and this is an area in which the Council should , in my view , be doing more .
Parliament has already worked towards this and we Socialists firmly believe that reconversion should take account of socio-economic conditions .
And so I believe it is important that we continue along that path in the future also .
May I wish the Bureau and the Fisheries Directorate of the Commission a happy new year ?
It was indeed very regrettable that we were unable to have a proper debate last December with you , Mrs Bonino .
Today we have to debate with you and your fisheries directorate how we can make progress in the common fisheries policy , convinced that fisheries is an important branch of industry in the European Union , especially in the many coastal regions of Europe dependent on this industry for jobs .
It is very regrettable , as you said , that at the Council meeting in December valuable time was lost arguing about the allocation of possible fish , which may not longer exist , rather than spending the time on dossiers on which Parliament had already expressed its view .
We of course welcome the agreement on satellite monitoring , even although it is only the largest boats that are equipped with this new technology .
This fleet which is relatively small but nonetheless important for the EU fishing is at least a start in the new technologies .
Mr Bonino , you said we must act decisively if the fishing industry is to survive in the long term in the EU .
My group supports you in that view .
I should like to ask you , as you have asked us , to work closely together with us to find a solution .
Otherwise the crisis in the fisheries sector will not finish , but fishing will .
I am quite worried that the present texts being discussed in the Council of Ministers differ considerably from those on which Parliament was consulted .
I urge the Commission to respect the right of this House to a further consultation .
We welcome the proposal not just to simplify but also improve the technical measures for stock conservation : nets with larger meshes , more selective nets with square mesh panels where appropriate and the principle of closed areas are essential principles if juvenile fish are to be given a better chance of surviving .
The Council of Ministers will be failing in its duty if it does not act immediately or it if waters down the proposals .
A transitional solution will only waste valuable time .
The fishermen have told us clearly that they want conservation measures .
Now we learn today that the Council of Ministers is unwilling to agree to measures for a proper reduction in the fish catch and in the fleet 's capacity .
Both are needed to restore a balance in the available resources , as you have said .
The dangers are real and serious if we do not take control of the situation .
Other political forces will dictate action and force their ideas on the fishing industry , including some which want to close down the fishing sector .
The remaining months until the North Sea Protection Conference will prove this and public opinion will be manipulated .
At the end of the day fishermen will be isolated .
That means that we must change our whole way of thinking .
In the excellent hearing organised by our splendid former chairman , Mr Arias Cañete , one thing was obvious from the start : the chase for fish will continue mercilessly if we do not solve the crisis once and for all .
For far too long we have been hearing only bad news about the present management of the fishing resources .
But we also heard some good news at the hearings .
The industry is often prepared to take account of lasting use of resources and thereby put an end to this destructive chase .
New Zealand and Iceland are good examples here .
I urge you to take their positive experience on board and present suitable proposals to this House .
We are fortunate to have Carmen Fraga as the new chairman of the Committee on Fisheries and as rapporteur on the future of the common European fisheries policy from the year 2000 .
I firmly believe that if we all pull together and are guided by realism then the fisheries industry has a future .
I am very curious to see what emerges from the Committee on Fisheries in the next two and a half years .
Mr President , at the outset I want to say that I welcome the opportunity of discussing aspects of the fishing industry here in Parliament this morning .
I recall the situation in December last year when we did not have the opportunity of discussing reports such as the Souchet and Kofoed reports and the aborted Escudero reports on technical conservation measures .
So it is essential that we have this opportunity of highlighting the importance of fishing and the problems confronting the fishing industry throughout Europe .
I do not want to take too much time on TACs and quotas but I should like to thank the Commission for making available to us the details after the meeting on 19 and 20 December .
It is important that Members of this House and in particular members of the Committee on Fisheries be fully briefed at all times in relation to ongoing developments .
I want to refer very quickly to the satellite system which all of us support in principle .
I am pleased that good sense prevailed both within the Commission and within the Council and that the presidency compromise was eventually accepted .
There will not therefore be a burden on vessels under 20 metres .
There will not be a burden on vessels fishing in inshore waters where they are at sea no longer than 24 hours .
I am also pleased that financial assistance will be available to those who will find it necessary to install such apparatus in their vessels .
Surely it is logical that the satellite regulation and system would apply to those boats .
The bulk of their fishing is spent outside flagship waters .
All of us support the principle of technical conservation measures to reduce the catch of juvenile fish to ensure that the fishing industry will survive for this and future generations .
We must ensure that we limit the fishing activity in certain areas and certain seasons where juvenile fish are abundant .
We must support the question of closed areas .
We must support minimum landing and the square mesh panel .
But we must also ensure that the regulations are simple and can be readily understood by fishermen and that any research that is carried out is done under commercial conditions .
I am pleased that we will have a further opportunity to discuss technical conservation measures before any decision is taken .
This brings me to my fourth point .
In European terms my country has a small fleet both in size and numbers .
Capacity cuts is not an option for Ireland .
The tonnage ceiling was established at a time when the industry was very much in its infancy , largely an inshore fleet .
As in all countries , our fishing takes place in coastal regions where there is no alternative source of employment .
The constituency I represent is an Objective 1 region .
This factor must be taken into consideration .
The broad brush approach is neither practical nor realistic .
In conclusion , I say to the Commissioner , accompanying measures must be put in place but they should not come from the existing structural funds .
Mr President , I also would like to thank the Commissioner for her extensive description of the Council meeting , which is most important .
I am also pleased to see that she looks so well .
It was widely reported in the British press that she only just survived the end of the meeting .
We are glad to see you here , your usual active self .
Briefly , concerning the satellite issue , a fairly minor but an important milestone , the most important thing here is that much of the industry has been against this .
Obviously they do not like the ' spy in the sky ' .
I come from the freight industry where we have had the tachograph for years .
One thing I have learnt is that people soon learn how to abuse and get round these systems .
It is always a question of staying one step ahead .
So I would be interested in the Commissioner 's views on making sure that there is uniform application and ensuring that the system is implemented properly throughout the Union on these vessels .
She has a great problem in terms of inspection resources .
These need to be used to help that process , but there is always a question of abuse .
Regarding TACs and quotas , again I would raise the strategic problem here of ministers debating with scientists through the Commission and coming up with a compromise that allows all ministers to claim victory , while at the same time , scientists are trying to make decisions on the actual scientific state of the stocks .
This seems to me to be a process that will not work , is not right .
Sometimes I wonder whether most of ministers ' time is spent trying to design their press releases to say that they have all won for their own industries .
I feel that we need to move to a process , to be honest , where we keep the politicians out of this process ; where , at the end of the day , maybe the ministers can say ' yes ' or ' no ' to the solution but cannot actually negotiate it themselves because we are just going to have a situation where the environment is put on the back burner and we are just looking for political victories .
As far as MAGP IV is concerned , I am not surprised that we have had to put this off again until April .
That is regrettable because the industry needs to know its future .
But I think it is partly an indication of the fact that this particular programme , like the previous ones , will not actually work .
I am interested that the Commission has put in a sanction to say that there will be no payments through FIFG until this is agreed .
I think that is , in a way , the right approach . But I believe that the only way that rationalization can take place is if the industry itself decides how to do it , given a very strict environmental framework within which it has to work .
The most important aspect of investment for vessels in the future is not that the EU should provide money for reinvestment .
That is completely wrong .
It is all about the industry understanding what its future will be and then private investment will come into the industry .
Lastly , I regretted very much , as far as the Mediterranean is concerned , that there was a complete defeat for the Commission , it would seem to me , on the swordfish issue - in that sort of area there was a complete sell-out .
I would ask the Commissioner what she intends to do in the first half of 1997 to start to bring forward the debate about the common fisheries policy post-2000 ?
Mr President , I personally think that the determined opposition by fishermen and shipowners from various Member States of the European Union to the Commission proposal for MAGP IV was decisive for the position adopted by the European Parliament in the last part-session , just as I think that this firm attitude was also important for the Fisheries Council , held on 19 and 20 December , which decided to adopt and work out new proposals to be approved in principle in the first months of 1997 .
I hope , for my part , however , that the practical solutions which are adopted do correspond to the declarations made at the end of that Council and that generally speaking , albeit with contradictions , they do seem to be in keeping with the tenor of the discussion which we have been holding in the European Parliament for a number of months .
Therefore it is fundamental that the new proposals do not once again insist on unacceptable reductions which cannot be justified in the fishing fleet or the imposition of new reductions in the number of boats , together with measures for a permanent and thorough monitoring of species evolution , and include effective forms of controlling fishery fleets and their respective techniques , providing for additional financial means to compensate for income loss , defend and support non-industrial coastal fishing , and the social stability of fishing communities and the direct and indirect employment provided .
Madam Commissioner , I should like to put another question to you because I think that it might be related to this .
I am referring in particular to recent declarations made by the Moroccan Government which suggest that it intends to increase unilaterally from two to four months the biological moratorium included in the current Fisheries Agreement which , if carried out , would be exclusively applicable to Community boats , in other words Portuguese and Spanish boats , just like the declared intention not to renew an agreement which , if I remember right , was established little more than one year ago .
Declarations of this type from the Moroccan authorities in my opinion are quite worrying and unacceptable .
It is unacceptable that we tell the peoples of the Iberian countries that this Fisheries Agreement was not negotiated in close association with the Trading Association Agreement established with Morocco , also in 1995 , and that many of the trading concessions made then in terms of fish preserves and farming products , which had very serious repercussions on certain European Union Member States , were not used as bargaining chips in order to create conditions in order to renew the Fisheries Agreement .
This close relationship between the negotiation of the two Agreements cannot be denied and it has even been mentioned by some people to justify and defend the respective approval , especially when we were discussing the terms of the Commercial Association Agreement with Morocco .
It is important for the Commissioner to give us her opinion on this question and tell us how , if at all , it is going to be dealt with as part of the new proposals to be studied and presented in 1997 , since the Moroccan Government 's positions - if put into practice - would naturally imply changes which the Portuguese and Spanish fishing fleets could never have imagined one month ago .
For our part , we think that it is unacceptable to change the periods of biological moratoria agreed in 1995 .
In other words , we would like to hear your opinions on this matter .
Mr President , Council meetings in the last few months have probably had the most important agendas for several years , dealing with three areas in fisheries management : first , the size of the EU fishing fleet under the MAGP ; the new regulations for technical measures proposed by the Commission ; and satellite transponders , an important aspect of the overall control programme .
In addition , the annual TACs were decided .
These meetings afforded a rare opportunity to take decisive action to rectify the dangerous situation of the EU fisheries .
Unfortunately the Council did not have the courage to make the difficult decisions which need to be made .
On the MAGP , everybody admits that the EU fishing fleets are too large .
Even the fishing industry itself says that there is overcapacity and that reductions are necessary .
However , the Council continues to resist the idea .
It currently seems to be attempting to turn MAGP from a programme to reduce fishing fleet capacity by decommissioning , scrapping etc . , into a programme to limit the fishing efforts which the fleets are allowed to make .
This amounts to a fundamental reorientation of the goal of the programme and one which , in our opinion , is bound to fail .
There are several reasons why this failure is inevitable . I will mention just two .
First , fishing vessels are built to fish , so fishing vessel owners are not going to be happy with their vessels sitting idle and losing money .
They will exert pressure on politicians to allow them to go fishing to try and make some money .
The extent of the pressure which can be put on politicians is known to us all and can be seen in the results of the annual Council meeting where TACs are decided .
So even if the Council was able , in its wisdom , to accept a programme to limit fishing effort , that would not end the story , for there would be ever-increasing demands from the industry to allow more fishing .
Secondly , such a programme would be extraordinarily difficult to monitor or control .
Last year I was rapporteur for the report on the CFP monitoring system .
You will recall that fisheries control is the responsibility of the Member States , not the Commission .
The basic conclusion of the review conducted by the Commission was that the control programmes in the Member States were totally inadequate and in dire need of improvement .
No country had a programme which was sufficient in all areas .
It was interesting that the Commission recorded that several countries had failed to meet targets in the statistics on the size and capacity of the national fleets .
Instances were found where vessels were larger in reality than was actually indicated in the national registry of vessels .
So I would pose the question : how can we be confident that a programme to control the fishing effort of a large and powerful fleet would be successful ?
We have not even managed to control the amount of fish which is landed , and that is a far simpler task .
One agreement has been reached on how much capacity is to be reduced .
Another aspect which is important is what capacity is to eliminated .
We must ensure that the vessels which remain in the fleets are those which are the least destructive to the marine environment .
This would have long-term beneficial consequences for both the fish stocks and for the fishermen .
A final matter which gets very little attention is what is done with the vessels .
EU fleets are already active in many oceans around the world and often cause considerable damage .
Considering the size of the other fleets in the world , there is not a great deal of room in other areas to which these vessels can go without causing problems .
The decommissioning schemes put in place must ensure that the MAGP does not simply transfer the problem to other parts of the world .
Europe must not be allowed to export its excess capacity .
In short , the Greens consider that a rigorous programme of fleet reduction accompanied by compensation for the fishermen thus affected is a fundamental prerequisite for resolving the current crisis .
The technical measures are all about trying to increase the selectivity of EU fishing practices .
This involves not only the juveniles of commercially important , targeted species but also other species that are not wanted by fishermen .
The fact that the FAO estimates that , on a global basis , one tonne of fish is thrown away for every three tonnes that is kept shows that this is a very serious problem .
The Commission has proposed a number of progressive changes in the current technical measures including square mesh panel , increase in mesh size , grates or grids to filter out the shrimp catches and others .
Once again , the Council is shilly-shallying , working on a compromise version which will weaken the Commission proposal .
The fishing industry is being held accountable for the damage it wreaks on the marine community .
The proposals of the Commission are a significant step along the path towards a more responsible approach to fishing activities .
The Council seems bent , unfortunately , on ignoring wider public opinion in Europe and around the world , which is in favour of a more careful and precautionary approach to fishing , and is choosing to bow to the pressure of the fishing industry .
Mr President , unlike you I was glad that Mrs Bonino had twenty minutes to talk to us .
I just wish that I had twenty minutes as well because there are many issues which are very important .
I want to make some brief points .
Firstly , the Northern Irish fishermen were compensated by the British Government during the negotiations .
I should like to know where the fish came from that went to Northern Ireland as part of a political deal which the Conservative Government had to stitch up with the Ulster Unionists .
Secondly , there are a couple of problems I want to flag up : one is that the salmon importation from Norway is a problem which will not go away .
I would apportion the blame between the British Government and the Commission for not imposing a minimum import price .
If they had asked for it earlier , they could have had it but , as the Commissioner says , there is an ongoing investigation and I understand her position .
However , there is a worry that the prices might take a nose dive now .
I want some reassurance that this will be taken into account .
Thirdly , the problem of the size of the UK fleet .
This is a major problem first of all because of flags of convenience - a problem mishandled by the UK in the past - and also because of the failure on the part of the UK to decommission .
There is a major problem there which I want to flag up .
I have one or two complimentary things to say .
It is very good that Mrs Bonino comes to us now after the debacle at the end of December and says : ' Let us now talk seriously about the conservation measures , about MAGP IV ' .
The things which we knew were not going to be implemented in December we can now discuss in a realistic way and we have time for a constructive dialogue which will take into account the views of the fishing sector .
I am glad also that the small-scale coastal fishing sector has been exempted from satellite monitoring .
That is very important both symbolically and in practice .
That is the way we have to go in the future ; giving that sector the priority .
Finally , I turn to the promise that there will be compensation through accompanying measures for any losses which are inflicted on the fisheries sector .
For a long time the farming sector has expected this as of right and the fishing sector has had to survive somehow .
I am glad to hear that this is built into the thinking and we will be looking for further specifications along those lines .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I welcome the Commissioner 's appearance in Parliament today and I think we would all welcome even more appearances by the Commissioner to discuss fisheries , because this has not received the amount of discussion it should have had over the years - and certainly not last year .
As far as TACs and quotas are concerned , it is a bit like the curate 's egg : it was good in parts .
But I have to question the whole situation last year .
The Commission statement on sweeping cuts in the fishing industry right throughout Europe unnecessarily alarmed fishermen .
Surely , in this modern day and age there is a better way in which we can carry this out ?
Is it not time for the Commission , Parliament , the Council , the fishermen and the scientists to approach this in a better way ?
Is it not time that the scientists and the fishermen got together instead of having the conflicting evidence that we always have ?
Because , Commissioner , we both know that by August , September , October , November and December of this year , we will go through the whole process again !
Nothing has been solved !
We will just simply be covering the same ground again .
So I would certainly call for a different approach and a different and more constructive attitude by everyone concerned .
I welcome the decision to have satellite monitoring on larger boats , and not imposed on the inshore fishermen as well - it was a very wise decision to accept that compromise by the Council and the Commission .
I also wish to say very clearly to Mr Macartney - in case he is worried - that there was no stitch-up between the British Government and the Ulster Unionists before the Council meeting !
There was no stitch-up at all : it was just good negotiations .
Perhaps , if some of the people in Mr Macartney 's party had the same skill in negotiations as the people in my party have in Westminster , then his fishermen might benefit as much as my fishermen in Northern Ireland did .
I wish to pay tribute to the UK Government and to the leader of my party for being able to achieve that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during their meeting in Brussels on 19 and 20 December last , the Fisheries Ministers reached an agreement on satellite monitoring , on TACs and quotas .
They postponed until April 1997 their decision on the plan to reduce the EU fishing fleet known as ' MAGP-IV ' .
Let me go back over two points in the agreement .
The introduction of a satellite monitoring system for European vessels inevitably calls to mind satellite monitoring of agricultural set-aside or the number of cows per hectare .
It is the most sophisticated method available to the Community bureaucracy .
This is of course being done under the cloak of technical and safety considerations : the identification and location of fishing vessels and , in cases of distress or shipwreck , helping them as quickly as possible .
These measures , costing ECU 205 million over five years , would have more impact and more credibility with Community fishermen if they were applied to all vessels fishing in the territorial waters of the Community , since only ships equipped with the famous blue boxes can be located and hence monitored and possibly penalized .
The other point agreed by the Fisheries Ministers was an increase in TACs over those initially proposed by the Commission .
Out of 116 TACs , only 30 were changed from last year 's levels .
Behind the technical debate on the conservation of fishery resources and the reproduction of species lies a political question that can be summarized as follows : do we want to sacrifice the common fisheries policy on the altar of world-wide free trade ?
But in the age of the WTO and the globalization of trade , the European Union is alone in respecting certain social , technical and environmental standards in fishing .
Community fishermen should not be paying the price of unilateral concessions negotiated by the European Commission in their name .
Mr President , if we just stand back for a moment and look at all the discussions that have taken place in the fisheries sector in recent months , there is one thing that stands out above everything else and that is that the industry has completely lost confidence in the assessment of the stocks of the different fish - that is one thing that comes through in all the things that I have read .
I know from the fishermen in my own constituency that they have no confidence at all in the scientific advice that is being received on stock levels .
I should just like to quote from the Annual Report of the Anglo-Scottish Fish Producers ' Association , which states very bluntly : ' We must continue to question the advice of scientists regarding stock levels . ' Anglo-Scottish are now withdrawing from the European Association of Fish Producers ' Associations .
There is also the fact that the quota system is not operating to suit market demands .
Fishermen are under pressure to catch the quotas for fear of cuts in the following year 's allocation .
One of the results is that we are seeing a higher proportion of smaller fish being caught - still legally , but the proportion of smaller fish is increasing , and so are the market withdrawals .
Last year 's figures for my region showed that haddock withdrawals increased by 50 % and whiting withdrawals were up by 30 % .
We urgently need to get away from the ' catch it or lose it ' mentality .
I would urge the Commission to take on board the fact that we need a new approach to stock assessment and quota setting .
Unless we have confidence in a new approach , we cannot possibly hope to construct an effective regional management system .
Mr President , first I want to thank the Commissioner for being here to tell us the results of the last Fisheries Council , and for her readiness to debate them with the European Parliament .
But unfortunately , although that Council was important a priori , we cannot really talk about results , because nothing was decided except the TACs and quotas .
It was a disappointing Council at which MAGP IV was postponed until April , the regulations for technical measures have an even vaguer timetable , and the satellite monitoring project - crippled in my view - also awaits final approval .
All this means we are about to lose a year in providing the sector with three instruments fundamental to its management and development .
This is plain weakness on the part of the Council , demonstrating its lack of harmony with the Commission and , while the latter may be guilty of putting forward certain projects that are unrealistic , confused and lacking the necessary advance compromise , the Council can be accused of indecisiveness and of being led more by the special interests of the Member States than by genuine determination to make progress with fisheries legislation that is coherent and has a future .
We see it every year in the blatantly political outcome of the TACs .
But it is on the issue of the MAGP that I need the greatest possible clarification because , although I have no doubt that the pressure from the Council must have been very strong , that is also where I think the Commission has done its worst work .
Even admitting - as I have always done - that a reduction of the fleet is essential , the proposal was extreme and highly questionable scientifically .
It was one of the priority issues of the year , calling for great flexibility and capacity for compromise , but the Commission proved incapable of dialogue and perhaps lacked common sense .
It is obvious , Madam Commissioner - and this House is tired of repeating it - that when the fleet is asked to make the kind of sacrifices contained in this project , it must either come equipped with serious and guaranteed socio-economic measures or it will be condemned to failure .
Furthermore , this Parliament is still not clear whether some MAGPs are generically based on a reduction in strength , whether they maintain minimum determination about the need to reduce capacity , or whether the project is tenuous and mixed , with initiative left to the States in principle , and the Commission making the decisions later .
We have heard widely differing interpretations from your department and the only thing that is certain at the moment is that the fleet does not know for certain what kind of measures it is going to have to submit to and nobody seems to be able to explain them clearly .
With the Council in deadlock , the Commission 's reaction was to force approval by threatening to withdraw the structural funds for construction and modernization . Quite apart from the legal questions that raises , it was politically out of order and has proved to be a mistake .
I have openly criticized the Council 's attitude , Madam Commissioner .
But when the Commission has to resort to that kind of threat , the obvious absence of harmony is too serious to be overlooked and the Commission shares responsibility for that .
On the other hand , the decision is intolerable and unjust for countries which have complied with the MAGP , because they are the ones best placed to fulfil the subsequent ones .
How can good and bad pupils be lumped together ?
Not one single serious measure has ever been taken to penalize the non-compliers , which could not receive funds for that very reason , and now a measure is introduced which is exclusively directed at punishing the countries that have taken Community measures seriously .
The situation is worthy of Kafka , Madam Commissioner and I want to ask you to consider the request to restore access to the structural funds , at least to the countries which have complied with the reductions in capacity imposed by the European Union .
I would have liked to comment on all the other matters dealt with by the Council but as time is short I will not burden Parliament with further issues .
Thank you again for being here , Madam Commissioner , and for shedding so much light on these matters .
Mr President , I would like to note two encouraging aspects of the decisions taken at the December Fisheries Council .
First the announcement , within a year , of more flexible quota management .
Taking into account the rate at which quotas are used is an essential and too often neglected factor in the conservation of the resource .
It is imperative that we seek the greatest possible flexibility , otherwise Member States and the producer organizations will tend to use up their quotas to the full so as to avoid being penalized later , and reprehensible practices like the diversion of quotas will be encouraged .
The second positive aspect is the improvement in the accuracy and fairness of monitoring thanks to the adoption of satellite observation , for large ships only of course .
I am delighted at the adoption by the Council of many amendments I submitted to the Committee on Fisheries which had been adopted by this Parliament .
On the other hand , the Commission 's attitude , using a form of blackmail by suspending aid for the building and modernization of ships to try and force Member States to adopt a plan for a massive reduction in fleets , seems to me to be extremely dangerous .
People in coastal regions know that many shipyards are now on a knife-edge .
Blockage by the Commission could endanger many of them , since their future now depends on orders benefiting from FIFG aid .
The disappearance of these yards would mean considerable job losses in our countries and the irreparable loss of very valuable European know-how .
As for the technical measures , they must be carefully tested before any general use and all factors must have been taken into account , particularly the selectivity and energy consumption of the different types of fishing gear .
Finally , the common fisheries policy must not be confined exclusively to issues under the three headings of monitoring , capacities and technical measures .
It must be directed to redefining the concept of Community preference in order to achieve better price control .
The absence of Community preference , coupled with an overliberal policy on import controls , can only encourage overfishing .
The best protection for the resource is a fair price for the products of European fisheries which will also be , Mr President , the best guarantee for the future of a thriving fishing industry in our countries .
Mr President , I thought I was down to speak earlier but I see that the big transfer fee from the EPP to the Goldsmith Group got in first .
The Council meeting was quite a mixed bag .
There are some positive features which many Members have commented upon , in particular the introduction of satellite surveillance , along with the flexibility allowing the industry to roll on quotas into the next year and take them off quotas for the following year .
This is very much welcomed by the industry .
There were other areas where it was obviously thought that discretion was the better part of valour and it was decided to postpone decisions , in particular in MAGP IV .
We welcome that too .
Industry felt that the proposals on which the Commission had based their original proposals were seriously flawed .
The one area where I would take issue with the Commission in particular , though also with the Council , is the matter Mr Macartney alluded to concerning salmon .
This issue will not go away .
Some regions have been dumping salmon for ten years in the European Union and it is not a new issue .
We have frequently had debates and discussions and passed resolutions ; the Commission reluctantly introduced a minimum import price a couple of years ago and then let it go after a time and did not reintroduce it .
I would like to put it to the Commissioner that she lost the battle with her colleague Sir Leon Brittan on this because we understand that he is not very enthusiastic about dealing with the Norwegians and does not want to introduce restrictions .
He is frightened it might cause problems under the EEA agreement while we in the Committee on Fisheries and many people in Parliament take a different view .
Apart from that issue , if I were giving the Commissioner a mark for her endeavours at the Council meeting I would give her 6 out of 10 .
Mr President , if you watch the language groups that are participating in this debate you will see that there is a lot of pressure in the north-west of the Community on the fishing industry and deep concern , which is reflected here .
I welcome the presence of the Commissioner and want to say we were proud and a little sad to note that she worked herself into the ground before Christmas on fishing problems .
We are happy that she is here this morning and has given a very full explanation of what she has undertaken .
In the past , and in particular in the north-west of the Community , there has been deep suspicion in the fishing industry about how fishing policy was conducted and managed and a deep lack of trust .
It is good that the Commissioner comes here and gives us full explanations and she is entitled to our support for the long-term objectives which she has set out .
It is only when we receive full explanations that we can give this support .
The lack of trust in the fishing industry in Scotland and Ireland - and it is also true of Spain - is to be regretted .
We were disappointed that we did not have some sort of minimum price fixing on imported salmon before the Christmas period .
That is the period in which Scottish and Irish fishermen sell a lot of their produce and the prices at the end of the year are extremely important to them .
Since a prima facie case had been made , we thought it would have been possible but we look forward at least to a satisfactory outcome of this investigation that will give some measure of protection to European Union producers in this sector which is very important for the poorer regions .
I welcome the decision on satellite surveillance of fishing .
I did a report on it myself some years ago .
At that time the idea of the spy-in-the-sky was an emotive issue .
It was being used against the European Union , cited as an effort to invade everybody 's privacy .
This is absolute nonsense .
It is only reasonable that the Community should adopt modern technology which will keep pace with what is happening in other sectors .
If the boats get faster and if the nets get bigger and more powerful , it is only natural that we should use all the modern technology available to us .
There is a positive side to this , namely safety .
Many boats have been lost at sea in years past and if they had had this facility on board lives could have been saved .
We are glad that the excessive administrative costs have not been applied to inshore fishermen but , nevertheless , we welcome what has been done so far .
So far as fleet reductions are concerned , there is one thing I have to say .
It seems always to be bad news .
The fishing industry is always being told to make reductions .
It never seems to be explained that there is a long-term objective which can bring profits .
I saw a report at one time which said that we could increase the catch from European waters by 50 % if we would apply the conservation measures necessary .
At the end of the day what we need is a long-term programme - seven or ten years - with a bottom line that tells us what we can expect to achieve in the end and , in the meantime , the investment necessary .
For social reasons we need to make an investment and I am glad to hear accompanying measures being spoken about .
However , I would like to see a bottom line which can give some sort of hope to the disadvantaged regions and the fishing communities .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for her statement and I agree with almost everything she said .
We have to remember that the MAGP policies were introduced in the beginning to balance the European Union 's domestic fleets and fishing effort to the European Union waters fishing opportunities .
Clearly , fishing fleets are too large , clearly fishing effort is too strong - so we have a big problem !
On the one issue I want to address I will probably be shot down , but there are some parts of the European Union flag fleet that do not contribute to that problem .
They are not fishing in European Union waters : they fish exclusively outside European Union waters , under agreements which we have negotiated with various countries around the world , and those agreements are I hope respected and monitored .
One example , and I make no apologies for a blatant constituency interest , is that the remains of the British distantwater fleet fish off Norway , Iceland and various other north Atlantic places .
They fish mainly from my constituency and they are under very strict control .
I appreciate that there are examples of this fishing exclusively outside EU waters in many other Member States .
Is it possible that these fishing boats , which are guaranteed to fish outside Member States , should be excluded from the MAGP process altogether ?
Thank you , Madam Commissioner , for your presence and your statement .
I would like to start by saying that I support and value the agreement reached on TACs and quotas in the December Council .
It seems reasonable to me and I think the objectives that have been set are balanced in terms of conservation of resources and appropriate exploitation of them .
So after that positive assessment , I want to go beyond the actual distribution of this year 's quotas and seek to evaluate the whole distribution system itself .
From this angle , there is continuity in the Council 's decision and the system employed , to the extent that it is based on the principle of relative stability , which has succeeded in fulfilling the mission of distributing resources objectively , but , as we see it , it has some important failings today .
In the first place , there are serious problems about the system in terms of conservation of resources .
Thus the lack of a multi-species TAC system forces some Community fleets to throw species of legal size back into the sea because they do not have a quota .
We continue to have a rather absurd system which bans certain trawler fleets of Member States from catching a range of species brought up in the net and they have to be returned to the sea without any benefit to the stock .
The system is logically unacceptable from the viewpoint of economic exploitation .
And from the viewpoint of resource conservation we are deceiving ourselves because our quotas do not account for actual fish mortality .
Moreover , the principle of relative stability clearly discriminates against some Community fleets .
For example , the Community fleet under the Spanish flag only has access to 8 species out of the 22 for which there are quotas .
And that is one of the reasons for the discards I just mentioned , because what are these ships going to do with the sole or cod they catch , in some cases involuntarily , when they do not have quotas for those species ?
In addition , equilibrium under the principle of relative stability is calculated on data and periods when some fleets saw their opportunities of fishing in Community waters reduced as a result , amongst other factors , of the extension of fishing limits to 200 miles in 1976 , which also changed historical access to the fishing grounds .
Finally , a third factor casts doubt on the current validity of the principle of relative stability as a constant of the common fisheries policy : the fact that markets for fish have been completely liberalized , frontiers no longer exist in the Union for marketing fish , and yet extremely rigid national barriers are still in place in terms of access to Community resources for Community fleets .
These points also apply when considering the necessary reform of the common fisheries policy to ensure that the distribution of quotas is not based on anachronistic criteria , regardless of what the current system is and whether the TACs and quotas should be set on the basis of it .
This is nothing to reproach the December Council with , I evaluate it positively as I said at first , but I do expect the Commission to take up these ideas and be the dynamic factor for profound medium term reform of the common fisheries policy so that the desirable equilibrium can be achieved between responsible exploitation of resources and their conservation , with equal opportunities for all the ships that form part of what ought to be a Community fleet , that is , a European fleet .
And I end with a small comment on the technical measures .
The proposal for a regulation on technical measures starts , in my opinion , from the wrong hypothesis .
It assumes that young fish are currently being caught because of the size of mesh in the nets used and we all know , Madam Commissioner , that a large part of this fishing is due to illegal activities and lack of effective control , because control is in the hands of the Member States and unfortunately they fail to enforce it .
The paradox of tougher technical measures is that they will prejudice those who respect them and make those who continue to catch young fish in breach of the fishing regulations more competitive .
So let us make respect for the law the priority .
If we toughen and enforce control we will enormously reduce this serious problem of catching young fish .
We should not just punish those who comply with the law and respect the technical measures .
I think that would be unjust .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , may I say that I am very happy that this debate has been placed high on our agenda : this will dispel the dismal impression given in December and , I am pleased at the choice of this time-slot out of respect for you , Madam Commissioner .
I noted three words in your statement : transparency , efficiency and balance .
Transparency remains - as we well know - a very important factor in making progress towards an accurate evaluation of overcapacity .
So I welcome satellite monitoring , something we have been talking about for years in Parliament .
We know that this needed some courage , that it was unpopular .
But we have achieved it , so much the better , even though I understand very well that we have exempted small inshore fishing fleets , which do not place the same burden on our resources .
You then spoke of efficiency .
And here we know that more progress will have to be made in the technical measures of selectivity and protection of juvenile fish , as I have been saying again and again for a number of years now .
Here also , courage will be needed .
This can all be summarized in a few very simple words .
We must fish less - we know that - but we must also more than anything else fish better and to do this we must not only reduce capacity , but also and above all introduce some selectivity .
Lastly , the third word , balance : the necessary balance between the resource and human activity .
This is the whole socio-economic aspect .
You will easily understand that this concerns us .
You were an elected Member of this House , Madam Commissioner , and anyone elected is the spokesperson for men and women who find it hard to earn a living in our coastal regions .
We cannot ignore these social and economic worries .
We have to do something about this and that is why , personally , I much prefer completing the necessary reduction in fleets to reducing activity in several forms .
I believe it would be reasonable not only to improve resource management but also to take account of the socio-economic realities of our coastal regions .
Mr President , I want to start this speech by thanking Mrs Bonino for the great cooperation she has shown the Committee on Fisheries of the European Parliament during the two and a half years I have had the honour of chairing it .
It has not been a time without serious problems , but in spite of all , relations between the Commission and Parliament could not have been better .
So thank you , Mrs Bonino .
Moving to the substance of this debate , I have to say that after the last Council of Fisheries Ministers and after listening to the Commissioner 's statement , one can only feel intense frustration and uneasiness .
Frustration at the narrow range of the decisions taken and the postponement of the most important ones , and uneasiness because , in my view , some of the decisions are inexplicable .
Frustration because MAGP IV and the technical measures were not approved by the Council .
The Commission 's proposals were drafted without proper thought , realism or composure .
Does the Commissioner recognize that the proposals have been formulated without carefully assessing their economic and social consequences and without setting up additional support mechanisms at the same time , which would make them easier to accept ?
Uneasiness , Madam Commissioner , because of the approval of some TACs and quotas which , in my opinion , depart from the line maintained until a few days ago by the Commission .
How do you explain the contradiction between some TACs being generally if slightly increased and certain guidelines which , as some colleagues have mentioned , propose drastic cuts due to the poor state of resources ?
Something is wrong with the equation .
Frustration because , on the one hand , the satellite monitoring plan is pretty remote from the agreements adopted by this Parliament , without prejudice to its amendments to them , and , on the other hand , so many conditions have been introduced into the final wording that the possibility of effective control of the fleets has been seriously limited .
Uneasiness , Madam Commissioner , because the Commission 's letter freezing structural aid represents a sweeping measure with the same impact on Member States which , as Mrs Fraga says , have strictly complied with the reduction objectives of the MAGP and those who have ignored them .
There is no encouragement to exemplary behaviour if pressure is not applied selectively , especially when the aid that is frozen is covered by Community support frameworks approved by the Commission , which in principle constitutes a sufficient legal basis for granting it .
In conclusion , Madam Commissioner , I think the outcome of the last Council is a serious setback to the process of reforming the common fisheries policy , but we trust in your well-known ability to relaunch that reform and contribute to adoption by the Council of the regulations awaiting approval as soon as possible , because that is what the state of the resources and the guarantee of a stable future for our fishermen requires , Madam Commissioner .
Mr President , I would like to start my speech by mentioning that I disagree with what your predecessor said about the Commissioner 's speaking time .
Commissioner Bonino is known for not mincing her words .
She never tries what I believe the French call ' langue de bois ' , or as we say in Spanish , ' vender la moto ' .
The Commissioner never fudges things .
She always gets straight to the point .
So the more time she has , the better for us .
I urge the Commissioner to take no notice of those comments from the chair , because I think we very much want to listen to her .
Having said that , the Commissioner will not mind if I criticize the Commission , specifically on its weakness regarding the biological rest period for cephalopods .
When she negotiated the agreement at the end of 1995 , she was praised for her firm stand , but now we find , as Mr Novo said earlier , that the Commission has accepted a doubling of the biological rest period , with no explanation and virtually no information , purely on the basis of a few catches by a few Community ships .
I have received no explanation .
I cannot explain to my fisherman what happened to make the biological rest period suddenly increase from two to four months .
I am also concerned about what appears in the agreements adopted in the Joint Committee on the landing of fish in Moroccan ports .
Perhaps this has to do with the application of later agreements , but we need more information to appreciate the consequences for our fishermen .

And finally , as Mr Novo said , referring to a Moroccan statement on non-renewal of the fishing agreement with Morocco , which could have devastating consequences , I would ask the Commission what repercussions this would have on the commercial and financial concessions granted by the European Union to the Kingdom of Morocco in the framework of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Mr President , I have heard many speakers say today that we are frustrated .
I have heard that the Council is frustrated .
But quite clearly , we are frustrated .
There is not enough fish , my friends .
That is the crux of the matter .
That is the reason why we are gathered here .
What we are talking about today is the conflict between the adjustment of capacity and the limiting of activity .
Limiting activity is a very difficult issue in the context of the common fisheries policy .
I speak from personal experience of the discussions on mesh sizes .
You can provide compensation by increasing engine power , so that the mesh size is not so critical .
I know a whole range of tricks , since I am perhaps one of the few people here in the House who has been a fisherman himself .
Over the last 20 years , we have had a fleet which is so advanced that the same number of vessels can catch three times as much .
So it is clear that we have to look at the problem from a different angle .
I am strongly in favour of conserving stocks .
But the two things - on the one hand adjusting activity , on the other imposing limits and conserving stocks - do not always go hand in hand .
That is why we are obliged to adjust capacity and hence reduce the fleet .
But this should be done jointly in all the Member States .
It cannot be right for some people first to exhaust their own fishing grounds and then to try to exhaust those of their neighbours .
We have to act in a consistent way .
From a socio-economic viewpoint , I would warn against support which does not help to bring about structural change , since otherwise we shall have the same thing as in the agricultural sector , where we often provide social assistance rather than real agricultural support .
Earlier today , we heard about the very high withdrawal prices and the quantity of fish withdrawn , which was extremely large last year .
This is helping to protect and maintain a system which does not look towards the future .
I put my trust in the Commissioner and support her continuing efforts , whilst joining in the praise which has already been expressed .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I just want to tackle two subjects : MAGP IV and Morocco .
As far as MAGP IV is concerned , I am convinced that when there is a crisis such as the one facing this sector , the fishery sector , any proposals aimed at reducing fishing fleets will be seen as unpopular .
But I recognise that , given the state of deterioration of fishing stocks it is natural that the whole balance of the process of initiating these issues begins by setting our sights very high .
That is just what the Commission has done : the Commission has set its sights very high in terms of proposals on the basis of MAGP IV .
I am not going to discuss the scientific reliability of the basis used , but I recognise and I concede that there had to be a scientific basis to begin with .
But once these proposals are on the table , then we have to have a process of compromise and given that either we have to have a possibility for a compromise to be reached between the Commission and the Council or else the lack of agreement between the Commission and the Council will only be enhanced .
On the other hand , as I already said in the Committee on Fisheries , I cannot accept that Member States which fulfil the objectives defined in MAGP III should be penalised with cuts in their fleets , in the terms which have already been referred to by my colleagues , Mr Fraga Estévez and Mr Miguel Arias Cañete , and as I already mentioned in the Committee on Fisheries .
In other words there is a Community support framework , there is an IFOP regulation , and there is a basic regulation : I do not see why the Commission should indulge in this kind of blackmail .
Finally let us talk about Morocco .
The Fisheries Agreements with Morocco will end up in the current form .
The future will obviously see the setting up of joint ventures .
But I would like to ask - and I really must insist quite clearly on this to the Commissioner - is whether there really is a will on the Commission 's part to involve Member States in particular Spain and Portugal in the preparation already or after 1999 , or otherwise all we are doing is postponing the problem ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although I exceeded my speaking time at the beginning , at least I made up for the time we did not have in December to prepare the Council 's dossiers .
Our debate is therefore the dual outcome of the Council 's work and the dossiers you have voted for .
However , the breadth and depth of the debate just held , and even the number of contributors , obliges me to group my replies under several headings mentioned by many of you and to deal with each of them at the same time .
Forgive me if I forget anybody , but I did try to take as many notes as possible .
First of all , let us talk about current events .
I shall look first at Morocco .
Ladies and gentlemen , you must remember that the clause of agreement with Morocco included a provision that , apart from the two months of biological dormancy , and I refer here to cephalopods , any other conservation measure could be jointly agreed between the two parties .
Starting in November the Moroccan authorities and sector have informed us of their concerns about the resources plan .
After quite long negotiations , we have reached a joint decision to add March and April to the ' cephalopod ' biological dormancy period for all ships of all flags in all areas , thus giving the species a period during which it can recover .
I think this is quite clear in the final statement from the Joint Commission , so there is no discrimination .
It will obviously be necessary to monitor this , but I would like to point out that this was a planned measure which was jointly agreed .
I can assure you that it is not the normal custom of the Commission to be subjected to pressure , particularly when there are illegal ship inspections .
Attempts can always be made to exert pressure - we need to know if others are subjected to it .
As regards the renewal of the agreement , I think it is impossible to impose anything on a sovereign third country .
This is a case where a little momentum needs to be imparted .
I think , for example , that the partnership meeting about fisheries , which will take place in May in Casablanca , is one step further in the Commission 's activities , so that relations with Morocco , including commercial ones , become increasingly partnership relations and are less strained so that , apart from the problems of political flourishes by one side or the other - and you are political enough to know what political flourishes are - we can reach a calmer , renegotiable position .
I can guarantee nothing , but this is the line and these are the activities that the Commission is pursuing .
I now pass on to other matters that have been mentioned , and I return to the TACs and quotas .
Mr Teverson , I fully share your view .
Moreover , the Commission proposed more than two years ago that a general political debate on TACs and quotas be initiated but that , subsequently , over the details , this type of night-time negotiation is better conducted at the level of technical management so that the dossier does not remain at a high political level with everybody then being able to claim a victory , almost like a Napoleonic night .
I also think it would be a good thing if we all committed ourselves to making the TAC and quota issues less dramatic and less exposed to media attention . Because that is not the main issue .
The subject is very popular with the media and is given great media coverage .
We negotiate all night , we sometimes exchange fish that are not there and in the end everybody has won .
I do not know what has been won , but everybody claims victory !
I mentioned political flourishes just now .
These do not occur only in third countries , and you understand that as well as I do .
But if we can , together , do more to reduce the drama and even reduce media coverage of the subject , while making it clear that the real issue of the common fisheries policy is in fact to be found elsewhere , that could help us .
That leads me to say something about the future and the way I intend to deal with the debate on the common fisheries policy .
I now intend to set up a kind of task force within DG XIV , not linked to day-to-day management of the fisheries policy but starting from now , that is from 1997 , committed without prejudice and taboos to a new general review taking us to 2002 .
I also think it would be a good idea to begin consultations with the parliamentary sectors concerned , so as to give ourselves plenty of time , and to do this it would be a good thing to have a small task force devoting all its time to this work without having to deal with day-to-day management as well .
Although Mr Nicholson is no longer here , I am sure that he will read over the minutes of this debate and I wish to say to him ' That 's obvious ' .
After all , the Commission along with Parliament and the Fisheries Committee chairman , Mr Arias Cañete , have organized many seminars and debates between the parliamentary sectors , in which many of you have taken part .
It is obvious that neither the chairman nor the Commission can force people to participate , but facilities were provided and the choice was there , and I hope more and more that these opportunities for open debate , almost off the record , will be increasingly accepted .
I return to MAGP-IV just to give some more details .
In suspending aid to the fishing fleet - not all the aid to the fisheries sector - there is no blackmail .
It is automatically a legal result of a shortfall in a MAGP , so there is no blackmail .
I hope , on the contrary , that this can help those among us who consider it necessary to have a MAGP to urge those who do not like it to accept their decisions .
I should point out , as is clearly specified in the agreement , that if a MAGP should be concluded by April aid to the fleets will obviously be restored retrospectively .
If a decision is reached , nothing will be lost since the aid would be restored , but suspension of aid to the fleet is automatic if there is no restructuring plan .
Much has been said about the general lines of the MAGP .
I do not want to go over these again .
Mr Crampton , I am not convinced by your proposal to withdraw MAGP-IV altogether from the distant water fleets which fish in waters of third countries .
Perhaps you made this proposal to provoke us , to make us think about it , but may I say that stocks are at risk not only in our waters , but world-wide and even in the waters of third countries .
We must take care not to find ourselves in a difficult position .
So I take note of your idea but I do not think it is viable at the moment .
Mr Baldarelli asked me what the position is regarding MAGP-III .
I think it is an important prerequisite .
MAGP-III , which ended on 31 December , will be evaluated in April according to the rules , so as to be based on data from member countries .
So if you can help us in getting member countries to send their data quickly and in similar formats , it would enable us to clarify our ideas considerably .
Another word in reply to a group of Members of Parliament , particularly Mr McCartney , Mr McMahon and Mr McCartin , who raised the problem of salmon .
Let me first say again that we must not forget that the most efficient producers of salmon record an increase in productivity of between 5 and 6 % .
It is clear that prices fall when more salmon is produced and when there is an increase in productivity of 5 to 6 % .
The consequences of this are obvious .
An additional factor is that , fairly predictably , the price is once again falling after the Christmas festivities .
We shall see in the next few weeks what happens , but you also know that the minimum price has not been a very efficient measure .
It was more of a political signal .
Lastly , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the real solution to the problem lies in the results of the Committee of Inquiry on measures to combat dumping .
Thus , I would like us to work together to find lasting solutions , even if it means urgently examining what is happening .
I hope I have more or less grouped the replies to the questions put to me .
If I have forgotten anybody , I will send them a reply in writing .
Thank you Mr President , thank you ladies and gentlemen , thank you Mr Arias Cañete .
I think another of your colleagues will be taking over the presidency , but I am pleased with the way we have collaborated , and the way you have collaborated with the Commission .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
Community forestry strategy
The next item is the report ( A4-0414 / 96 ) by Mr Thomas , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on a global Community strategy for the forestry sector .
Mr President , I have great pleasure in presenting today my report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the European Union 's forestry strategy .
I would first like to point out the procedural significance of this report which constitutes an important historical step for the European Parliament .
Article 138b of the Treaty on European Union gives Parliament the right to initiate legislation .
Although this article has indeed been used before for specific measures , this is the first occasion on which it is being used to call for legislation across the entire sector , which is of considerable importance in all Member States and has implications which touch on the employment , economic prospects and future of millions of citizens of the Union .
I am proud to be associated with this step and I shall be very interested to hear from the Commissioner , who is here today , whether the Commission intends to respond positively to this request by Parliament .
Forestry is extremely important in the European Union although , of course , its importance varies in different Member States .
When I was in Finland recently , a forest owner said to me that , for Finland , the forestry industry was as important as the automobile industry is in Germany .
The resolution which the Committee on Agriculture voted for unanimously covers the following points : it stresses the importance of the forestry sector as a source of employment and wealth and points out that the commercial utilization of forests should be a priority .
However , one has to recognize the diversity of European forests ; their multi-functional nature and the need for ecological , economic and social sustainability .
This means that forestry strategy must be based on the principle of subsidiarity .
We have to aim for a clear definition of national policies , setting objectives at national and international level and establishing a link between forest strategy and other policies such as environmental and rural policy .
Quite clearly the European Union and its Member States must respect the resolutions approved under the Rio Declaration and the Helsinki Agreement .
The resolution concentrates on three different aspects : the protection of forests , their utilization and development , and their extension .
As far as protection is concerned , I would like to highlight one important point : the protection of forests against fire .
Every year approximately half-a-million hectares of forest are destroyed by fire .
This is a massive waste of resources which should be tackled by a coordinated programme at Member State , regional and forest-owner level and by action by the European Union .
We need to encourage the utilization of forests not just as a source of timber , but for their environmental and recreational values .
These are not mutually exclusive areas of concern .
There is no reason why the use of timber should not be encouraged , particularly through a coherent quality policy , while at the same time , forests should become an even more valuable resource as a means of recreation for our citizens and because of their environmental value .
We also need to extend and increase forest resources , respecting biodiversity and the traditional landscape and helping to prevent erosion and desertification .
In some parts of the EU it makes sense to promote the sustainable management of agri-forestry systems .
There is also specific action we should take to improve the European forestry inventory , encourage research in forest eco-systems , develop education and training and promote the development of economic and social interests of forests .
The committee is also making proposals to extend the role of the Permanent Forestry Committee so that it becomes the chief instrument in the coordination of forestry matters and , at international level , to coordinate forestry-related concepts more effectively so that they are taken into account in the Union 's general trade policies .
The Commission should submit an effective action plan to combat ecological and social dumping in relation to imports of timber .
Also , the Commission and the Member States should continue to work actively towards an international convention on the protection and sustainability of forest management .
There is also the difficult question of how to agree an international certification system concerning the sustainable management of forests .
Certification should meet the objectives of enhancing - economically , socially and ecologically - the sustainable use of forests .
I hope that I have covered the main aspects of the committee 's proposals .
The committee voted for this report unanimously and I hope that it will receive a large measure of support in Parliament in order to ensure that our voice is heard loud and clear in the Commission .
I would like to hear whether the Commissioner will be making a proposal along the lines suggested .
With regard to the amendments which have been tabled , I would like to remind Members that my priority is to see that a large measure of consensus which was achieved in the Agriculture Committee is preserved .
I am not prepared to accept amendments which upset this balance .
I am , however , accepting some ideas from Members which are useful additions .
I emphasize that - useful additions .
Mr President , I should like to begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteur , David Thomas , who has , in my view , worked long and very effectively on a very important report which gives the view of this House on a sector crucial to the future of the European Union .
When we use Parliament 's legislative initiative , we should do so on very important and special occasions , and there is no doubt that the issue we are today dealing with is one of them .
We are asking the Commission to submit , on the basis of the articles of the Treaty and within two years , a legislative proposal on a forestry strategy for Europe , recognizing the environmental and ecological role of Europe 's forests , in terms of biodiversity and the part they have to play in preventing erosion and desertification and as the most important source of renewable energy Europe has available to it .
And we similarly refer to the economic , silvicultural and commercial use of forests , taking account of the diversity and multi-functional nature of forests and the very different experiences which - particularly in the wake of the enlargement of the European Union - we are now seeing within the Union .
I think that the report is structured around three critical issues : the protection , use and development of forests and their enhancement .
I firmly believe that all three of those elements can play a full part in the new policy for rural development which , following the Cork Conference organized by the Commission , has opened up a wide-ranging debate on the whole of the common agricultural policy .
There were those who described the arguments of Commissioner Fischler at the Cork Conference as a flight of fancy , an utopian view of the future .
But I firmly believe that we have only to think of an issue such as that of the forests to realize that this is not utopian but real and offers a wealth of possibilities .
There is no doubt that we could perhaps have gone further still here in the European Parliament : in the discussions of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , some argued that it was appropriate to talk in terms of a genuine common policy for forests .
I do not myself think it realistic , at present , to think in terms of a common policy for forests with all the trappings of , for example , more traditional common policies such as the CAP .
What we need to do is devise a strategy which properly applies subsidiarity : subsidiarity used not as an excuse for doing nothing but as an opportunity for doing things in a more intelligent and targeted way .
And so , the real issue is not to spend more but to improve coordination of the resources that already exist and those measures in place at national and European level - and , fortunately , there are many of them - designed to make proper use of the forestry heritage of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . We quite rightly recognise that the report before us on a common forestry strategy had a difficult struggle to see the light of day .
And why was that so ?
Allow me to try to offer a constructive explanation .
For many countries forestry represents a vital economic and cultural foundation .
The forestry sector is also undoubtedly one with a future .
Forests and wooded areas cover 41.5 % of the surface area of the European Union , divided over more than 10 million owners , and 2.8 million people are either directly or indirectly dependent on the forestry sector .
And so it is easy to understand why forests arouse so much passion in the debate .
The result is here for all to see .
That is why I would like to express my warmest thanks to all who have cooperated in producing this acceptable compromise .
I think that this is expressed in the unanimous decision in the Committee on Agriculture .
Let me draw attention to another positive aspect .
Parliament took the initiative in this case .
It is only through this kind of undertaking , I think , that we shall strengthen the role of the European Parliament in the early stages of the debate .
We as Members of this House should ever bear that in mind .
Some points in this report merit particular attention in my view , particular from the Austrian angle , which is of course very close to my own .
Austria has 3.87 million hectares of wooded area of which 86 % is managed .
Some 250 , 000 persons depend either directly or indirectly on the forestry sector or work in it .
The main roles of forests is defined as their economic utilisation and their value in environmental and leisure terms .
I think it important that these roles are seen as a whole .
I think it would be a mistake to equate economic utilisation with exploiting natural resources .
Only planned and particularly sustainable management can guarantee the ecological balance of forests in the long term .
And to ensure this economic balance in the forests we must have responsible hunting .
Forest management is of prime importance for mountain areas in particular , which are well known to suffer from neglect in other agriculture management .
Wood has become a basic element as a raw material , a work material and also as a source of energy .
An increase in the use of biomass , as we hope for , will certainly lead to a greater demand for wood .
There is no need for me to dwell on the many other varied uses of wood .
But one thing is clear : wood , as a renewable raw material , is a product which we must value more .
The question immediately arises of expanding forestry resources .
And here we must make a clear distinction between those areas where afforestation is sensible or necessary and those where it should only be considered as a last resort to manage rural areas .
It goes without saying that we should reforest in order to prevent erosion or protect woods .
But caution is needed in areas where natural landscapes would be altered .
Our guiding principle should continue to be , not afforestation , but the preservation of wooded areas .
We all know that throughout the EU , with the exception of Greece , forest expansion is greater than depletion .
I think that the report takes proper account of fire protection , use of pesticides and the biological resources of the forests .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope that you will vote in favour of this compromise for a common forestry strategy in the EU .
Mr President , it is not easy to venture into the issue of Europe 's forests without running the risk of getting hopelessly lost .
Congratulations are therefore first due to the rapporteur who , following exhausting efforts to reach a compromise through a tangle of amendments , managed to emerge with a number of basic proposals on which we shall be able to work in the future .
This was a difficult report because there are many aspects to this issue , just as the forests of Europe are many and varied in nature : they range from the birch forest of Finland to the eucalyptus forest of Portugal and the palms of the Canaries .
There are therefore general principles that have to be taken into account , such as , for instance , the first paragraph of Section A , which refers to management , which needs to be applied to the lowest level . This means applying the principle of subsidiarity in the action taken , going so far as to assign direct personal responsibility to the landowner for protecting and using his forestry resources .
In the second paragraph of that same Section ( A ) , there is , however , a contradiction , since general criteria for use of forests are proposed , whereas differing criteria are needed .
The forests of central and northern Europe cannot be used in the same way as the Alpine forests , nor as the Mediterranean maquis , with the presence of man resulting not only in the use of forests to obtain wood but in tourism and recreational activity , triggering different problems , beginning with hydrogeological protection of the land .
One principle that has to be established concerns the property rights of those who own forest , but also the right of local people to intervene in instances where , either because of a lack of resources or because of a failure to cultivate them properly , neglect results in damage to forests .
In cases of that kind , it is appropriate to earmark specific aid for that purpose .
All forms of coordination and association between owners have also to be encouraged , as is stated in paragraph 12 which refers to increasing forest resources .
It is right to encourage owners to exchange information and discuss their experiences as well as to promote forms of training and advice for forest managers and workers and , above all , farmers who have day-to-day experience of what is happening in the forests and should become their indirect controllers and custodians .
The Standing Forestry Committee has a crucial role to play here : we need to place our faith in it and it needs to be organized as a real task force that is dynamic and able to take a broad range of action .
If we are to do this , we have to be resolute in tackling the last chapter of the report which discusses the issue of funding .
We need to undertake a serious study of the means of action based on a clear system of priorities : first , to safeguard forests and genetic resources ; secondly , there has to be a European forestry register , diversified criteria for use , clear rules , technical assessment and protection from dangers .
The lesson is that the forests cannot become either a resource for the wood industry or a natural park from which man is completely excluded : man has to become both the promoter and user of forests but , above all , shoulder responsibility for the survival of forests .
The debate will now be suspended , to resume at 3 p.m.
We now proceed to the votes .
Statement by the President
Before we start the voting , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express the satisfaction of the European Parliament at the signing of the Hebron Agreement by Mr Benjamin Netanyahu , Head of the Israeli Government , and Mr Yasser Arafat , President of the Palestinian Council .

This Agreement , approved by the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Council , is an important step towards peace and restores hope that the Oslo process will be initiated again , as called for repeatedly by the European Parliament .
I think we can congratulate ourselves because , at least according to the agency news , the intervention of the European Union , through the appointed mediator , contributed to a successful outcome to these discussions .
I think I speak for all of you when I say that .
( Applause )
Votes
Mr President , my group considers the time allocated to us on Monday for this important motion for a resolution is too short .
That is why we shall abstain in the vote , but it does not mean that we do not approve of this resolution and the gist of its content .
Thank you very much , Mr Hänsch .
May I suggest that perhaps the most appropriate course would have been an explanation after the vote rather than a point of order , as you know .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mrs Jackson , during voting in this House it is customary for group officers covering the report in question - and therefore a maximum of one person per group - to be seated beside the person who is taking the decision on behalf of the group .
So unless there is a change in the Rules of Procedure - which do not say anything on this - I think this practice should be maintained to facilitate the progress of the votes for the benefit of all .
Other people should not be here , of course .
Mr President , the Dublin summit has , we are told , won a major victory : agreement on the main elements of the stability pact which should bind participating countries to the single currency .
But when we look more closely at it , this great victory appears very dubious .
Let us read the final communiqué from the European Council .
After expressing satisfaction about the so-called agreement , it sends the implementing texts back to the Ecofin Council not to be signed but , I quote , ' to be carefully examined ' , which means in plain language that the European Council has serious misgivings about certain points .
Moreover , it invites Finance Ministers to prepare for the Amsterdam Council , and therefore in June 1997 , a draft resolution which , again I quote , ' will record the commitment of Member States , the Commission and the Council to apply the stability agreement rigorously ' .
By dissecting the communiqué , we thus discover that behind the grand declarations there was in reality no commitment , no signature to an overall commitment .
There were two reasons for that .
First , since the stability pact was not explicitly provided for in the Maastricht Treaty , lawyers are experiencing great difficulties in including such an ambitious construction in the existing rather sketchy provisions .
If they do not succeed in this , which seems likely to me , it will be necessary to go back to the various nations to modify the Treaty and perhaps even to alter constitutions , particularly in Germany and France .
In addition , there has not yet been any decision over the two opposing concepts of the stability pact .
Is it to be a simple agreement for the proper functioning of the single currency between countries quite close to each other , or will it be aiming at forced convergence between very different countries not forming a truly optimum monetary zone ?
In other words , what would be better : a Europe divided into two or a Europe subjected to a compulsory bureaucratic convergence ?
This is the dilemma into which the single currency has locked us today .
We cannot vote for the resolution as , in many respects , it goes against our own and , above all , our voter 's views of the future structure of the EU .
We do not believe that the introduction of the EMU will promote growth or employment .
Nor do we think it desirable that the EU should take on increased powers in Foreign or Security policy .
We believe that each and every one of the EU Member States should have a free and independent vote in international cooperation .
The most important task for the EU at the moment is to bring about enlargement to the East .
The problems with EU agricultural and regional policies must be resolved as soon as possible so that we can accommodate the new Member States .
Much has already been written on ( and about ) the Irish presidency , its high standard , the Dublin summit , its positive results for the euro , but there is not much about institutions ... not to mention unemployment .
I will not return to this in detail other than to congratulate the Irish government and to encourage the Dutch presidency which is now beginning .
While noting in my turn the oddities of history which , after closely linking the Netherlands with the Maastricht Treaty , now once again makes the same country responsible for a fundamental monetary and institutional phase of the Treaty , I wish today to pay tribute to the quality of the work done by small countries in the European entente .
Although I am personally in favour of an institutional reform that would question the six-monthly change of presidency , which does not allow long enough to govern properly ( what would we say today about a country that changed its government every six months ? ) , that does not mean that new and longer presidencies would necessarily suit the big countries .
The experience of the last few years , including that of Ireland whom I congratulate once again , shows the commitment and the dependability of the European work carried out by smaller countries compared with that of larger ones ... who very often ' still believe themselves to be at the centre of the world ' when they do not still think of themselves as ' great powers ' ...
There are of course exceptions ... but as a Frenchman I know what I am talking about .
We have a whole series of objections to the motion for a resolution before us , particularly with reference to the passages on the WTO Conference .
The WTO Conference in Singapore was not a ' complete success ' , as the Commission continually claims in its official reports .
The Commission justifies its claim that it was a ' huge international success ' ( to quote Sir Leon Brittan in his final press statement of 13.12 1996 ) by constantly citing the agreement in the sphere of information technologies ( OTA ) , the progress in negotiations on telecommunications and the understanding within part of the quad group on customs reductions for spirits and other alcoholic beverages .
Apart from the fact that the latter is only indirectly to do with the WTO Conference , and apart from the questionable consequences on public health of price cuts for whisky , rum , cognac or gin , I wonder whether the progress in negotiations in the fields of information technologies and telecommunications will really be advantageous to the citizens of Europe , to European consumers .
It is more than doubtful whether it will lead to further substantial price reductions for computer software and the like .
It is precisely in my capacity as Parliament 's rapporteur on ' Trade and the Environment ' that I must unfortunately conclude that the Singapore Conference was an unadulterated failure .
Parliament 's decisions prior to the WTO Conference were completely ignored ; hardly any part of our demands are to be found in the final declaration .
Singapore has not brought any progress at all for the environment !
I agree with Mr Carlos Pimenta that the Conference was a failure and the WTO Committee on Trade and the Environment ( CTE ) has failed .
The CTE has proved itself incapable of coming to any kind of concrete results in the two years of its work .
Despite its failure - or perhaps we might suspect precisely because of it - to secure environmental protection in world trade , the CTE has had its mandate renewed for a further two years .
On ' Social Standards ' Singapore was also a flop .
Here too no institutional advance was made .
Sir Leon is not exactly famous for his affection for trade union matters , but here the problem lies first and foremost with the Council .
The governments in London and Bonn in particular acted disgracefully as a brake before the conference , and when you hear what the German Economics Minister , Mr Rexrodt , said in Singapore then you know that so long as such people are in the national governments then there will not be the slightest bit of social progress in world trade .
It is shameful that the EU did not protest more strongly when the Director General of the ILO , Michel Hansenne , had his invitation to speak at the WTO Conference withdrawn , under pressure from some countries .
The WTO Conference also failed in matters of transparency and NGO participation .
Demonstrations were banned in Singapore during the WTO Conference .
There were no official channels for NGOs to make their concerns and expertise known to the negotiating delegations .
Important meetings took place in the most intimate composition , even ministers from some third world countries were denied access to these meeting rooms .
The NGOs protested strongly in Singapore against the obstacles to their work and thrust a protest declaration into Sir Leon 's hand .
When you hear him speak now you are convinced that he never read it .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbaek ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) In contrast to the majority in Parliament , we think that the Irish presidency 's draft framework for an amendment of the Treaty is a move in totally the wrong direction .
Although important institutional issues - including the scope of majority decisions , the rules of flexibility , changes in the weighting of votes in the Council , the role of the Commission and its composition - have still not been clarified in any detail , the aims of the Irish presidency are quite clear .
The aim is for more supranational decisions and a strengthening of the EU 's federal operating bodies at the expense of the Member States .
This will lead to a considerable loss of democracy .
For the foreseeable future , it is activity at national level which will guarantee the democratic legitimacy which our people find acceptable .
The strong bias in the draft framework towards supranationality in Foreign and Defence policy and the proposal to transfer important parts of the cooperation on Justice and Home Affairs to the First Pillar is also ill thought out .
This weakens and in some instances neutralises interparliamentary and interstate cooperation .
As Scandinavian opponents to the Union we can also state that the ' core issues ' from the Scandinavian countries , openness and the environment have so far met with minimal success .
We are also disappointed in the weak nature of the Inter Governmental Conference which has not dared to make the link between employment issues and the unemployment creating effects of the EMU project .
The seemingly bitter criticism of the Inter Governmental Conference put forward in the resolution principally expresses a desperate need on the side of the European Parliament to appropriate greater power for their own purpose and to increase the demand for a central superpower in Europe .
We have , it seems , many valid reasons for rejecting the resolution .
An important event during the Irish presidency was the first WTO Ministerial Conference held in Singapore in December .
Although expectations were not all that high prior to the start of this conference , the outcome may be deemed surprising .
It is after all quite something to get 128 countries backing one declaration .
The main result of Singapore is perhaps that it strengthened the position of the WTO .
A stable and effective multilateral trading system is of great importance for settling trade disputes and placing international trade within a framework of social and ecological rules .
Although no great progress was made in Singapore on the liberalization of trade , it is clear that the benefits of free world trade will grow in the next few decades .
The agreement to abolish the tariffs on trade in information technology products in the year 2000 is an important step .
Trade in information technology involving computers , telecommunications and electronic goods is one of the fastest growing sectors of the world market .
But less ambitious results were achieved in the area of government procurement and trade in services and liberalization here will be more difficult .
It is less sure that the outcome of the Singapore conference will bring as much advantage to the developing world .
Fortunately a clash between rich and poor nations was avoided by the decision that the ILO is the only organization in which the question of social standards can be dealt with and that trade measures are not the right way to impose these standards .
As far as the very poorest countries are concerned , we wish that the Dutch proposal to abolish trade tariffs for these countries had been accepted .
Regrettably the idea of proposing an action plan for the least developed countries , which would also include this measure , is a very informal one .
Because countries are free to act on the proposal or not , as they wish .
It is regrettable that there was no discussion in Singapore of trade and environment and the final communiqué contains no clear agreement about the relationship between the two .
Rules to protect the environment must be adopted in the WTO on the basis of consensus .
The WTO Committee on Trade and Environment will need to make clear recommendations on this in the near future .
Otherwise it is very likely that the inclusion of environment policy in the WTO will be put on the back burner .
To sum up : it is good that the Singapore conference strengthened the authority of the WTO .
A lot more will have to be done at WTO level to combine policy on the environment , social standards and development policy to further liberalization .
So we were happy to endorse the paragraphs of the joint motion for a resolution concerning the outcome of the Singapore conference .
I should like in this House to quote Paul Billings , chairman of the Irish National Organisation of the Unemployed , who said in December at the meeting of the ' European Network of the Unemployed ' in Ennis :
' Europe 's unemployed argued against the Maastricht Treaty because it failed to present any commitment to tackle the plight of the jobless .
Since Maastricht , unemployment has soared throughout the EU .
We have witnessed a massive widening of the gap between rich and poor .
And now , as Governments attempt to meet the Convergence Criteria for monetary union , welfare and social budgets are being slashed .
Europe 's unemployed are no longer prepared to be sacrificed in the name of a more ' advanced union ' .
We are demanding that full employment be made the central goal of the new Treaty .
The Irish Government , during its presidency of the EU , is in a prime position to ensure that this demand is acted upon .
Without such a commitment , Europe will continue to sustain unacceptable levels of unemployment , leading to rising problems of crime , drug abuse , poor health , racism and social disorder .
We know that countries which achieve low levels of unemployment have two things in common : a widespread commitment to full employment and institutions to put this commitment into practice . '
I should , however , like to add another , more specific consideration , coming from a colleague in one of the big groups who did not dare to speak his mind here .
( DE ) Flexibility has been planned as a fall back position of the currency position .
Flexibility , however , should not be allowed to become one of the principles of integration .
At the most it may remain an exception .
It may only solve some transitional problems which are limited in both time and content .
And at the same time it must contain aid for Member States willing but not yet able to participate .
It must enable these countries to participate .
( EN ) This man is also quite right .
It makes me doubtful about our internal workings that this colleague has found it necessary to use this channel of communication for his dissent.- Revision of the Treaties ( B4-0040 / 97 )
We are totally opposed to the idea of increased use of the qualified majority voting for Third Pillar matters .
This and the proposed operational capacity of Europol is not the cooperation between free states which we joined on January 1st 1995 .
We do not think that transferring these matters to supranational level will lead to any increase in efficiency .
We consider that every Member State must retain their right of veto in matters of Common Foreign and Security policy , CFSP .
This is why we cannot vote for the resolution on this issue .
Integration of the Western European Union into the EU goes against Sweden 's policy of neutrality and cannot be accepted .
Sweden , together with other neutral countries are not members of the WEU which must make integration of these two independent organisations impossible in practice .
Our fundamental view that the EU is a cooperation between free states stands in sharp contrast to this resolution making it impossible for us to vote in favour of it .
Oomen-Ruijten report ( A4-0009 / 97 )
I am very glad that common sense has prevailed on this directive .
I was instrumental in seeking amendments to it in Parliament and I am glad to see that the spirit of these is reflected in the final text .
I hope that Parliament will support it without amendment .
In my view it gives the European consumer effective protection without at the same time introducing conditions on distance sales which would be so onerous that consumers would find it difficult to make purchases at a distance .
In particular , I welcome the fact that the directive 's provisions on prior information and cancellation rights will not apply to the booking of taxis , hotels , theatre tickets etc .
If the rules of the directive had applied here , it would have brought the European Union into disrepute and ridicule , without benefiting consumers .
Similarly , I am glad that the directive has been amended to enable flower delivery services such as by Interflora and other gift delivery services to continue to provide a same-day service .
I do not regret that the directive does not deal with financial services .
It would have been hopelessly complicated to try to tack financial services on to a directive which was not originally aimed at them .
Certainly there remains a lot to do to ensure that European consumers do have effective protection ( other than their own common sense ) in terms of financial services purchased at a distance , and I am glad that the Commission is now examining this matter .
Roth-Behrendt report ( A4-0006 / 97 )
We Swedish Social Democrats wish to express our doubts on the compromise proposal under consideration .
It is obvious to us that consumers should be able to make their own choice based on a well established system of labelling .
Use of the system proposed in this compromise would not enable the consumer to make a conscious choice .
The fact that novel food will only be labelled if it differs from natural food in a way which can be scientifically proven minimises the responsibility of the producer .
We consider it to be wrong to place full responsibility on European institutions instead .
The system will lead to the spread of approved genetically modified foodstuffs which are not labelled .
The system ought to be based on the principle of caution , which means that new products should not be permitted if they constitute a risk .
If there is to be no comprehensive labelling system either , we feel that the consumer will be left without any real influence over his own consumption of genetically modified food .
Despite our reservations , we are voting in favour of the compromise because the alternative is to continue with an unregulated market .
This would be even more serious from the consumer 's point of view .
After a long process due to the disagreement between the European Parliament and the Commission and Council , which required the convening of a Conciliation Committee , the European Parliament has approved the proposal relating to novel foods and novel food ingredients .
Novel foods ( which are no longer equivalent to existing products ) and ' genetically modified ' foods must be ' labelled ' to provide consumers in the European Union with as detailed information as possible .
This new Regulation is needed to face up to the globalization of the economy : Member States must avail themselves of the same regulations on labelling so that no confusion can arise over products coming particularly from the USA where genetic engineering in the food industry is already well advanced .
This compulsory European Regulation for marketing novel foods and food ingredients is very positive .
It provides better safety as regards genetically modified foods .
The BEUC ( the European Bureau of Consumers ' Unions ) has congratulated the European Parliament , which has been much more demanding about labelling than the Council , and I wish in my turn to thank and congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt for her work .
The BEUC also approves the ' obligation for the Commission to monitor the impact of the regulation on the health , protection and information of consumers ' .
However , the regulation must be supplemented by an obligation to label genetically modified seeds and raw materials .
Once again , the European Parliament has demonstrated the value of its contribution to the introduction of first-class European legislation .
We are voting against the Conciliation Committee 's joint draft of the European Parliament and Council Regulation on novel food and food ingredients .
The joint draft has serious shortcomings with regard to the labelling of products from genetically modified soya , maize and sugar beet and of food additives produced with the help of genetically modified organisms .
The draft does not require labelling of these foodstuffs .
We consider that consumers have an inviolable right to know and be able to take responsibility for what they are eating , particularly as the long term effects of genetically modified foodstuffs are difficult to predict .
The Standing Committee on Food which will assist the Commission in the decision on novel food does not have the necessary expertise to be able to evaluate the ecological risks which can result from the unrestricted release of novel food onto the market .
What is more , there is to be no transparency in the decision making process nor will there be participation by consumer or environmental organisations .
The rapporteur stated that the resolution is better than being completely without legal regulations in this area .
Of course we want clear rules but they must be based on human and environmental needs to a greater extent than this proposal allows , which is why we are voting against the joint draft .
I am going to vote for the result from the Conciliation Committee on novel foods .
I shall vote in favour of this Directive since genetically modified foods will then carry a distinctive label in future .
The great majority of the press and consumers ' associations have also described the result obtained by the European Parliament at the Conciliation Committee as a great success !
In this matter , I am against the Greenpeace campaign which , far from responding to the detailed arguments I put forward at the same time as the Group of the Party of European Socialists , continues to describe the compromise obtained by the European Parliament as insufficient .
The arguments of Greenpeace turn out to be partly mistaken and do not take into account the interests of European consumers .
For this reason , I have sent to Greenpeace and all the media a precise and detailed five-page reply to the arguments put forward by the environmental organization .
Thus , it is claimed that ' the compromise on novel foods constitutes an obstacle to any stronger national legislation ' .
Now , this objection completely ignores the fact that , within the European internal market , the principle of freedom of movement guarantees the free marketing of products .
No national legislation ( even if it should exist in the fifteen Member States , which is unlikely ) , can be any better than an EU Regulation based on this compromise .
In general , Luxembourg socialists , who are sympathetic to the position taken by Greenpeace , sincerely believe that it is best to work towards a legal situation to protect consumers by voting for the compromise , when its rejection would create a legal vacuum both at European level and in some Member States , which would be harmful to the health and safety of consumers .
Of course , the compromise is not perfect .
But it is better to start creating a Regulation , even if it means perfecting it later on , than to reject it and having to start all over again from scratch !
Thus , contrary to what Greenpeace claims , we are not going against the wishes of consumers in Luxembourg nor against the resolution passed in December against genetically modified soya .
On the contrary , we are fully aware of our responsibility to protect the health of consumers .
The compromise reached by Parliament and Council sets the seal on a more than six-year long legislative process with a very chequered path , one which was followed closely and contentiously by consumer organisations , the public and the press .
In the light of political and social circumstances the resulting compromise is a good one .
The food industry in particular needs this regulation , not so much for practical , scientifically documented reasons as for political reasons .
It needs a secure legal foundation in the debate with politicians , administrations , consumers and the public .
If the European regulation were to fail then there would be a risk of re-nationalisation with serious restrictions on competition for the food industry .
The only genuinely genetically modified foodstuff ready for marketing is still the ' FlavrSavr Tomato ' ( USA ) .
A tomato puree from a similar tomato correspondingly labelled was successfully introduced into Britain this spring .
Genetic engineering is playing an increasing role in agricultural useful plants , albeit principally through changes to the agronomic qualities more than changes to the products themselves .
With the genetically modified soya seeds used this year in the USA for food production we have seen the first genetically modified plant raw goods arrive in Europe .
Some 40 further genetically modified plants will follow in the coming years .
Almost 1 , 000 outdoor experiments are being carried out with corn varieties alone ; genetically modified corn was admitted in December in the EU .
But genetic engineering has not just now begun in the production of foodstuffs with the introduction of the new soya bean , but it has been here for some time , albeit without influencing the products themselves .
The most important areas of application of genetic engineering as far as foodstuffs are concerned are to be found in plant breeding .
Allergens have already been successfully removed from rice and they are working on more nutritious ingredients such as the fatty acid content and on ingredients more suited to processing , such as starch composition .
More and more encouraging results are to be expected in these fields .
There are already potato and rapeseed varieties which have been altered in their composition ; they are nearly ready to be marketed in Europe .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt writes in her report that there is no doubt that the novel foods open up a series of interesting perspectives . Yet consumers are still worried that they could even pose a hazard to human health and the environment .
And that is precisely why I think the adoption of this regulation is very important as it regulates both the authorization and the labelling of new kinds of foods .
It does strike me as a pharmacist , however , that this is the first time that we find ourselves having to authorise foodstuffs like medicines ; this kind of compulsory authorization is something new .
All foodstuffs which are being marketed for the first time , even those which have not been genetically modified or produced by means of genetically modified organisms , now come under this regulation and must be authorised .
If , for example , kiwis were not known in Europe then they would have to be subject to these rules and receive authorization , just like medicines , before they could be marketed .
Where should the line be drawn for the requirements of this regulation ?
Are we moving towards a time when all food will have to be accompanied by an information leaflet ?
Any foodstuffs which contain or consist of genetically modified organisms must be labelled as such .
In addition under the new regulation there must be a label on all foodstuffs which in their composition , nutritious characteristics or application are not equivalent to usual or established products and where labelling is necessary for ethical or health reasons .
This lack of ' equivalence ' must be determined through a scientific assessment in which changes coming within the natural fluctuations are disregarded .
This differentiation meets the demands of the cropper and the foodstuffs monitoring authority for a practical solution and the consumer is also adequately protected and informed .
A particular circumstance can only be labelled if it can actually be proved in the end product .
This regulation meets the requirements for truth and clarity .
The compromise has yet to be assessed for its detailed effect , to ensure that it meets the requirement of the European legislator that it is proper for present and future situations .
Labelling products , however , will not provide the consumer with anything more than an indication that genetic technology was used in the production of the goods and the changes that its use has produced .
In addition to this we shall have to inform the consumer of the background and the significance of the procedures used so that he is given reassurance .
It is only through well founded explanations that we can combat hysteria and ease the way for novel food on to the European market .
Consumers are turning against genetically modified foodstuffs on a massive scale .
But genetically modified foods are still on their way to Europe from the USA .
No political force will prevent that from happening .
That is why the political campaign is being directed towards health and environmental assessments and rules on labelling .
In general terms , the right wing does not wish to ' put obstacles in the way ' of industry , whilst the social democrats instinctively base their stance on the attitude of consumers .
We wish to have extensive labelling rules for products which get through the health and environmental assessments .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt should be commended on the impressive result which she has achieved through the conciliation procedure .
She really has secured as much as possible from the basis on which we went into the negotiations .
There must be no risks for consumers , they must not be misled , and novel foods must not have a lower nutritional value .
Parliament has forced through the requirement that all modified foodstuffs are to be labelled , and prevented an exception for plants which are resistant to chemical sprays .
Bulk consignments which may contain genetically modified organisms are to be labelled .
In this way , feed companies , farmers , abattoirs and the retail trade can make a choice .
We cannot yet be sure , by sending a pâté to a laboratory for tests , whether the pig from which the liver pâté was produced was fed on genetically modified soya beans .
But consumers wish to know that .
The regulation does indeed say that it should be possible to identify genetic modifications , and techniques for detection are being developed all the time .
However , the retail sector must take care that its customers do not come to feel deceived , if it wishes to remain in the market .
When we adopted the rules on the irradiation of foodstuffs , the technique for detecting it had not been developed .
It has been in the meantime , and we have the same hopes with regard to novel foods .
I have heard farmers complaining about feed having to be labelled as to whether it is genetically modified , but surely farmers do not buy feed without knowing its nutritional value ?
Surely they should be aware of a production method which can influence sales ?
The novel foods regulation is essential , because it is the only option at present .
This regulation can only be of benefit , as opposed to an internal market with no rules at all .
It is too naive to think that the absence of EU rules will lead to 15 excellent national regimes .
After 13 redrafts by the Commission and three readings in this House , the novel food regulation remains a deeply flawed piece of legislation .
Although it is put forward as a consumer protection measure , it contains too many loopholes , exceptions and restrictions to be an acceptable means of regulating the new gene foods as they come on to the market .
Many categories of foodstuffs produced with the aid of gene technology will be regulated under other legislation or not at all .
Others will simply require a notification by the manufacturers to the Commission at the same time that they are placed on the market , with no independent safety or environmental assessments .
Only where the food contains a living genetically modified organism will the regulation apply in full .
This category would cover raw fruit and vegetables , some dairy products like yoghurt and some beers but not very much else .
Even for these products , there will be no long term independent health and safety assessments .
Consumers are entitled to clear and consistent information to enable them to make informed choices .
The most damning aspect of this regulation is that no-one can say in advance which products will carry a label .
A coherent system should be one which provides quite simply that all foods produced using gene technology will be labelled .
The procedure foreseen in the legislation means that the Commission will have exclusive powers to decide on a case-bycase basis whether consumers will be informed and what the label will say .
There is to be no Public Register of approved gene foods , so the transparency provisions currently in force under Directive 90 / 220 will disappear .
Bulk shipments of mixed conventional and modified food crops such as soya and maize have been sanctioned by the regulation , further weakening the scope for responsible supermarkets to offer their customers a choice .
In those cases where these are to be labelled , it will be an almost meaningless statement that the product may contain genetically modified material .
Austria , Denmark , the Netherlands and the UK all have stronger legislation in the pipeline or voluntary schemes already in existence .
As this is an EU regulation entering directly into force in Member States , they will have no opportunity to enact stricter safeguards .
There are no provisions in the law to govern the export of gene foods from EU territory which means that these may be shipped overseas without a licence or any labelling .
For these reasons , we voted against the adoption of the joint text .
This report is incomplete .
There are far too many loopholes , exceptions and restrictions to be an acceptable means of regulating ' novel food ' .
Only food containing live genetically modified organisms will be adequately regulated .
The consumer must be able to make a free , individual choice on which food they want to buy and consume .
This means that they need to know exactly what they are buying and this is achieved by means of clear labelling on the product .
There is no proposal for a joint register of approved genetically modified foodstuffs either .
Many Member States such as Denmark , Sweden , Austria and Great Britain already have or are planning stricter legislation or voluntary agreements .
As this Directive , if approved , will come into force immediately and will supersede national legislation , it could lead to a lowering of standards and security and consequently a reduction in consumer protection in many Member States .
Nor is there any ban , regulation or control on genetically modified foodstuffs which may be exported from the EU to other countries .
These are the reasons why I have voted against the report .
After thirteen redrafts by the Commission and three readings in this House , the novel food regulation remains a deeply flawed piece of legislation .
Although it is put forward as a consumer protection measure , it contains too many loopholes , exceptions and restrictions to be an acceptable means of regulating the new gene foods as they come on to the market .
Many categories of foodstuffs produced with the aid of gene technology will be regulated under other legislation or not at all .
Others will simply require a notification by the manufacturers to the Commission at the same time as they are placed on the market , with no independent safety or environmental assessments .
Only where the food contains a living genetically modified organism will the regulation apply in full .
This category would cover raw fruit and vegetables , some dairy products like yoghurt and some beers but not very much else .
Even for these products , there will be no long-term independent health and safety assessments .
Consumers are entitled to clear and consistent information to enable them to make informed choices .
The most damning aspect of this regulation is that no-one can say in advance which products will carry a label .
A coherent system should be one which provides quite simply that all foods produced using gene technology will be labelled .
The procedure foreseen in the legislation means that the Commission will have exclusive powers to decide on a case-bycase basis whether consumers will be informed and what the label will say .
There is to be no Public Register of approved gene foods so the transparency provisions currently in force under Directive 90 / 220 will disappear .
Bulk shipments of mixed conventional and modified food crops such as soya and maize have been sanctioned by the regulation , further weakening the possibility for responsible supermarkets to offer their customers a choice .
In those cases where these are to be labelled , it will be an almost meaningless statement that the product may contain genetically modified material .
Austria , Denmark , Netherlands and the UK all have stronger legislation in the pipeline or voluntary schemes already in existence .
As this is an EU regulation entering directly into force in Member States , they will have no opportunity to enact stricter safeguards .
There is no provision in the law to govern the export of gene foods from EU territory which means that these may be shipped overseas without a licence or any labelling .
For these reasons I voted against the adoption of the joint text .
We have just approved the regulation on novel foods .
This represents progress in the area of preventive health measures and consumer protection .
For questions relating to public health we rely on the Scientific Committee on Food .
We have no reason to doubt the committee 's professionalism or objectivity .
But the findings of the temporary committee of inquiry into BSE suggest that caution is advisable .
Both the membership of the Scientific Committee and the free availability of its opinion and what the Commission does with it are vitally important .
In yesterday 's committee of inquiry we welcomed Commission President Santer 's intention regarding the scientific committees .
We expect these intentions to be translated into decisions , with a view too to the implementation of this regulation .
Peijs report ( A4-0004 / 97 )
We are very positive about the proposed Directive as it will improve the quality of cross border payments and it is a prerequisite for the orderly functioning of the internal market .
But we consider that the Directive would have been even more satisfactory if no limit had been placed on the pay back guarantee to the customer in the event that the transfer of credit does not take place .
We also consider that the time limit allowed for the transaction should not exceed 12 months .
Ladies and gentlemen . Transfers from one Member State to another in the European Union is still a lengthy and expensive business .
European citizens and in particular small and medium-sized companies find the difficulties involved not simply annoying but in some cases also extremely expensive .
The European single market is not yet a fact of life in this sphere .
Meanwhile some banks in border regions have introduced cost-saving methods of transfer .
Giro systems which should lead to quicker and cheaper money transfers within the European Union are being set up .
I am confident that fair competition between the cross-border transfer systems leads to better , more favourable supply .
The present proposal for a directive on cross-border transfers has very definite repercussions on citizens ' everyday life in Europe .
Our objective was to make cross-border transfers quicker , cheaper and more reliable .
I welcome the joint draft before us which represents an excellent solution .
From the first reading in May 1995 to today we represented Parliament 's view in intensive discussions and negotiations and I believe we have made a considerable improvement on the original proposal in the citizen 's interests .
One example of what I mean is the scope of application of the directive where our upper limit of ECU 50 , 000 was finally accepted in place of the original ECU 30 , 000 .
I think this is particularly important since a series of transactions of small and medium-sized firms now come under this directive .
Another important amendment dealt with the credit advice of transfer amounts to the mandator if they had not reached the beneficiary for any reason .
Up to ECU 10 , 000 was to be credited back to the mandator under the Council 's common position .
We finally managed to have this amount increased to ECU 12 , 500 .
Even although this is well below what Parliament originally asked for I nevertheless believe that we can accept it in view of what we have achieved elsewhere .
The case of cross-border transfers is to my mind a clear example of the significance and success of the co-decision procedure .
We have seen here that we can achieve a great deal if we enter negotiations with clear objectives .
Incidentally I would like to point out that with the introduction of a common currency the importance of the subject will inevitably wane , with the exception of various legal points .
In conclusion I wish to thank everyone involved for their hard work which has led to this agreement which is satisfactory to all concerned .
I believe that this has overcome another hurdle and taken another step closer to the European single market .
Medina Ortega recommendation ( A4-0415 / 96 )
On behalf of the French socialist group , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , for the excellent work he has done .
Mr Medina has produced this important report unassisted .
On the whole , I believe he has found adequate formulae for the protection of personal data in the telecommunications sector .
We have had a few difficulties with the second reading amendments .
In France , we have a red list system which effectively protects the identity of subscribers wanting this facility in return for a modest fee .
On this point , we fear that the proposed free service will weaken the protection of subscribers .
The experience of certain States who use this system is not encouraging .
We are also concerned by the problem of identification during incoming calls .
In some cases ( SOS AIDS or SOS Battered Wives for example ) , it is vital that the anonymity of the caller is protected .
We think the proposed provisions are inadequate .
A solution to these problems could have been found in the context of the subsidiarity principle .
The amendments dismiss the application of the principle for reasons I do not share .
As a result , we could not vote for some of the amendments proposed at second reading .
As everyone knows , the purpose of this proposal for a directive is to guarantee free movement of telecommunications data , services and equipment and the achievement of this aim has been aided by the amendments presented by the European Parliament at first reading , which have been taken into account . However , it would be desirable to limit the Member States ' margin of manoeuvre by virtue of the principle of subsidiarity , because the telecommunications sector is essentially transnational .
It is likewise important to guarantee that the protection of data and privacy in telecommunications services costs subscribers nothing .
We support the amendments maintaining that harmonization of telecommunications does not lend itself to the principle of subsidiarity because of the essentially transnational character of telecommunications networks and services , and that , in any case , such harmonization will have to guarantee that no obstacles are put in the way of promotion and development of new telecommunications services and new networks between Member States .
We are also in favour of promoting cooperation between the Member States , the providers and users affected and the Community authorities for the establishment and development of technologies which are necessary to apply the guarantees laid down in the provisions of this directive .
The amendments which guarantee that the protection of data and privacy in telecommunications services do not cost subscribers anything are very important .
Operators should not be allowed to demand payment from subscribers for guaranteeing respect for the right to privacy .
We agree that the protection of privacy must be free .
In short , our group is in favour of the majority of the amendments adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on the common position of the Council , as this initially involved regulating the issue of protection of personal data and privacy in telecommunications without leaving it to arbitrary decisions of private companies .
More specifically we support the positive aspects of this proposal like the interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity in a way that limits Member States ' margin of manoeuvre in the telecommunications sector because of its essentially transnational character and the defence of the principle of free protection of privacy .
Kerr report ( A4-0367 / 96 )
The Danish social democrats support the rapporteur 's rejection of the change in the definition of the concept of ' transfers ' .
Changing the definition would involve the risk of a substantial reduction in employees ' rights .
We are naturally opposed to that .
It cannot be right that employees should have to pay because a business changes hands .
We are pleased that this report has been adopted at last .
It was a difficult struggle , and the careless Swedish translation was just the last straw . Mr Kerr proved himself a successful go-between here .
The rapporteur has introduced relevant clarifications and improvements on the Commission 's proposals on the unsolved legal questions , the term ' transition ' and the increasing practice of ' outsourcing ' ; in particular he fended off attempts to exclude either completely or nearly completely from the new regulation the award of services to outside .
We welcome that .
However , we are still left with the task of finding suitable regulatory means of strengthening the weakened opportunities of participation in relation to the undertaking 's organisation and activity .
That will be one of the main tasks of the coming post-neoliberal years , we hope .
Bertens report ( A4-0416 / 96 )
We welcome the initiative of the Commission and the committee for increased cooperation between the EU and the countries of Latin America .
A global strategy for economic cooperation should be established along with more intensive political cooperation in order to promote peace , democracy and respect for human rights in Latin America .
We do not consider that those aspects of defence between the Union and these countries which we have discussed fall within the framework of this report .
Paragraph 25 of this report contains a further increase in the funds already available to Latin America .
We believe that the European Union is already one of the biggest contributors in this region .
In general terms we are in favour of advancing the process of democracy in this region and the development of the country .
The important thing as far as we are concerned is that the current projects can be proved to be efficient , for that is the only guarantee that the money is being used properly .
Until such time as we have specific figures on these projects we do not wish to comment on this paragraph 25 .
As paragraphs 21 to 34 are being put to the vote together and we approve of all these paragraphs with the exception of paragraph 25 , but have no opportunity to vote separately on it , we give our approval to this bloc voting while abstaining on paragraph 25 .
Carnero González report ( A4-0418 / 96 )
Paragraphs 16 and 18 of this report contain a further increase in the funds already available to Central America or a partial exemption from the foreign debts of Central America .
In general terms we are in favour of advancing the process of democracy in this region and the development of the country .
The important thing as far as we are concerned is that the current projects can be proved to be efficient , for that is the only guarantee that the money is being used properly .
Until such time as we have specific figures on these projects we do not wish to comment on paragraphs 16 and 18 .
As paragraphs 11 to 25 are being put to the vote together and we approve of all these paragraphs with the exception of paragraphs 16 and 18 , but have no opportunity to vote separately on them , we give our approval to this bloc voting while abstaining on paragraphs 16 and 18 .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.38 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Community forestry strategy ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0414 / 96 ) by Mr Thomas , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on a global Community strategy for the forestry sector .
Mr President , the European Parliament 's proposal for a future EU forestry strategy has changed fundamentally over the year and a half during which it was under consideration in committee .
The forestry strategy represents a compromise agreed in committee .
Although a compromise can never be entirely satisfactory , I am pleased with the ultimate result as a Finn and therefore a representative of the European country most dependent on its forests , considering how enormously the proposal has been improved in comparison with the original draft .
Rather than a common forestry policy , we are now considering a common forestry strategy .
The basic point of departure is a recognition of the differences between the Member States ' forests , in terms both of conditions and of significance .
According to this strategy , the use and protection of forests remain matters for national decision-making .
Nonetheless , an effort is being made to work towards common objectives through common action .
According to the strategy , the current fragmented action is to be coordinated with the aim of preserving the diversity of forests , adopting an ecologically sound approach and sustainable economic and social use .
The forestry strategy stresses the significance of forests as a renewable natural resource .
Correctly used , the forests function as a reserve for sustainable economic development , which means work and prosperity for people .
Forestry is among the sectors where open competition prevails in the EU , and industry must operate without subsidies or regulations which distort competition .
The forests maintain a living countryside , various industries and much small enterprise , which provides employment .
According to the forestry strategy , it is possible to combine the preservation of forests ' biodiversity and recreational functions with their so-called economic use .
Finland 's forestry industry , with its right of access for all and growing reserves of wood , is an excellent example of this .
The strategy presents opportunities for the EU to promote environmentally benign exploitation of forests in contexts other than the allocation of regional funding .
The EU can be actively involved in bringing influence to bear on the establishment of an international certification system which takes account of the special features of each country .
An effective environmental labelling system and the provision of information about the sustainable forestry associated with it could promote the multifunctional use of wood , which is a considerably more environmentally benign material than unrenewable natural resources .
The use of wood and biofuels as energy sources , with the aid of advanced technology , could afford new opportunities for the creation of a greener Europe .
The forestry strategy will introduce a stronger environmental element into forestry .
It stresses principles agreed at the UN conference on environment and development in Rio and the conclusions of the Helsinki ministerial conference on sustainable woodland management and preserving the diversity of forests . The EU Member States have also committed themselves to these .
Mr President , in conclusion I should like to thank the rapporteur and my colleagues for their cooperation in drawing up the forestry strategy and to express the hope that we will be able to agree on the compromise which was its outcome .
Mr President , the painful genesis of the Thomas report at least showed that the forestry issues which arise in the various regions of the Union are very different .
The fact is that the Commission has no reason to make haste with a heavy legislative programme which would in effect transfer substantial powers with regard to forestry affairs from the Member States to the Union .
The report has something of the Trojan horse about it : on the one hand , it stresses the position of the Member States by referring to the subsidiarity principle , while on the other hand the Commission is asked in two years ' time to produce a legislative programme based particularly on Article 235 of the Treaty .
As you know , this article is a kind of black hole by means of which the European Union draws power away from the Member States .
In their own proposals , the Greens stress that the forests must be considered in a balanced manner from the points of view of sustainable use , social benefit and environmental protection .
We would like the Commission to engage in cooperation , for example with the FSC ( Forest Stewardship Council ) , with the aim of adopting an internationally recognized certification system .
In this way the Commission could also help to ensure that this system is adapted to European conditions .
If extra funding is wanted for the forestry industry , we recommend that it be used to safeguard the diversity of forests .
In our view , the Habitat Directive should be taken seriously , and funding should be found for its conservation area network for forests .
In this way it might also be possible to find money to protect Scandinavia 's last surviving ancient forests .
Mr President , the Helsinki resolutions give an excellent definition of what sustainability means in relation to forestry .
The definition takes into account not only the quantitative sustainability but also the ecological sustainability of forestry .
The common practice amongst foresters was , until Helsinki , just to stick to the rule that you could not harvest more timber than was growing back .
The more ecologically orientated people amongst us foresters pleaded at that time that we should take into consideration not only the timber flow but equally the protection function of the forests and also the production of non-timber values from forests .
The ministerial conference of Helsinki which took place about three-and-a-half years ago took our requirements into consideration .
So I am really pleased that the motion for resolution , which we worked out in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , refers explicitly to the commitments of the European Union in Helsinki and also to our commitments in the Rio Declaration .
The motion for a resolution is , of course , a compromise .
I can tell you it took a lot of work behind the scenes to get this compromise .
Now let me tell what I do not like in the compromise .
If you are , on the one hand , claiming that forest management should respect the multi-functional nature of forests , on the other hand - we refer to the Rio and Helsinki Declarations - it makes no sense to say that the commercial utilization of forests should be a priority for the EU strategy .
Positive from an ecological point of view is that we emphasize the protection function of the forest ; that we want to protect and enhance the biological and economic value of our forests , especially in threatened areas like mountainous regions ; that we ask to take into account the carbon sink function , especially by encouraging the production of long-living forest products .
Some people wonder why we do not propose to implement a common forest policy similar to the common agricultural policy , but just a strategy .
I have full understanding for the Scandinavian countries and also Austria , which do not want the same fiasco which we had in the common agricultural policy before their arrival in the Community to be repeated in the forestry sector .
Nevertheless , I think , personally , that it makes sense to introduce a system of price intervention for used paper to promote paper recycling .
Wood fibre products are a very precious natural resource and play a role in the carbon sink cycle .
The more often they are recycled , the better they fulfil their carbon sink function .
Let me now talk about certification .
Consumers have the right to know where the products - be it window frames or paper products - come from .
There must be transparency of origin .
Consumers have the right to know whether wood products come from forests managed on the principle of ecological sustainability or from a destructive operation .
I would recommend focusing on certification schemes like that of the Forest Stewardship Council but I would like also to warn against systems similar to the one proposed by the Canadian Standards Association .
This system certainly does not guarantee transparency of origin but just serves the interests of an industry that does not want to change .
A serious certification system could not only be beneficial to the conservation of our forests but also to the forest owners who manage their forests wisely .
For my country , Luxembourg , where a large portion of our territory is covered by forest eco-systems which are managed in a way which is close to nature , a certification scheme would certainly be a big advantage for selling our wood products on the market .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , David Thomas , for the work he has done to secure a broadly acceptable compromise .
I know this work has not always been easy .
As Mr Thomas has said , the use , management and conservation of European forests cannot be controlled by common rules , given how different the forests are in different parts of the European Union .
This fact is the premise of the report .
However , there should be certain common principles to enable us to safeguard the sustainable use of forests .
To this end , a common strategy is needed which takes into account and reconciles the varies types of use to which forests are put and need to be put .
The common forestry strategy should take account of the multifunctionality of forests : forests are needed to combat the greenhouse effect , conserve biodiversity and provide opportunities for recreation and landscape values .
But forests are also valuable and important as a renewable resource , a source of raw materials and energy for many different industries .
Thus the common forestry strategy , the industrial use of wood and wood production should all be based on the principles of the market economy , not on subsidies or on rules which distort competition .
The EU 's forestry strategy should also be based on the coordination of national policies on the basis of common principles .
One of the things which should be done at European level is to organize joint research into the development of forestry resources and the health of forests .
A relatively large sum has been assigned to forestry in the Union budget : some ECU 400 million .
A common strategy is needed to ensure that this money can be used sensibly and not , for example , in ways which distort competition .
We need to know what this money is being used for and what our priorities are .
Mr President , first , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for an interesting and comprehensive report .
The forestry industry is extremely important in my country , Sweden .
Our net export of forestry products is approximately 70 billion Crowns which corresponds to 8 billion ECUs .
In fact , half of Swedish net exports are products from the forestry industry .
We have quite recently introduced legislation in Sweden for the forestry sector .
We have moved away from detailed production legislation , which tightly controlled the methods of production which could be used by the individual forest owner , to more general legislation which gives equal weight to the needs of production and the environment and in which the obligation to replant after felling is unequivocally stated , all in accordance with the declarations and fundamental views of the Rio Conference and Agenda 21 .
During the preparation of this report , we were very concerned that it would advocate a joint forestry policy with tight control from above .
This hazard has been avoided .
In my opinion , such a move would have led to greater bureaucracy and a move away from the principles of the market economy .
We would all have been the losers under such a proposal .
The current proposal includes a number of ideas on cooperation within the sector which can really be of benefit .
I am referring to research , the establishment of an inventory of forestry assets , measures to prevent damage to Europe 's forests from air pollution , joint measures against forest fires , all of which complement national and individual measures .
It must also be in our joint interest to be able to demonstrate that Europe 's forests are managed in a sustainable manner and that great care is taken to maintain biological diversity .
Certification which inspires trust and respect could also be an advantage as part of a joint voluntary regime .
It must be in our common interest , in those regions where forests have been devastated , to reinstate this important resource .
This could take place within the framework of regional political programmes supported by the EU .
The forests of Europe also have an important role to play in terms of the greenhouse effect .
As long as there is less felling than growth , coal is stored in our forests and can therefore contribute to a reduction in excess carbon dioxide obtained through the burning of fossil fuels .
It would be even better if we used a proportion of our joint excess as biological fuel .
I continue to maintain that by following the direction taken in the report , the European forestry sector will prove to be a very good example to the world in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was essential that the European Union define a forestry strategy in order to improve the use and management of forestry resources .
All types of forest are represented in Europe , from taiga to the tropical forests of Guyana , and we must ensure their continued existence by preserving the biodiversity of these very fragile ecosystems .
Forests occupy a privileged position in today 's society .
Over the last few years , we have seen the appearance of much development and exploitation of woodland areas .
As regards protection , we must fight against erosion by preventing such forestry practices as clear felling .
Methods for conserving genetic resources must be strengthened by encouraging seed selection and improvement .
The fight to sustain plant health is still a priority among foresters .
Greater attention must also be given to fire protection by encouraging prevention and detection .
As regards forest use and exploitation , we should favour groups of small producers , advise owners about management and exploitation , and help with the mechanization of enterprises .
The Commission should encourage the promotion of the timber industry .
Wood is a renewable energy source .
The Commission will also have to support the education of its citizens , especially the young .
As for funding , the relationship between forests and cash is complex .
In an economy obsessed with the short-term , with very stretched budgets , it is difficult to invest in production on a scale of centuries .
Our forestry strategy should lay down firm guidelines which respect the subsidiarity principle .
Europe must develop a voluntary policy supported by regular investment for both the protection and production of wood ; a guarantee of long-term rural development .
In conclusion , although our forests cover only a small area of the Earth , the forestry strategy of the European Union must become a world model for the management of resources and species .
Mr President , forestry policy ought first and foremost to be a national matter .
Joint strategies ought to be restricted to issues of a general character .
Each country must be given the opportunity to develop their own forestry policy .
Swedish forests , the backbone of the Swedish economy , are used ecologically and with care for the environment .
Any joint strategy chosen for the forestry industry should be based on producing a commercial forestry sector , run under market conditions , without subsidies which distort competition .
There is a risk that the use of subsidies will perpetuate an ineffective structure and reduce both short and long term profitability .
Certification of forests should serve as a means of communication between the producer and the consumer .
This ought to form part of Community policy , like the quality mark .
It is possible to give legitimate economic support for various environmental measures or for use in the fight against forest fires for example , but even here the main responsibility should rest with the Member States .
It is also important that fresh ideas are not unfairly treated as a result of political decisions .
A European campaign to promote the use of wood and wood products is being proposed .
If such a campaign does take place it ought to include paper as well .
Like wood products , paper products are also under pressure from substitutes such as plastic , glass and metals .
It is preferable to link forestry issues with issues related to the forestry industry and not to agricultural policy .
As a representative of Europe 's most densely forested country , I would just like to say the following to any potential supporters of a fully regulated , joint forestry policy : to those who wish ill on Europe 's forestry industry , there is now a fate worse than more forest fires .
This is a forestry policy similar to the European CAP .
Mr President , this is why it is pleasing that the compromise proposal which is under consideration here is not aimed at such a development at all .
Mr President , the Thomas report is very ambitious but there must be strong doubts as to whether , in general , it is possible to formulate a joint policy for all the countries of the Union in such a complicated area as this .
Basically , there are very different conditions in the different regions and countries of the Union .
In many countries , the forests are so neglected that extensive programmes are needed to rehabilitate them , whereas exactly the opposite is the case in Scandinavia .
Here , there is no desire to further enlarge the forest , instead people are anxious to preserve the open landscape and the biological diversity that it represents .
Because of this , the report is so general and so diluted that it barely gives any direction .
It could serve only to complicate the issue for more substantive and practically national forestry policies .
The report also has obvious difficulty in reconciling different views and opposing interests .
On the one hand forest protection is highlighted , while on the other , the emphasis is placed , and indeed priority is placed , on better commercial use .
How is this to be interpreted ?
Is this to be at the price of more biological monoculture or of planting species not native to the national flora or which consume large quantities of water and put the surrounding area at risk ?
I think that the European Union ought not to take on further new , difficult and wide reaching tasks .
It already has enough work coping with the tasks in hand .
The report also panders to what , unfortunately , is increasingly becoming a habit in many areas of the Union , that is the proposal of new subsidies , something which can hardly have been very well thought out in the current budget situation .
If we want subsidies , we ought , at least , to be looking for alternative means of making savings , in the excessive set aside subsidies to large farmers growing cereals and oil plants for example .
What this report really says to me is that there is a desire , at any price , to expand the European Union 's power instead of allowing the Union , more sensibly , to concentrate on finding the best way of managing the tasks which it has already accepted responsibility for .
Mr President , we have heard from the rapporteur and from some of those who have participated in the preparation of the report that this should not pave the way for EU forestry policy .
Despite this , I believe that some of those who have participated in this work do think that this is the case and view it as a step towards this .
As a forest owner in Northern Sweden , I do not think that we need such a joint forestry policy .
Of course there are some good ideas in this report , including those concerned with the environment and with certification , but the question is how much space will be allocated to these ideas in a joint forestry strategy .
The tone of the report is set right from the first point where it states that commercial use of forests should be given priority in the EU 's forestry strategy .
This clearly shows what the report is aimed at .
If it doesn 't , let me mention another point , point 9 where it says that the ' Commission will be asked to recommend adaptation of those goals and actions affected , particularly in Regulation 1610 / 89 , to the real needs of supporting the management and use of forests ' . It is a question of ' use ' and in the English original the word ' exploitation ' is actually used .
What this means in plain language is that EU support is to be used for the exploitation of forests .
I think this is terrible .
The more environmentally friendly wording is retracted in the next breath and replaced with the notion that the role of the forest and its value to tourism and recreation must be acknowledged without unnecessary restriction on the economic use of the forest .
All this , Mr President , leads me to believe that we should vote against this report , especially if we compare it with Swedish forestry legislation which is much better , but still much discussed in Sweden .
If this is passed we will be forced to rewrite this legislation and it will become totally and utterly useless .
The initial aim of this report , drawn up on Parliament 's initiative , was a general reflection on the basic features of a common forestry policy and a request to the European Commission to propose appropriate legislative measures to attain these objectives on bases and guidelines laid down by ourselves as parliamentarians .
I would like to remind you that , from South to North , forests of all kinds cover a third of European Union territory .
They are a vital element in future rural development in line with the European countryside charter that we have examined and voted upon in this very place .
What are the problems with forests ?
The absence of a legal basis in the European Union Treaty and the fact that timber , originating from living plant matter , is considered merely as an industrial product , are obstacles to the establishment of a European forestry strategy .
We should like these legal and technical points to be taken into consideration by the Intergovernmental Conference for inclusion in the future appropriately-amended Union Treaty .
Next , the recent arrival of three new well-forested Member States , Austria , Sweden and Finland , has increased the mean forest area in the Union from 21 % to 34 % .
There is quite strong opposition in these new States to any common forestry policy that might resemble a new CAP , particularly with regard to forest management and exploitation , and even more with regard to the timber and wood pulp markets .
The first version of the Thomas report was incomplete , but incorporated in its final compromise version are a good many amendments , particularly those that I was also able to submit with members of the Intergroup on Forestry .
Although this new draft is satisfactory , some points still need clarification , and that is why I tabled a few additional amendments .
To begin with , we emphasize the need for a reference to Article 130 of the Union Treaty which implies codecision and financial support from the Cohesion Fund .
Secondly , in the second amendment , we point out that the coordination of forestry strategy with the other policies on the environment and rural development must actually be mentioned .
Thirdly , it is stressed that the multi-functional role - socio-economic , environmental and recreational - must form the basis for long-term development of forests .
Finally , in the last amendment , we call on the Commission to propose measures to guarantee economic development of forests linked to farming .
I therefore ask you to support these amendments and urge you to give your closest attention to future legislative proposals from the Commission that we shall have to examine carefully in order to establish a genuine European forestry strategy capable of providing us with self-sufficiency in timber and other forestry products , as we have in food .
Mr President , I wish to begin by complimenting my colleague , Mr Thomas , on the work he has done .
This debate here today illustrates how difficult a task he has in trying to balance and bring together the competing philosophies on this subject .
However , I would like to address two practical points to the Commission .
One is that , given the relative importance of forestry to what are very often fragile rural economies , I would like the Commission to take account of the part it can play in rural development and , in this respect , it is vital that we attempt to retain as much of the added value of forestry products in the local community as possible .
I would like to ask the Commission to encourage practices and projects which seek to meet this objective .
Similarly , as forests mature and technology advances , sometimes access to forests for harvesting can present quite a problem .
This is the case in my part of the world - roads and bridges need to be strengthened and maintained - and all this against a background of constrained budgets - certainly local authority budgets .
I would therefore like to ask if the Commission would look favourably on encouraging Objective 5b funds to be used for this type of infrastructure .
In general , I welcome the rapporteur 's acknowledgement that forests provide much more than the simple exploitation of their economic potential and that much of the value of forests cannot be easily quantified in cold facts and figures .
Nevertheless , we should not underestimate the contribution that forests make to the benefit of society as a whole and we must continue to develop at international level cooperation and sustainable management .
Perhaps the best service which the Commission can render at European level is to ensure that information and expertise is available and shared within the European Union in order that we can build on the existing pool of knowledge and practice .
Mr President , fundamentally the Thomas report is a compromise between the different functions of what should be regarded as the European forest .
Obviously this is not the text that some of us wanted , but I would say that it is broadly acceptable as amended during its progress through Parliament .
I would like to emphasize the most important aspects of what a European forestry policy should be , as I understand it .
Of course we all recognize the environmental function , but I want to say that the economic function of the forest should be openly recognized , because everyday reality demonstrates that there is no protection for anything that has no value .
The protection of the forest is a need which is better fulfilled when it relates to a profitable asset .
It is important that we develop this socio-economic potential .
And it is also important to develop and recognize the principle of subsidiarity to the maximum , because , amongst other things , the European forest is very diverse and the social and economic players in each case are different too , as are the environmental characteristics of each European forest .
To give an example , the Atlantic forest , which comes into the area I represent , is highly productive and 80 % privately owned by over two million individual proprietors .
As a result it has enormous social repercussions , including , of course , on employment .
But its characteristics are quite different from the Mediterranean forest , the Nordic forest and the central European forest .
So we must respect this principle of subsidiarity and it must also extend to regional level .
Sometimes we talk about subsidiarity in Europe as only extending to state level but there is no national forestry policy in Spain , for instance .
In almost every case , responsibility for forests lies with the regions , which have legal forestry plans , naturally legitimized by their parliaments as well , and these fully-empowered regions should also be given legitimate scope in relation to the European Union in this sector .
Once the economic function of the forest is recognized as well as its environmental function , and once subsidiarity is taken into account , I think we need to be capable , at European level , of creating a scenario appropriate to investment in a forestry sector where ownership is extremely widespread and that means creating a dynamic climate for forestry investment , increasing the use of wood and its derivatives , a natural renewable material .
I do not have time to go into this fully , but let me just give an outline .
The scenario should include encouraging tax incentives at state level , boosting basic and applied research on the uses of wood , gearing European forestry aid to local authority control of the risk of forest fires , as well as ensuring the future viability of new forest stands and I would add encouraging the formation of foresters ' organizations and including them in the Community 's consultative bodies .
Of course much more can be done , but equilibrium between the environmental , socio-economic and recreational functions of the European forest can be promoted along these lines .
And one final thought , Mr President .
We are also concerned about the tropical forests the world 's ecological balance depends on , and we recognize that the greatest contribution we can make to saving these vital tropical forests is for Europe one day to become self-sufficient in forestry resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this stage in the debate stress should be placed on the particular aspects we regard as most important , because general analysis has been covered by colleagues in earlier speeches .
I would like to highlight the fact that the merit of the Thomas report is to examine a sector which not only has a commercial value , as stated in the report , but also has an impact on the environment and the countryside as a whole , with very different incidence across the European Union .
That is why I want to draw particular attention to the need , in implementing the report 's proposals , to consider the European forests as two large groups : the central and northern European forest and the Mediterranean forest .
These two large groups have different characteristics and a different influence on society , and the forests of the south are also the best bulwark against erosion and desertification , in addition to their environmental contribution .
So I want to stress the variable importance of the forests as a function of their geographical zones .
In terms of operational capacity , responsibility for forests is currently shared between nine different areas of the European Commission , and more rational administration is clearly needed if the European Parliament 's proposals are to prosper .
Mr President , the Thomas report has taken a somewhat strange turn .
After it was presented in the Committee on Agriculture some 200 to 220 amendments were tabled .
After that there was a compromise to group these amendments or to withdraw some of them .
What emerged from that is not much of an improvement .
We think it is so patchy that we decided to table a few amendments , especially on the economic utilization side to stress that the forestry sector must have a natural and sustainable development and to ensure that there would be no common market organisation similar to a common agriculture regulation for wood .
In agriculture that has contributed considerably to the destructive developments .
What we want instead is for the EU in a concentrated and limited fashion to secure a market immune to dumping from outside .
We need certification in which ecological criteria are agreed on an international basis and then recognised by the EU so that a wood industry can develop in the EU where the value of wood is economically anchored .
For a long time the price development in the wood sector was so disastrously low that re-afforestation could not be financed by it and repeated subsidies for re-afforestation were given by the EU which were not of course given in other countries .
We cannot transport a disastrous EU price policy to the outside because as we have already seen forests , and rain forests in particular , would be dragged down in its wake .
We need woods in general to survive .
And that is why the EU must deal with this subject matter in an international context and not set up a regulation solely for within the EU .
Mr President , the Swedish Social Democrats find it very difficult to support the Thomas report .
This should not be seen as a criticism against the report itself but more a way of expressing our scepticism of a joint forestry strategy for the Union .
We think that the principle of proximity should apply for this sector .
We have enough problems within the Union adapting our agricultural and regional policies for enlargement towards the East .
There is absolutely no reason for the Union to take upon itself another political area .
As many speakers have pointed out , the problems vary enormously in the Countries of the Union .
The Southern countries have too little forest while the Northern countries probably have too much .
The Southern countries have problems with forest fires while in the North it is the cold that we struggle with .
There is no lack of forestry policy either , the reverse is true .
Individual countries have forestry laws and the necessary authorities to administer these laws .
There is no lack of international cooperation either .
All the European forestry authorities cooperate within the ECE Timber Commission .
At a global level there is cooperation within the framework of the FAO .
Trade problems are resolved within the framework of the WTO and so on .
There is also extensive cooperation taking place to detail forest damage .
Very detailed statistics are published annually for the sector .
As for environmental certification , this is of dubious value for the Scandinavian countries .
We already have such certification , and it is well known that certain competitor countries on the other side of the Atlantic have exerted pressure on the Union to adopt certification at a lower level than we have in Scandinavia .
Adoption of common certification would lead , therefore , to a lowering of environmental standards for the Swedish forestry industry .
Finally , Mr President I consider it unnecessary that the Union is using this document to recommend new increased expenditure .
Our budget is already under considerable strain .
Mr President , the last enlargement brought a deeper interest and even a passion into the debate on forestry in this Community .
It is interesting to see the geographic interest and to recognize the diversity that enlargement has brought to thinking on afforestation in the Union .
I thank Mr Thomas for his report .
In some of the opinions annexed to the report there are entirely different descriptions of the industry at European level than the one he gives .
I take it that his is the correct one , that we are about selfsufficient since the Nordic countries joined .
Another report says we are only half self-sufficient so it a pity that students or even planners looking at documents like this see such contradictions within a few pages .
That of course is not the fault of the rapporteur .
We should not get ideologically fixed on the whole question of whether we have a common policy or not .
We have a common industrial and commercial policy and we can have a common forestry policy in the same way .
We will not have one like the common agricultural policy .
I could not go as far as Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Obviously , we would not want to have guaranteed prices and intervention and export refunds .
But if we have a common interest in the environment , a common interest in the economic welfare of the European Union , a common tourism policy and so on , it is realistic to think that we ought to have a common policy so far as forestry is concerned .
It need not necessarily impose a major burden on the European Union budget .
I come from a country where we have the fewest forests in the European Union .
The Finns harvest something in the order of 50 million cubic metres annually .
The area under afforestation is the size of England and Scotland .
In Ireland we have about 2 million acres or 16 % of our agricultural land and our worse land at that .
So , there is a great diversity .
Obviously forestry will become very important commercially in Ireland but there is resistance from a social standpoint to replacement of the small farms on the marginal land by tracts of woodland .
The European policy which seeks to assist us with the development of our afforestation is not all that popular in Ireland and yet I believe it is wise in the long run .
We are planting 25 , 000 hectares annually at the moment .
That can give Ireland a value added income of approximately £ 300m at today 's prices and that is three times the amount our sheep farmers are able to earn from the entire production of sheep in Ireland at the moment .
So , for us it is not only important for the environment but economically we can develop our forests into something very important .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my appreciation to rapporteur Thomas for the patient and constructive way that he has worked to produce this report .
The forestry industry in Europe is very diverse with considerable variation in species between countries .
This applies also to views on forestry policy .
This is why such varied proposals have been put forward during the debate .
Central Europe has long been demanding protection of our forests while the Southern States have long demanded a support system .
This far reaching demand has now been dropped .
This is a good thing , in my view , as it would involve problems both for the environment and for production in our forests .
It has already been stated earlier in the debate that Swedish forestry legislation has allowed us to create a sustainable and strong forestry industry which maintains a balance between the interests of the environment and of production .
This policy means that the renewable raw material base is used while at the same time maintaining biological diversity .
It is important to make clear to other parts of Europe that the Scandinavian forestry sector is a resource which can be used profitably within the ecological framework without any State support .
It is these differences between North and South , East and West which , on the whole , make a joint forestry policy inappropriate . Such a policy should not be introduced within the European Union .
The document currently under consideration represents a compromise which we arrived at in the Agriculture Committee .
For this reason , I think that we should accept it as it is without any of the amendments which have been put forward .
Of course some important sections concerning both environmental and production issues , are missing , but the compromise is acceptable ; we can live with it in Sweden .
This is why I think that we shall be able to approve it here in Parliament when the time comes .
Mr President , I must begin by greeting our new Vice-President , Mr Marinho , and congratulate him on being elected .
The Thomas report has the great advantage of having aroused a wide-ranging debate on the subject of forests in the European Union .
This debate has shown that unfortunately there is not a consensus about the place of forests in the framework of Community policy .
The Thomas report merely proposes a common forestry strategy based on greater co-ordination of national policies and the strengthening of protection , training and information measures .
This strategy was the only base of compromise which it was possible to reach in the European Parliament and in the Committee on Agriculture in particular , and Mr Thomas deserves our greatest support for the effort which he has made to bring the different sides closer together .
I think that bringing about at this stage a common forestry strategy will only make sense if it is carried out gradually in the future as part of a genuine common forestry policy with express aims , the relevant application instruments and appropriate financial means .
This is the only way in which we can solve problems such as the increase in forestry production and reducing the deficit , and of finding alternative occupation for land in terms of non-food and energy raw materials , the creation of employment in rural areas and protection from atmospheric pollution and forest fires , adding to the contribution which forests make to the environment and the economy alike , since if people are not given incentives in economic terms to invest in the forest , then they will do nothing to defend it .
The activities proposed by the rapporteur - which are already a great advance on what we have at present - would cost the European Union some 350 million ECU per annum , an equivalent to 0.8 % of the CAP budget .
It is easy to conclude that what has now been proposed in the report presented to the European Parliament is derisory in terms of the European Union 's resources .
It is particularly derisory given the strategic importance of this sector for the future of our society .
In a country like Portugal , for example , where three million hectares are forested which represents onethird of the territory and 80 % of which are integrated into farms , it is nonsensical to set differences in the way in which agriculture and forestry are treated .
First of all since the CAP reform in 1992 farming and forestry land are increasingly interchangeable in terms of market situation .
Secondly because farmers tend to look upon forestry activities as a way of topping up their income earned from farming .
However , just to refer to this situation is unacceptable !
I am going to support this report but I hope that the Commission is going to be more daring in its proposals than the European Parliament Committee on Agriculture .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Thomas for his report on a subject which is very important to us in Finland .
All Member States of Union have common interests in the state of the forests and their use ; the forests serve to bind carbon dioxide , prevent erosion and provide opportunities for recreation .
We should also not forget the spiritual values they possess , either .
Finland is the only country in the world which is economically fairly dependent on forests .
Finland 's national wealth has been generated with the aid of forest-based production over the past 150 years .
The annual growth of Finland 's forests is now greater than ever before : more than 80 million cubic metres .
Even after account has been taken of all the use made of them and natural elimination , Finland 's forestry resources are increasing by more than 10 million cubic metres per annum .
To my mind this is a practical demonstration that it has always been a vital necessity to us Finns , as it still is today , to take good care of our national resources , our forests .
By way of an example of the responsibility displayed by the Finns over forestry issues , may I just mention the extensive conservation areas which have been instituted in recent decades in various parts of Finland .
By means of them we are seeking to safeguard Finland 's nature and the biodiversity of its forests .
From these points of view , the report does not entirely come up to my hopes .
The report stresses subsidies and regulations , whereas to my mind one should allow the market economy to resolve the issues at stake .
Nor does the report take any account of the fact that , in Finland for example , most woodland belongs to small private proprietors .
The report also recommends that consideration be given to setting up a European forestry school .
I cannot support this idea , because in my opinion forestry education is already adequately organized within the territory of the Union , right up to university level .
Nor can I endorse the view expressed in the report that there is a need to set up a Union forestry committee .
Although the current improved version of the report still does not take enough account of the Nordic point of view , it is nonetheless considerably better than the original version , and I therefore consider that it should be adopted .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 30 January in Brussels .
EC / Israel public procurement and telcommunications agreements
The next item is the report ( A4-0357 / 96 ) by Mr De Clercq , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0148 - C4-0323 / 96-96 / 0104 ( CNS ) ) concerning the conclusion of two agreements between the European Community and the State of Israel on procurement by government and telecommunications operators .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this afternoon 's debate on the report from our colleague Mr De Clercq and on the conclusion of the EC / Israel public procurement and telecommunications agreements gives me a chance to make four points .
Firstly , as President of the Europe-Israel Delegation , I wish to pay tribute to the work of our colleague , Mr De Clercq , who has worked very hard throughout these last few months to improve and develop relations between Europe and Israel .
Secondly , it should be pointed out that these agreements fit perfectly into a continuation of the agreements that came into force a year ago and into the framework of the Europe-Israel association agreement approved here by a very large majority .
Thirdly , I wish to emphasize the great importance of these latter agreements , which will enable Europe to benefit from Israeli high technology and will enable Israel , which wishes to build new public infrastructures ( a metro has been mentioned ) , to call on European expertise .
Both parties therefore benefit greatly from this , and we must recognize that this is not always the case in association agreements .
I stress the importance of these agreements in the context of regional economic integration between Israel and its neighbours , in what we hope is the near future .
Israel will then be a privileged intermediary for the European Union .
Finally , and following on directly from the last point , I wish to express the satisfaction and delight of Europeans after the Hebron agreement of Tuesday evening and the reactivation of the peace process .
I myself , as you know , have always been confident , but I can understand the misgivings and doubts .
I would therefore like to congratulate the Israeli and Palestinian negotiators on their courage and good sense .
Europe has played a discreet but effective role , in particular with its special envoy whom we should also congratulate .
In conclusion , I reaffirm that the development of our economic and scientific relations with Israel is one of the prime conditions for peace as well as being one of the first consequences .
I am therefore pleased that we have been able to play a part here in these affairs during the last critical months .
The future will be just as difficult and we must therefore still try and keep a cool head , and retain our common sense and sound appreciation of situations .
The vote on the report of our colleague , Mr De Clercq , is therefore very important , both as a symbol of a constructive and effective process and above all in its practical and rapid effects on the economic and technological relations between Europe and Israel .
Madam President , the conclusion of these two agreements is a further step towards achieving the European Union 's goal of opening up the markets for public contracts further . And I think that is a very important and proper objective .
Moreover , the two agreements flesh out the agreements concluded earlier by the European Union and Israel on greater political and economic cooperation , cooperation which I myself and my Group welcome most warmly .
I also have a point to make concerning procedure .
It is regrettable that procedural problems always arise when matters are dealt with by the Committee on External Economic Relations and that this committee so often has to fight to be treated properly .
In this case the committee bowed to the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee .
I think that is a wise decision , if only to preserve the unity of the European Parliament over this procedure .
I have little to add to the wise words spoken by Mr De Clercq , but I would just like to say following on from my comment on procedure that over the past seven and a half years of international agreements of the kind we are debating today - and far more importantly the GATT agreement - the European Parliament and the European Union have been in very good hands in the Committee on external Economic Relations due to the fact that Mr De Clercq was the chairman of that committee .
In all honesty I am having trouble adjusting to the idea that in a few hours ' time the Committee on External Economic Relations will have a new chairman and that Mr De Clercq will be serving the Union in a different capacity .
But Mr De Clercq has done a great deal personally to promote the liberalization of international trade , which is economically very important to the European Union and to employment and I regard it as an honour and as a very great pleasure to have served on his committee for the past two and a half years .
Madam President , first of all I must congratulate you on your new office and I must also congratulate Mr De Clercq on this report , which rounds off wonderfully his seven years as chairman of the committee .
This House talked long and hard about the European Union 's Association Agreement with Israel .
These two agreements on public procurement and telecommunications agreements are a consequence of it .
Mr De Clercq looked rather more at the technical considerations , but I am looking at it more from the point of view of foreign policy , the Barcelona initiative .
It is a step along the road to reciprocal liberalization , but it is also a step along the way towards stability in the region .
The interests of the Union and Israel are well served too .
Israel is strong in high-tech , and we need that in Europe .
Europe has a sizeable head start in public transport .
Israel has ambitious plans in this area , including the building of an urban metro line , and that would be a huge challenge to any one country of the Union .
Of course the Union 's economic resources are not the same as Israel 's , but we are going through a good patch .
Thanks to the efforts of King Hussein of Jordan the peace process has moved on a pace and , if I read the situation aright , there is an increasing hope of greater economic involvement of the European Union in Israel and the region as a whole and that is the prospect today : liberalization is all very well , it is an economic thing , but the real issue is stability in the region .
My Group , the Union for Europe Group , wholeheartedly endorses Mr De Clercq 's report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament is today able to express an opinion on two proposed agreements between the European Union and Israel on public procurement .
Although the two agreements are as such rather technical in nature - as has been pointed out here , particularly by the rapporteur - one concerns public procurement generally and the other procurement in the telecommunications sector specifically , it is clear that they represent a considerable step forward in opening up procurement at an international level .
There is therefore a wider point here , above and beyond the purely technical matter of the two agreements .
The Commission wishes to draw attention to a number of important points .
In the case of the first agreement , Israel is enlarging upon and adding to the undertakings entered into through the agreement on public procurement ; it includes the urban transport sector , an area in which the Union is particularly competitive , and removes a number of exemptions previously negotiated under the Government Procurement Agreement .
In addition , it opens up local procurement to European Union undertakings , in sectors other than those previously envisaged .
In the case of the second agreement on procurement in the telecommunications sector , Israel is immediately abolishing a 15 per cent price preference and gradually removing the provision on compensation that it was in fact accorded under the Government Procurement Agreement .
Both agreements are the product of the closer - political and economic - relations established by the association agreement between Israel and the European Union , and the post-Barcelona context of which this initiative forms part has already been mentioned . Secondly , they make a real contribution to economic development and , therefore , also to the political stability of the region .
Thirdly , they secure for the European Union more favourable treatment than Israel has hitherto accorded other third countries , by offering further economic opportunities to European suppliers .
Fourthly , they seem to us to be giving a positive signal and therefore constitute a positive precedent for other third countries in terms of opening-up markets on a reciprocal basis : this is a completely new element .
For those reasons , the Commission welcomes the fact that the Committee on External Economic Relations unanimously endorsed the resolution approving the two agreements , after the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights had confirmed the legal basis proposed by the Commission .
Let me take this opportunity of thanking those committees for their work and support and , in particular , the Commission wishes to thank Mrs Sierra González of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for her contribution and , clearly , Mr de Clercq for having prepared the very clear and balanced report we are today debating .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Consultation of workers
The next item is the report ( A4-0411 / 96 ) by Mr Menrad , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the communication from the Commission on worker information and consultation ( COM ( 95 ) 0547 - C4-0538 / 95 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner . May I point out that in addition to my five minutes as rapporteur I have a further three minutes on behalf of my group ?
The European Commission and Parliament have been trying to harmonise or coordinate company law for over twenty years .
The debate on the legal form of the European company has recently been re-kindled .
The so-called Ciampi report stipulates that the lack of a statute for the European company results in considerable costs for the European economy .
In the light of the study by the group on stimulating competitiveness in Europe the Commission is urging a speedy adoption of the statutes , preferably in 1997 .
Five years ago the Commission presented proposals for a European cooperative society , a European mutual society and a European association , in other words not only for the European joint-stock company .
The reason why the Council of Ministers has failed to adopt various regulations on these kinds of company forms under European law is first and foremost because they could not agree on the essential directives on the position of employees .
The most controversial issue was the idea of building in special employee representation in the company bodies , what we have with some works councils , for example : participation or co-determination are part of social democracy .
They mean economic productivity at the same time .
Only an informed , qualified , committed and motivated employee who has the opportunity to influence matters can develop forms of organisation and technologies and so use them in such a way that all opportunities for sustainable development are fully utilised .
The main objective of the communication we are debating here today is to break the deadlock on the proposals on the European company forms and European legislation .
The Commission 's communication concentrates on whether and how the directive on European works councils can help here .
It offers three options : the first is keeping the status quo , the second and third options are closely linked .
Both are based on the assumption that the controversial matter of co-determination by company organs in the supervisory board or board of directors would not be pursued further and that the employee involvement directives would be withdrawn .
The second option also proposes , in addition to the EWC Directive , a community instrument to create minimum standards for informing and consulting employees at the national level .
I think this approach is important because it means that the European works council can operate more effectively .
But this proposal does not constitute a contribution to economic co-determination .
The motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Social Affairs stipulates first of all that no European joint-stock company or other form of company can be created unless the EWC Directive is transposed .
Unlike the Commission communication it distinguishes between pure information and consultation rights , as under the EWC , and the opportunities for economic participation , like those enjoyed by employees in the supervisory boards in Germany or the Netherlands or like those enjoyed in the Nordic countries of Finland and Sweden under collective agreement rights when company decisions are taken .
It is with this in mind that my report calls secondly for opportunities for economic participation for employees .
In view of the plethora of models in the European Union we must avoid two dangers .
We must not transfer a specific codetermination model from a few Member States to the other countries of the Community , in other words no export of the mainly German model .
But equally worker co-determination cannot be circumvented by means of a European legal instrument .
We must prevent the frequently quoted flight from co-determination .
This must be counteracted by minimum standards in European companies .
Any Community initiative is based on the assumption that the existing rules on co-determination are familiar .
We therefore welcome the creation of a group of experts from both sides of industry which will identify by means of a comparative study the legal and actual situation in the EU countries on information , consultation , participation and co-determination .
It will also examine the role of the European works council under the general heading of codetermination .
We hope that this group , which has already started work , will take the time to work out a definitive proposal .
The results of this study must be presented for a social dialogue at the European level which can then decide on framework agreements on co-determination .
Analogous agreements between both sides of industry might also be considered at the branch or company level .
At all events we need a special yardstick for co-determination in all European joint-stock companies which corresponds to the relevant structures of the company or firm .
The communication reports on why the directive on the EWC was so successful .
That can be turned round any way one likes , the real secret of success of the EWC lies in certain procedural principles .
They could also be very relevant in creating a co-determination model of a European joint-stock or other company .
A European directive must lay down flexibility , negotiations solutions and minimum standards in the event that the social partners cannot reach agreement within a specific time .
The suggestion in the recital that the European company statute should be made more attractive to small and medium-sized undertakings does not mean that there should be zones with no co-determination when employee numbers are low .
That is not what the committee wants ; we want to support these SMEs .
May I briefly summarize the position of the Committee on Social Affairs : firstly , both sides of industry should play an appropriate role in establishing the rules on co-determination ; secondly , employee participation in the European company must be more than information and consultation rights of the European works councils , under no condition should there be a European company without employee economic participation .
The European model is called social market economy and employee participation and partnership are part and parcel of its basic principles .
Participation and co-determination are important principles .
In conclusion may I stress the importance of that last sentence and thank all members of the Committee on Social Affairs for their solid support and the Committees on Economic and Legal Affairs , whose opinions we fully endorse .
Madam President , I wish to thank my colleague , Mr Menrad , with whom I have worked for several years on this subject , and also my colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , whose point of view I am representing today .

I have worked closely with both Mr Rothley and Mr Janssen van Raay on the issue of information and consultation of workers in the European Company Statute .
The conclusions of the Legal Affairs Committee were very largely similar to the conclusions of Mr Menrad .
We had a vote in the committee which was nem con , showing the strength of feeling in the committee which is convinced that it is absolutely essential for the wellbeing of the internal market that we have information and consultation of workers in some form .
Speaking particularly about the European Company Statute , this is an important plank of the internal market and it is absolutely vital that the Commission gets this proposal unblocked .
We need a European Company Statute with the full participation of the workforce .
It is quite unacceptable to press ahead with a company statute without British workers being fully involved .
Indeed , back in Britain many British companies tell me they want the European Company Statute .
It is a voluntary arrangement ; it is not compulsory .
Every single British company which decides to set up as a European company should do so and have the participation of British workers , so we do not want a European Company Statute with Britain a kind of second-class citizen again .
As far as European Works Councils are concerned , they have some place .
But if we look at the Commission 's consultative document , it muddles up the options for information , consultation and participation .
We need to build on the best traditions of company law in the whole of Europe .
Germany has a fine tradition of workers on the board , France and other places have good versions too .
We need to have a flexible system which is good for all the workers in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , first and foremost I should perhaps convey to you my best and heartfelt wishes for a successful social year in 1997 and a happy outcome to the IGC .
On behalf of the Group I compliment Mr Menrad most warmly on his report .
It is a good report , ladies and gentlemen , and it contains a very powerful New Year message , Commissioner , to the European Commission .
In the view of my Group that message is as follows .
As Mrs Oddy said just now , we are all agreed on the need for progress on the various forms of European company , which have been blocked for years now . But on one thing we must be clear .
We are not prepared either to make social concessions to the single market .
That means , Commissioner , that if the Council and Commission want to press ahead on the matter of European companies - and I assume they will in 1997 - then for us that can only be possible if we also get definitive rules , not only on worker information and consultation , but also on worker participation .
I think the European Parliament may hold an important key when these proposals come up for discussion , especially if they are made under Article 100a , and we are now serving notice to the Commission that we , the European Parliament , will not yield on the matter of these rules for worker participation .
Already during the debate on the 1995-1996 social action programme Parliament pressed in Mr Hughes ' report for all directives concerning worker participation which were currently blocked to be unblocked .
We were very glad to see the Commission producing a communication for the benefit of the social partners .
Well , Commissioner , I have to say with regret on behalf of my Group that we are somewhat disappointed in the Commission 's communication .
Firstly we are sorry that there was no debate beforehand with the social partners , that there has not been greater study of the different forms of worker participation which already exist in the Member States .
We also think that the concrete options suggested in this statement are not satisfactory .
Indeed we think that the European works council is a success .
We are very happy that even firms in countries not bound by these rules have chosen to have European works councils .
But we also think that worker involvement should not stop at the European works council .
In smaller firms too there must be provision for information , consultation and participation .
The Union must ensure that social dialogue is and remains an essential element in our European social model .
Secondly , the issue of participation is not regulated either in the European works council or in the directive on collective redundancies or transfers of undertakings .
And that is a subject which has been under discussion since the Vredeling directive .
We think that in addition to the European works council there have to be rules which also prevent firms from shopping around to find the best country in which they can avoid trade union involvement in their operations .
So , Commissioner , it is unacceptable to us that there should be a European company in a country which will not even agree to works councils .
So the United Kingdom cannot be involved for the moment .
But secondly , we also find it unacceptable to have a European company without far-reaching rules on participation .
And then I would also ask the Commission and the Davignon Group too to think creatively this year about legislation which , firstly , will respect the tradition of social debate in the Member States .
Which , secondly , devises framework legislation at European level on information , consultation and participation in smaller firms too , not to enable them to escape the process of dialogue but on the contrary to enable dialogue to exist within small businesses too .
I shall thus be happy to support the EPP Group 's Amendment No 2 on behalf of my own Group .
Thirdly , legislation which leaves the specific shape and form of things to the social partners .
Fourthly , which provides for minimum rules applicable to everyone .
I think this will give us a piece of good legislation , Commissioner .
Madam President , first may I congratulate you on the fact that you are chairing this debate and it is perhaps fitting that someone from Germany should preside over it , since Mr Menrad too has made an exceptional contribution in the drafting and presentation of his report .
Because this is no simple matter ; it concerns the very essence of codetermination in the various countries of Europe and thus the essence of the European social system .
Our subject is of course the European company and the Commission is now trying to get this European company off the ground . For two reasons it has not yet managed to do so - firstly the question of codetermination and secondly the question of tax .
We are very much in favour of it .
But the machinery of codetermination is not suitably regulated and that is not good enough .
We have a number of different systems here , and how is one to align those systems in such a way that one can distil a European company out of them ?
It is not easy .
It is not easy from the standpoint of a country like Germany , or one like the Netherlands , and certainly not from the standpoint of a country like Italy .
The merit of this opinion is that it has drawn all the threads together .
We have started along the road , we are going to resolve the problem and maybe finally get this European company sorted out .
That is I think a very important point .
But countries which do not have codetermination councils , European works councils , cannot really be a part of this .
That is one thing .
The second thing is that we must take account of the two main corporate systems in Europe , namely the monistic and the dualist systems , and we must find appropriate forms for them .
They must be flexible forms but forms of equal value .
Forms which are equal and thus do not lead to an erosion of codetermination but on the contrary to an enhancement of the European model .
So , Commissioner , the European works council has made a significant contribution towards the further resolution of this problem .
But it is also important that we should continue our efforts , as the opinion advocates , on codetermination in general .
It is a slow process but it must be addressed .
All these things taken together more or less boil down to what Mr Menrad proposes .
Mr Menrad also stresses the importance , and rightly , of the expert committee headed by Mr Davignon .
I am actually very glad we have produced this opinion before his committee has started work .
I think they will find the opinion useful .
The European People 's Party attaches enormous importance to a European company .
It is crazy that we have a European market but as yet no European company .
This company has to be voluntary , but it must offer a basis for codetermination . Certainly it must not be a step backwards for countries which already have that system , but on the other hand it must not be an obstacle to countries which have not yet advanced quite so far along the road .
I think Mr Menrad has made a good job of presenting the overall situation .
I hope the Commission will take all the recommendations on board , because each one is important in its own way .
Then we can perhaps get this initiative completed , but not before we have had a suitable response from the European Council and the European Commission to these excellent proposals of Mr Menrad 's .
Madam President , as we are all aware , the main objective of the report on the consultation of workers is to establish appropriate and up-to-date global rules governing the sector .
Let us put on one side for a moment the first of the three options put forward by the Commission because it in fact proposes that the status quo be retained without change .
But let us look more closely at the other two .
As a group , we are in favour of the third option provided it does not depend on implementation of the second option .
We need therefore to unhook the third from the second option which suggests a global approach based on the definition of a general framework .
In contrast , the third option seems more closely to reflect the requirements of all of the interested parties , by referring back to the link with transposition of the directive on European Works Councils .
We are in fact starting from the premiss that forms of worker information and consultation exist in all the Member States , based on the needs and special features of the individual state .
In certain sectors , the adoption of Community rules of a general nature could therefore prejudice balances achieved with great difficulty over a period of time .
The third option therefore seems to us to be based on realistic demands reflecting clearly-defined requirements .
It is actually unfair to subject undertakings which opt for the new legal form of European company to comply with rules on workers different from those whose observance is required under Directive 94 / 45 for other companies at a Community level .
We have the opportunity of taking an approach which meets the needs of both workers and undertakings .
And it is our duty to do so .
Madam President , I am going to use my time to read a text by Mr Ribeiro who cannot , unfortunately , be present .
The subject of workers ' participation in the system of social relations in which some people see ways of exploiting the labour force and others of a non-social combination of productive factors is one of the most interesting we can discuss .
Either in terms of ideology or in terms of the practical and political expressions which might be used .
Of course , it will not only be interesting for those who , belonging to one of those schools of thought or action , feel that they have the only way of thinking or have the only authority on the matter .
However , for those people perhaps nothing is of interest and not even in terms of thought or action ...
The Menrad report , in my opinion , reflects the complexity of this question in dealing with information and consulting workers .
However , it is not innocuous and would be dangerous to identify information and consultation with participation .
The report does not make clear this vital distinction and nor does it avoid the risks of that possible identification .
To inform and to consult might become the antidote for real participation or an excuse for avoiding real participation at all .
Affirming the right to information and consultation cannot , in my opinion , be a kind of co-responsibilisation of workers at a given time , given that when things are going well information and consultation are not necessary for doing business .
I accept and support the claim of the principle of informing and consulting workers . Therefore I think that the Menrad report is positive especially in respect of multinational or transnational companies but I must , however , emphasize my reservation about the refusal to identify these actions with the participation and the co-responsibilisation of workers in management , especially since information and consultation could be used as an expedient so that workers are more ready to accept real measures taken against them during difficult economic times , dismantling systems and reversing social games .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Pronk talked about the European social model and the European system .
I think we must look at that a little more critically .
We are not here to limit ourselves to defending the status quo .
It is true that there is no change without defence , defence against the neo-liberal attempts to seize territory .
But it is equally true that attack is the best form of defence .
We have the opportunity to design the European constitution as one of the basic levels for coordinating the Europeanisation and democratisation of the economy .
That may sound presumptuous , too aggressive for some , too optimistic for others .
But that is the real situation : the neo-liberal offensive in Europe especially is threatening and has started to reduce the effective existence of employees ' chances to help shape affairs at the broader level .
That is going too far .
The least that we should decide here to do together is to reverse the current negative force of this process , and Mr Menrad 's report is the first step in that process .
But once the reverse force is under way we have no reason to bring it to a halt at the structure stage where it stopped in our national histories .
We should ensure that we really make further progress along the lines of democratising the economy .
If the people who propelled this neo-liberal dynamic force then start to complain , they only have themselves to blame .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur for the work he has done but also to ask him to forgive me if I tell him that I find some parts of his report a little obscure .
Of course , there were difficulties in translation .
And of course I handle social concepts with less facility than he does .
However , I believe , to use the language of semantics , that some of the words used take on an extended meaning that becomes all the wider as any understanding of it becomes less well-defined .
Apart from that , it would be advisable for the rapporteur to explain clearly what he means by ' co-determination ' .
I fear that term does not cover the same situation in France and Germany .
Let me now turn to a fundamental point .
The rapporteur assigns trade unions a leading role in the life of firms .
As you know , trade union history is in large measure that of a struggle between two ideas illuminated by different doctrines .
One is the doctrine of a single trade union organization , as was the case in all socialist regimes , whether communist , fascist or Nazi , and the other is that of trade union pluralism enabling workers to form any unions they wish and to join the organization of their choice .
In my country , France , the hypocrisy of the system enables us to maintain the illusion of trade union pluralism by guaranteeing in practice the preservation and privileges of the already established organizations which cling fiercely to those privileges .
It is somewhat similar to the situation here in the European Parliament , where the system is really one of a single party with dual labelling and having two extremes with slightly divergent economic doctrines .
Thus , in France , a law on ' trade union representativeness ' forbids the free candidature of workers in the first round of professional elections of staff representatives or delegates to works councils , and it is only when there is a shortfall at the first round that the worker can vote or stand for an organization of his choice not yet recognized .
Note that the French criteria for representativeness always include the patriotism shown during the years of occupation .
It is difficult to see how organizations whose founders have not yet reached retirement age could satisfy this criterion .
Not only that , but no mention is made of the fact that the communist leaders who controlled the French CGT with a rod of iron , according to the ninth and thirteenth directives of the 21 Moscow conditions , had supported the Hitler-Stalin pact and even , like the traitor Thorez , deserted from the French army straight away so as not to face the German army .
But today , in the dishonourable , unscrupulous , disloyal war in my country against the national movement and patriotic forces fighting for the independence , sovereignty and freedoms of the fatherland , there is a desire to ban new trade union organizations whose members are workers who no longer have confidence in the old union nomenklatura , in the apparatchiks incapable of expressing the desires for work , with preference given to nationals , the desires for security , for self-management of wages , for setting up modern social security systems and retirement schemes that are appropriate , better managed and better controlled .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The European join-stock company may well facilitate the change towards the internal market if one considers the ever closer economic interrelationship of companies in Europe .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has closely studied the Commission proposal , including an experts ' hearing , and I would like to thank the rapporteur particularly for resisting the pressure to produce an over-hasty conclusion .
For indeed we need time to reflect on the repercussions of the statute of a small European joint-stock company on labour relations , on relations between owners , shareholders , management , the labour force , works councils and trades unions .
We could , of course , have shown greater courage for co-determination and not for reduced participation , precisely because we were not under pressure of time .
The vision of a democratic economy , which has also been addressed , would have been important precisely at this time of economic upheaval , in view of employees ' fears at globalisation ; it would have been a signal to the labour force that Europe also values more than just shareholders .
If you will bear with me , Mr Menrad , I cannot refrain from pointing out a few inconsistencies .
In paragraph 11 I am happy to see that you say there must be no flight from co-determination .
But I as a German must point out that the German government in the last few years has taken two decisions which worsen employees ' rights ; one of them , for example , is the law on small companies dealing with co-determination rights in companies with fewer than 500 employees .
That is why I am particularly worried about paragraph 14 of your report in which you made specific reference to this matter .
We all know that most workers in Europe are employed in these small and medium-sized companies and I think that they are the ones who need special protection .
And as you also know , Germany has also made works council rights worse for very small firms , for those with fewer than ten employees .
In principle we welcome the study which you referred to in supportive terms .
But we do expect that the results will not only be made available to representatives of the social dialogue but also of course to the European Parliament .
I believe we should discuss our ideas on a future European directive and European company statute in detail and without pressure of time .
I urge that we keep national traditions but at the same time advance democracy in the world of work at the European level .
We are unfortunately still far removed from that objective on the threshold of the next century .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . First of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Menrad , very warmly .
He has brought his wide experience , his deep knowledge , his perspicacity and attention to detail to this report .
I should also like to thank the Commission for their preliminary work , even if the communication on worker information and consultation is not exactly a success story , but that is not the Commission 's fault .
Apart from the various directives on mass redundancy , the transfer of companies and the European works council which were individual successes , all other proposals have ground to a halt in the Council .
That is particularly true of the co-determination model .
The Council has not exactly excelled itself by its eagerness to take decisions , and it is time that that was made public and that the people of Europe learn exactly where matters have become stuck : not in the European Parliament , not in the Commission but in the Council .
The Commission 's four principles for solving this problem sound good : to wit , simplification , coherence , pragmatic and planned progress and general application .
But as to whether the three solutions proposed will be successful - keeping the status quo , global approach , proposals on the statute of the European company , European association or European mutual society - I am doubtful , Commissioner .
I am also afraid that we shall need some more time to find the solution to this problem , to get in all the opinions which have been requested and to see the Commission 's definitive document on the table before us .
The experts ' hearing on this subject in the Social Affairs Committee gave us a taste of the difficulties ahead in the search for a solution to the problem of informing and consulting employees .
The Commission 's group of experts , as I have unfortunately had occasion to say to you , Commissioner , is composed of theoreticians and too few practitioners .
I also think the deadlines set for this expert group on such a complex subject are too tight .
Here I agree with Mr Menrad .
I fully endorse the broad conclusions which the rapporteur has already reiterated .
I would just like to draw attention to a sentence where he writes : variant 3 ( a ) would be most acceptable in combination with option 2 . But what we must avoid is that economic opportunities of participation be replaced by simple information and consultation rights as in the EWC directive or by an as yet inexistent community instrument to regulate information and consultation at the national level .
Mr President , good industrial relations , with a well-developed relationship between the owners of a company and the management on the one side and the employed and the unions on the other is an asset for all concerned .
The Commission is proposing three different alternatives at EU level : to maintain the current situation , to establish a framework or to go straight to a proposal for a Regulation on European companies .
The committee supports the development of a framework , which seems to be a sensible and realistic measure , and the proposal to establish a Directive on the minimum level of information to , and consultation , with employees .
It is very important that this does involve a minimum of regulations and not a full harmonisation of legislation .
Each Member State must be able to maintain and develop its own regulations which may be more far reaching than the framework and the minimum requirements .
There are also large discrepancies between Member States .
In Sweden there is already a well developed system of participation through collective agreements which has proved to work well .
Above all , issues of this nature ought to be resolved and administered by the labour market and related parties .
Any proposals for legislation and directives ought therefore to be developed in close conjunction with the relevant parties in the labour market .
This proposal , Mr President , should be seen as a first step towards more far reaching employee influence at EU level as well .
Mr President , Commissioner. perhaps note should be taken of the paradox that a communication on worker participation , consultation and information has been produced without consulting the social partners .
To me that is a paradox .
Secondly I want to mention the deadlock in the Council - I suppose the communication from the Commission is intended to break that deadlock - as regards those aspects of the statutes of companies , associations , cooperatives and mutual societies that have to do with worker information , consultation and participation .
In our view this deadlock raises two questions : one - already discussed here on many occasions - is the need for qualified majority rather than unanimous decision procedure , particularly on the social issues we are so concerned about , at least in our group . The other is how easily the Council takes economic or economics-related decisions on the construction of Europe - see the last stability pact - and how difficult it finds approving anything to do with workers ' rights and citizens ' rights in general .
We think the Commission 's three proposals are broadly unacceptable unless they are changed and we naturally agree with the rapporteur that there should be a group of experts which includes trade unionists , SMEs , scientists , Parliament and the Commission , to give us a clear idea and a clear proposal for a directive guaranteeing worker consultation , information and participation once and for all .
Because , we repeat , the Europe some of us want will not exist if worker and citizen participation is not turned into reality .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Menrad on his splendid report .
It is great to have a German Conservative I can agree with , even if I cannot agree with my British Conservative colleagues .
It is nice to see someone like him involved in dealing with the social area so that real progress can be made in this Parliament .
Unfortunately , we do not get that kind of progress inside the Council of Ministers and I know very well why that is so .
Firstly , it is only right and essential , when you have a statute for a European company , that you also have the active promotion of the participatory , consultative processes within that company for workers .
It is further right that this report identifies the fact that we need to promote this progress both positively and earnestly .
The Directive on European Works Councils after all is rather too limiting for any progress to be made .
I must say to Mrs Van Lancker that the social debate in the United Kingdom is not entirely dead .
I was the editor of a pamphlet in the ' 80s which spoke about the pan-European agreements that were being forged vis-à-vis the participatory democratic relationships inside companies .
I was very pleased then that companies in the United Kingdom had taken a very positive lead in that .
But , unfortunately , the United Kingdom , as you know , is controlled by what we might refer to as the political undead .
I hope that one day we will be able to do without them .
But we must remember that inside the United Kingdom people have lost their jobs and their homes and they cannot afford to lose their hope in this respect and I know that you will join me when we try to do something about that .
This report clearly demonstrates that conflict can be avoided inside companies .
If there is anything that could demonstrate the proof of this and its relevance to our society , and indeed to the world as a whole , we must look to Seoul in Korea to see just how trade union rights are being taken away from workers with the horrendous violence which is being seen on the streets there .
It is quite obvious that this is some proof of what we can do .
Paying respect to this particular report is easy because it looks at the differing forms of economic units as well - the mutual societies , the cooperatives , the SMUs - and this is all essential if we are to have the kind of success which we know is relevant for the progress of this report .
In conclusion , therefore , I just wish to say how grateful I am to our colleague , Mr Menrad , for all the work he has done on this and I hope that we can promote this through the Commission and the Council as rapidly as possible so that it becomes law .
Mr President , I come from a country , Greece , which can claim no great traditions or achievements in the area of informing , consulting with and encouraging the participation of working people , and for that reason , if you will , from another standpoint , we note developments at the European level with particular interest .
Here , of course , we should express threefold concern , as I believe has been confirmed by other speakers too .
The first concern is that there is unfortunately this two-speed development in the European Union , one speed for monetary issues and a different speed for issues related to working peoples ' rights , and that is why we have been bogged down for decades over the issues of information , participation and consultation .
The second concern is the probable danger that instead of making it easier for countries with no great achievements to forge ahead , we may hold back and drag down achievements that already exist in other European Union countries .
The third concern is that we may end up with laws so labyrinthine , fragmented and technical , that working people will ultimately be largely excluded .
And I am afraid that this is confirmed by the existence of too many regulations and by the fact that all these debates are taking place largely beyond the range of the labour and unionist movement 's monitoring capabilities .
In this situation , I want to say that I too think Mr Menrad has produced excellent work and that proposals such as the ones about the European Company , the Committee of Experts , a directive characterized by flexibility and a high-level common denominator , are extremely important .
Mr President , this report highlights the need to make progress on working out a participation model in the question of informing and consulting employees in the co-determination process .
Flexibility , pragmatic negotiation solutions and the introduction of necessary minimum standards will play a major role in this in view of the present very different European systems .
At a time when questions of the single market and globalisation reveal the most different framework conditions to be met by employees , acceptable framework regulations are even more necessary than ever .
Today 's international economy shows ruthlessly how capital moves and is concentrated , how it vanishes , what it exploits and who becomes the pawn of this new flexibility .
The biggest problem here is that in these international processes , in these international mechanisms basic human and trade union rights are circumvented and infringed .
In this context we must also think beyond the frontiers of Europe .
We must do that in order to see more clearly .
I know full well that we cannot regulate everything , nor indeed try to do so .
But a harmonious social community demands democratic consultation and co-determination models when the existential substance of individual workers is at stake , because in the final analysis it is on that that the plurality of our society and the creation of our democratic system depends .
The lack of a European company statute which , for example provides for stronger involvement of employees , means a waste of resources on both sides and leads of course to considerable costs on the economic side .
That is something we must constantly bear in mind .
It is precisely in that context that we must reiterate that the lack of a European company statute must be regarded as a deficiency because in my opinion such a statute could also provide the incentive for investments and so employment .
The Commission 's expert group which is charged with preparing recommendations for co-determination models by April must not be allowed to remain solely a platform for debate but should also give the necessary impetus for action .
Here it is important that the European solution adopted does not allow any escape for any company from countries with stricter regulations .
Otherwise we would only need to start talking about de-regulation downwards and that surely cannot be the credo of our action .
To sum up , the Menrad report in my view contains reasonable proposals on how the objective of co-determination can be reached and it also points out the risks of inaction in this matter .
A refusal to have co-determination is the most expensive wrong investment for the economy .
That is something we must never forget .
Mr President , I would like to thank you and your colleagues in the European Parliament for the excellent way you have addressed the Commission communication of 14 November on worker information and consultation .
I believe the motion for a resolution which we are discussing and which you are going to vote on , as well as its explanatory statement , illustrates very clearly the careful attention you have all paid to this very important subject .
This applies especially to Mr Menrad who has made quite a decisive contribution to the settlement of some previous dossiers , such as the European Works Councils .
We all want to acknowledge that .
I thank you in particular for the great efforts you are making once again with this excellent own-initiative report , trying to help out the European institutions in this important matter .
As Mr Menrad emphasizes in his report , the Commission communication addresses two main subjects .
The first is the need for a Community level framework for information and consultation in national undertakings .
The second concerns the attempt to break the deadlock regarding the European Company Statute and a number of other related proposals , all of which are pending and are important in the fulfilment of the internal market .
Regarding the first issue , I very much welcome the positive approach which you have adopted .
In the light of the consultations which have followed the Commission 's communication , I shall be presenting to the Commission in the coming months a proposal to initiate the procedure for the consultation of the social partners at European level .
I very much hope that the social partners will be willing and able to identify the content of the rules which should apply here and to reach an agreement on how these rules will be put in place .
The second issue raised in the communication is very complex as illustrated by the fact that the Commission is seeking to break a deadlock which has existed for more than a quarter of a century .
This deadlock deprives European industry of a very valuable instrument - the European Company Statute - which would be extremely useful in helping industry to adapt to the new single market conditions and to become more competitive worldwide .
The imminence of the third phase of economic and monetary union now reinforces the urgent need to make this instrument available .
The European Council is well aware of the urgent need to make progress on this matter and , indeed , has reaffirmed its commitment to do just that as recently as last June at its meeting in Florence .
If , as I hope , Mr Menrad 's report is adopted by the European Parliament you will be making a decisive contribution towards identifying the constructive solutions which are required and I very much welcome the fact that you agree with the Commission on the basic precondition for progress that has to be made in this matter , and that is on the need to find an adequate set of rules applicable to the European company which preserve national systems while at the same time avoiding imposing foreign models of worker involvement in individual Member States .
Today I am pleased to say this represents common ground but you have not restricted yourselves to merely restating this basic position .
Mr Menrad 's paper goes much further and analyses in depth a number of ways in which this approach could be put into effect .
You have put forward many innovative ideas which will be of very great help to us in trying to find a way out of the present difficulties .
There are many difficulties to be overcome as has been stated by many of the contributors to the debate .
As you know , the Commission has recently established a high level group of independent experts chaired by Mr Davignon .
This expert group is an additional forum for reflection and will be an extra source of ideas on this issue .
I understand that there will be a delegation from the European Parliament including Mr Menrad which will be meeting the members of this group in the very near future .
I urge you to discuss your ideas , which are articulated in the report , with the expert group .
I am sure it will be very useful and an important input to their work .
On the basis of all the contributions received by the Commission on its communication as well as the report from the expert group , I am looking forward to coming back to you on behalf of the Commission and to the other Community institutions .
My aim is to have concrete solutions capable of gathering the support required for the conclusion of this long-standing debate .
Ms Oddy put it very well when she said that Europe needs the European company .
It is a very important matter for the perfection of the internal market .
I agree .
Mr Pronk recognized very clearly that there are many different systems in existence throughout the Community and it will not be easy to bring them all together .
I would like to look forward to having a system which would be both useful and flexible for all those wishing to use it , so that it could enjoy the confidence both of business and commerce and also respect the need for appropriate involvement of workers .
The European company has always been necessary for the internal market .
With the advent of EMU and the single currency , it will not just be necessary but essential .
To Mrs Van Lancker and Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez I would say on consultation that the Commission 's communication was a consultative document and it seemed to me to be much more appropriate to put our ideas up front first rather than consult people in advance of putting the consultation document into play .
There will be very wide consultation as a consequence of all we have now done .
Finally , we have been trying to achieve this for twenty-six years .
It was first brought up in 1970 but I would remind the House that even before that Robert Schuman spoke of the urgent need for achieving the market of having such an instrument .
After all these years we are now arriving at the possibility of a solution which has evaded the Union for so many years .
Other matters have been put in place and have been helped by the House , in particular the European Works Council , so that we can now look forward to a solution here as well .
After all those years I remain optimistic .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Protection of forests
The next item is the report ( A4-0417 / 96 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposals for Council Regulations amending :

I. Regulation ( EEC ) No 3528 / 86 on the protection of the Community 's forests against atmospheric pollution ( COM ( 96 ) 0341 - C4-0476 / 96-96 / 0185 ( CNS ) ) ; II.Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 / 92 on protection of the Community 's forests against fire ( COM ( 96 ) 0341 - C40477 / 96-96 / 0186 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I was relying on the Commissioner making a long speech .
Usually you can rely on these things , but the very time I wanted him to make a long speech , he cut it short .
It is quite terrible !
I shall send you a message in future : ' Do not worry , make a long speech ' , I shall say .
I apologise for my absence , but the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection was being reconstituted .
Now that it is reconstituted I can tell you about this report .
In fact , it is completely uncontroversial .
The committee has examined the Commission 's two proposals : one , on the protection of forests against atmospheric pollution and the other on forest fires .
We have looked at these and think that they are laudable .
They are contributions to sustainable forestry .
They build on existing programmes and simply bring them up-to-date .
They extend the life of the programmes and make the necessary budgetary changes .
We had one problem with the Commission and that was the way in which it presented the budgetary provisions .
The Commission wanted to include the budgetary provisions in the proposals .
That is contrary to the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1995 and so , on examining the two proposals the Budget Committee made some amendments .
It is the view of the Environment Committee that the Budget Committee 's amendments should be accepted : they substitute advisory committees for management committees , thus making the whole thing more open and , I hesitate to say above-board , but at least transparent .
The Budget Committee also pointed out that we need to have mid-term assessment of cost-effectiveness and implementation performance .
Again , the Environment Committee thought that that was a wise suggestion .
We are therefore prepared to recommend acceptance of the Budget Committee amendments .
When we voted I recommended the inclusion of these amendments and the committee has followed that advice .
We think , as a committee , that these reports will make a very large difference to European Union forestry policy and they will continue existing , successful programmes .
They have cross-party and inter-committee support .
Therefore I , like the Commissioner before me , do not need to make a very long speech .
I can finish at this point because nobody has sent me a message to ask me to speak any longer !
I recommend that Parliament accept these reports .
Mr President , we have here one of those proposals which we simply have to approve , among other things because it restates principles - already set out in 1986 and then retabled in 1992 - which we are now updating for a further five years .
At a time when we are proposing that the European Union make a new economic and organizational effort , it might be appropriate to consider the results of these ten years of experiment and commitment .
As regards the first problem , the problem of pollution , a specialist report tells us that , between 1988 and the present , European forests have suffered continuing and progressive impoverishment as a result of the corrosive effect of atmospheric pollution : defoliation , decoloration and the extinction of the more vulnerable plant species stimulate us to make a greater effort in the area of scientific research , giving it priority over monitoring and cataloguing , the procedures and criteria for which ought , in our view , to be firmly established ten years on .
The issue of protection against fire is a different and more complex one .
The study tells us that almost half of Europe 's forests are at risk of fire : 400 , 000 fires were officially recorded between 1985 and 1995 , but is possible that there were many more .
All of them are caused , one way or another , by man .
The main culprit is carelessness on the part of those who frequent forests to work or hunt or for recreational purposes ; the second is inadequate maintenance of agricultural land bordering on forest , with unmown grassland resulting in a lethal deposit of highly-flammable hay ; the third - and perhaps the most - critical cause is crime .
Aside from the fires started by those who are unbalanced in one way or another , there are throughout Europe criminal organizations which start fires in order to benefit from the financial incentives provided for extinguishing fires and for reafforestation .
On the basis of the principle of subsidiarity , Mr President , Commissioner , I think that we should set under way studies and inquiries on that issue in particular , before agreeing to any proposals - what we need then are initiatives able to identify those proposals that are objectively valid .
Finally , the resources are very limited : ECU 70 m for fighting fires .
That is very little if we really want to make more progress .
Mr President , the report by Mr Thomas debated this evening states that the forests have deteriorated by 3.8 % compared with the previous year .
So that adds another 3.8 % to the 27 % of European trees that were already in trouble .
Hence the need to approve these regulations and the funds to help implement them , expressed by the chairman of the Committee on the Environment .
As he said , there was no great problem approving this report on the regulations and funds .
However , perhaps remembering the debate this evening , the substantial differences between the various countries in terms of a Community policy to support the forestry sector need to be made clear , and the Committee on the Environment tried to achieve that on several occasions .
Certainly there are difficulties , because there is diversity of forests , diversity in the way different countries deal with them , but if the European Union is to comply with the various conventions it has signed - Rio Conference , Helsinki Conference and also the Vth Environmental Action Programme - it is essential not only to implement these regulations , but also , after discussions between the various countries and the European Union , to achieve a common policy to protect our forests .
Otherwise it will not be possible to implement the ' Habitats ' directive properly by the year 2000 .
Mr President , atmospheric pollution is no respecter of national boundaries , that much is obvious .
The problems of Scandinavia 's forests are a clear demonstration of the fact .
I thus think that European cofinancing of research into the quality of the forests is a good thing .
The regulation we are looking at here has been several years in the making and the results of the research are gradually becoming known .
I have been looking through the findings published in the summary report of 1996 .
One of the thing which struck me was that the data show that it is excessive dryness , rather than air pollution , which damages the forests .
And then we are talking about a specific region , the region around the Mediterranean .
That is a remarkable finding .
But it does not mean that air pollution does not play a part too .
A quarter of trees were found to have lost a considerable proportion of their needles or leaves .
So the research has so far yielded all this and it would seem a good idea to extend it .
Now most of the money is already going not into observation via the systematic network , but into model and demonstration projects .
I can understand that shift , though I do think we should consider reducing the level of European support once the new five-year period is up .
The provision of aid always carries the risk that it will just be tacitly extended each time , when we ought to be wondering if the research objective has not in fact been achieved .
It would seem that five years of research will yield enough data to enable conclusions to be drawn .
I would then find it logical , on the basis of the research findings , to switch the funding to the routine protection of forests , that is to say to measures to counter air pollution and its effects on the soils and measures to counter desiccation .
We shall of course have to consider all that nearer the time , but what worries me is that all too often more and more new research objectives are mooted in order to secure the flow of funding .
In my view this applies even more to the regulation on forest fires .
To conclude , Mr President , I am happy to support most of the amendments .
Mr President , first of all I want to express the support of my group , the European People 's Party , for this proposal from the Commission to extend the two forest protection programmes in their dual role of prevention of atmospheric contamination and protection against fire .
These programmes can be generally felt to have been effective and Community coordination and evaluation of these two general phenomena continue to be necessary .
But questions need to be put to the Commission , and some suggestions may also be in order .
The atmospheric contamination protection programme is often thought to have been positive in its dual aims of establishing a general forest observation network - already covering the whole of the territory of the European Union and according to Commission reports , now operational - and an intensive monitoring network .
The Commission has also presented us with data on over 200 pilot schemes developed , approved and financed .
But we are told virtually nothing about the final objective and the evaluation of these programmes which have been developed over 10 years , and one of the European Commission 's responsibilities is precisely to make the final evaluation of all these research programmes , which are focused on establishing whether or not there is a causal relationship between atmospheric contamination and the damage being observed in the forests .
After 10 years of research throughout Europe , with the full collaboration of national research and international programmes , it is a little perplexing to find that there is still no data for evaluating and establishing cause and effect and , above all , procedures for looking after forests and forest floors .
The Commission should be asked to deepen this evaluation and , if new research programmes are needed , they must be carried out .
We cannot go on observing the deterioration of the forests , providing statistics and taking no measures .
The impetus for the fire protection programme and the evaluation carried out in all the European Union countries has been positive , especially in the most affected , like Spain , Portugal , Italy and France and , in part , Germany too .
But greater effort and cooperation between the Member States is still needed , because although there has been a reduction in the area burned , the number of forest fires has actually doubled since 1986 , and there are days - this statistic ought to be on the front page of the newspapers - when two fires break out every minute in Europe .
This really does not make sense and there are no supernatural causes .
The phenomenon clearly involves criminal acts and negligence by the authorities , because an additional statistic is that 50 % of the causes of these fires remain unknown .
Member States should be told that if they want to go on receiving Community aid , they must intensify their vigilance and especially their research .
And , in the southern countries , the Member States must give local communities and councils greater responsibility for protecting the forests around them .
I think that is an essential tool of effective protection .
Mr President , I too agree with the furtherance of this extension of programmes related to the protection of forests from atmospheric pollution and fires .
This is certainly a positive action by the Commission , and I agree with all that the rapporteur Mr Collins said .
Here , of course , we should bear in mind that in recent years the continuing destruction of forests by fire , especially in the South , has assumed uncontrolled proportions and of course , from that point of view , nobody can absolve the administrations of the Member States from blame .
I think , however , and we saw the same thing this morning in the Thomas report , that the European Union is doing far less than it could , both about protection and about improving the infrastructure , encouraging technical cooperation between the Member States , educating the workforce , and even setting up a task force for the entire European Union , which could contribute to the control of fires .
I do not think this closes the subject , it is simply an opportunity for us to observe , now that it is still winter and not yet summer , that the issue is still open and requires much greater readiness to intervene and to support the European Union 's action .
Mr President , I am pleased that , in spite of everything - since there was some doubt whether there would be any at all - we are having a report and debate on these important matters .
However , we have to recognize that the sums provided for funding these five-year programmes are very small .
It is a hopeful sign that the amount proposed to deal with pollution is up on the previous period , but it is surprising that the grant for fire protection was not increased .
The number of fires in Europe is tending to increase considerably .
That in itself would justify an increase in the modest grant of ECU 70 million over five years , i.e. ECU 14 million per annum , particularly as it would be funding preventive measures .
For it is noticeable that , although the number of fires increases at places where preventive work has been carried out , they are considerably smaller : the affected areas are then also much smaller .
Moreover , providing funds for prevention reduces by as much the considerable cost of reafforestation .
An appreciable saving is made in this way .
That is why , on behalf of the PPE Group , I tabled Amendment No 20 , identical with that of Mr Weber , seeking to increase the grant relating to forest fires from ECU 70 million to ECU 100 million which is still an eminently reasonable sum since , over five years , it amounts to ECU 20 million per year .
So on behalf of my group , I ask you , Mr Rapporteur , to be willing to accept this amendment .
I ask Parliament to adopt it and the Commission to take it over .
Mr President , today Parliament has been giving very serious attention to the problems of our forests , which cover 41.5 % of the agricultural land of Member States , two thirds of which are happily private property .
I would be preaching here to the converted if I were to repeat what was also rightly stressed in the debate on the Thomas report concerning the multiple role played by European forests in the environmental , health and leisure fields but also in social and economic areas .
A good European Union forestry policy must not ignore the spirit of principle of subsidiarity : as little Community regulation as possible , limited to what is necessary .
Using European resources to protect forests against atmospheric pollution that ignores frontiers and protecting Community forests against fires are Community activities that are worth strengthening and continuing .
It is therefore important that we are given the resources for this policy , particularly as regards the protection of forests against fires .
I therefore call urgently for the adoption of the amendment from our group , presented by my colleague , Mr de Brémond d 'Ars , which seeks to increase the amount of Community funding set aside for implementing the necessary action .
Having been able to appreciate , both in my own country and in the Community generally , the role played by foresters and their professional organizations in the context of good forestry management and fire protection , I am particularly anxious that they should participate effectively in Community action for the protection of forests and I hope the Commission can reassure us on this point .
As vice-chairman of the Hunting , Fishing and Environmental Intergroup of this Parliament , I would also like to stress the outstanding part played by hunters and their organizations in protecting forests and wild life habitats , a part that is too often misunderstood in some sections of this Parliament .
Hunters ' organizations must also be full partners in the implementation of Community measures designed to protect our forests .
So do not forget them , Commissioner .
Mr President , although aware of the absolute need to put into effect strict preventive measures and effective rules to combat atmospheric pollution , our society is nevertheless revealing itself to be hidebound and inclined to inflict damage on itself .
Not even the Commission has been able to reverse this trend and secure a real understanding of the need to protect the environment and the health of citizens . It revealed its own limitations when it failed to propose adequate financial support .
In point of fact , this is totally inadequate compared with the problem of safeguarding forests and preventing the fires which play so great a part in their destruction .
The damage caused to forests largely results from : the atmospheric pollution caused by the major industrial complexes ; the change in weather conditions brought about by this disruption to natural balances which has devastating consequences , triggering processes of degradation , such as defoliation and foliage decoloration ; and fires - both fires that result from natural causes and those which are the result of human stupidity .
Community action will have , therefore , firstly , to seek to harmonize the efforts of the Member States to prevent this problem , which principally affects the southern states of the Union where fires have resulted in the destruction of more than 500 , 000 hectares of forest .
If we then consider the funding allocated to the two programmes on forest protection , during the first five years of their application , and note that the available resources have been practically exhausted , it is clear just how inadequate that funding is .
We are therefore asking , on the one hand , for the Commission to identify those areas particularly at risk and make them the main target of Community aid and , on the other , for the Member States to submit global fire protection programmes . The latter must not be general , that is not particularly detailed , programmes ; they must be specific and as clear as possible .
We are absolutely convinced of the importance of creating a fire monitoring and information system for the Community as a whole and support the request of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection that the management committee originally provided for should be replaced with consultative committees which , if nothing else , would help limit the influence of the Council and strengthen the role of the European Parliament .
First of all I should like to express the Commission 's thanks to you , Mr Collins , rapporteur , and the Members of your committee for the quality of their work .
I would also like to stress the importance of the analysis in the reports from the Budget and Agricultural Committees and their respective rapporteurs also .
They have all taken a very positive stance on the protection of the Union 's forestry resources and the continuation of the Community measures in that sector .
It is very clear both from the Thomas report this morning and this afternoon that the protection and maintenance of forests is an extremely important topic .
It is widely debated throughout the world , particularly in view of the significant role of forests in combating desertification , climate changes and in the preservation of biodiversity .
By signing the Rio Declaration , the Union formally undertook to help in the conservation , development and sustainable management of forests , whether in its own territory or elsewhere .
The Sustainable Development Commission , with its governmental panel on forests , and the Helsinki Conference of Ministers on the protection of forests in Europe are the result of that undertaking .
The two forest protection measures referred to by Mr Collins that we are now proposing to extend are the key elements in the conservation of Europe 's forests .
Their importance is underlined by the fact that about a quarter of our forests are showing reduced vitality and half-a-million hectares are devastated by fire each particular year .
I would like to say to Mr Valverde López that there has been quite some success to date when you consider the statistic that in ten years there have only been ten days without a forest fire , with 95 % of all the forest fires taken care of and controlled within ten minutes of starting .
A lot of good work has been done there .
We should recognize that .
You have all expressed your broad agreement with the extension and the strengthening of these two important measures .
For that I want to thank you .
I also understand that you have proposed a number of amendments .
Several of these are common to both regulations .
With regard to the legal basis - Amendments Nos 9 and 1 - I can understand your concern that the two measures should have separate legal bases as was previously the case .
But nonetheless the Commission considers that Article 43 is both appropriate and sufficient and is not disposed to amend the legal base at this time .
You have also quite rightly noted that there is a new formula for estimating the amounts needed to be stated in the two new proposals for regulations , that is , Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 10 , 12 , 13 and 16 .
This is , in particular , what Mr Collins referred to .
We had quite mistakenly failed to take account of that change .
This omission was also pointed out by the Council 's working parties .
The wording of the two regulations has been revised accordingly in the light of the precise wording of the March 1995 Interinstitutional Agreement referred to by the rapporteur , between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The amendments that you have requested in the committee procedure - Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 14 and 15 - refer primarily to the publication of discussions within committees .
As you will know , this matter has since been settled by agreement between Parliament and the Commission and redrafting of the legal texts is not longer required .
You then ask for the Standing Forestry Committee to be changed into an advisory committee .
But in practice the committee already acts in an advisory role in most cases .
So I do not think that such a change should be part of this simple extension which is being sought today .
I would make the point about the amendments concerning the mid-term assessment , Amendments Nos 8 and 17 , that periodical evaluation reports on measures are published regularly , particularly with regard to forest health status and details on forest fires .
The Commission will ensure that these reports are made available to the honourable Members by means of a more appropriate information process .
The atmospheric pollution matter was referred to in four amendments , that is , Amendments Nos 22 , 25 , 26 and 28 .
They are of particular interest .
However , we should remember that this is simply an extension of an action whose systems are already established at national , Community and international levels .
So it is difficult therefore for the Commission to agree to those requests at this present time .
For the protection of forests against fire , several amendments , Amendments Nos 18 , 19 and 23 , ask for the financing of prevention measures to be made conditional on immediate replanting after fires and also to provide for the financing of insurance for that replanting .
These are measures which are not directly linked to the action and they would , I suggest , be very cumbersome .
In addition , some experts have stated that they would not always be desirable or technically feasible .
The Commission notes with much interest that there are amendments asking for an increase in the amount allocated to that action , that is , Amendments Nos 20 , 24 and 27 , which were particularly mentioned by Mr de Brémond d 'Ars .
We would like that to happen also .
Unfortunately I am afraid such an increase does not appear a realistic proposition at this time given the current budgetary situation .
Lastly , the Commission would like to welcome the amendments concerning the vital role of the rural population in the prevention of forest fires .
Perhaps this refers to what Mrs Lulling was saying as well : Amendments Nos 11 and 21 .
This is a subject that we take very seriously .
Within the Standing Forestry Committee we are cooperating closely with professional agricultural and forestry bodies to study the causes of fires and improve the protection measures generally . Accordingly we accept these amendments with some pleasure .
I would once more like to thank the rapporteurs .
Thank you , Mr Collins , and the Members of your committee for their very great efforts and their continuing concern for the protection of this great resource of Europe and of forest resources generally , which we will be passing on to future generations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Application of customs and agricultural law
The next item is the report by Mrs Theato ( A4-0303 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the change of the legal basis of the proposal for a Council Regulation on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters ( COM ( 93 ) 0350 and COM ( 94 ) 34-4324 / 95 - C4-0212 / 95-00 / 0450 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . The proposal for a regulation on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities in customs and agricultural matters has already trod a long and weary path .
Unfortunately there is not yet any sign of a speedy solution .
The conflict with the Council on the legal base to be applied has not been resolved .
May I briefly remind you of the background .
In December 1993 the European Parliament , under the co-decision procedure in Article 189b of the EEC Treaty , adopted a legislative opinion on the proposal for a regulation on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities and the creation of a customs information system , CIS for short .
Thereupon the Commission presented an amended proposal which incorporated most of Parliament amendments .
In December 1994 the Council adopted not a common position but a political stance in which it invalidated the legal base of Article 100a proposed by the Commission and replaced it with Article 235 together with Article 43 .
That is how co-decision was turned into a simple consultation of Parliament , and it was done by a unilateral decision of the Council , with an abstention from one Member State .
This unilateral behaviour is unacceptable to us .
Parliament now has formally to adopt an opinion on two questions .
Firstly : is Article 235 justified as a legal base ?
Secondly : is the legal base significant only in procedural terms or also in substantive terms ?
On question 1 , the Council argues that the customs information system contained in the proposal for a regulation constitutes an integral community entity which does not relate to the harmonisation of individual national legislation for the internal market provided for by Article 100a .
Why , I would like to know , did neither Commission nor Council think of separating the CIS from the rest of the proposal in order to deal with it directly under Article 235 ?
There were informal talks here with the rapporteur .
The real regulation on the introduction and development of mutual assistance , as I explained before to the House and therefore do not need to repeat today , creates a regulatory environment allowing mutual assistance to be activated and to operate in relations between the Member States and with the Commission .
This is clearly confirmed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Civil Liberties in its excellent opinion .
I am very grateful to Mrs Palacio , who drafted the opinion , for stressing that in her accompanying opinion .
As both national and community norms are mainly involved , this is undoubted harmonisation and therefore subject to Article 100a . A ruling from the European Court of Justice stipulates that a decision cannot be based on several legal bases which prescribe different procedures : Article 235 - consultation and unanimity in the Council , Article 43 - consultation of Parliament and qualified majority in the Council , Article 100a co-decision of Parliament and qualified majority in the Council .
Furthermore the ruling states that the procedure which can strengthen Parliament 's participation in legislation takes precedence .
That brings us back again to Article 100a . Incidentally it is not only the legal service of the Commission but also that of the Council that confirms the correctness of Article 100a .
On question 2 , the substantive significance of the legal base .
The Council accepts five amendments from Parliament , either verbatim or in essence , in its political stance .
But other basic amendments made by the Commission in its modified proposal were ignored by the Council .
Instead the Council said that information may only be passed on between administrative authorities once individual authorization has been granted by the judicial authorities .
That can mean delay or even obstruction .
In addition essential data in the CIS is omitted .
This is of particular importance for transit traffic which we are dealing with in the sub-committee ; the results of this should be available soon .
The Council plans to exclude mutual assistance not only in restrictions of public order but also in other basic interests of the Member States .
That is , excuse me , an elastic clause .
The Council has also made many amendments to the Commission 's text .
It questions the equal value of findings by an authority in another Member State .
In Article 43 the advisory committee is replaced by a type 3B regulatory committee .
What inconsistency the Council is guilty of !
On the one hand there should be an integral community entity under Article 235 , on the other hand it should be subjected to cumbersome national procedures .
Four countries , namely Denmark , Ireland , the United Kingdom and Sweden want to opt out from the regulation on non-automatic data processing .
In other words , à la carte .
I conclude that on the matter of substance the proposal for a regulation also calls for co-decision , especially after the textual amendments made by the Council .
I specifically ask the Commission - and I know , Commissioner Bonino , that you will take a view now - to clarify the statement that you , i.e. the Commission , added to the Council minutes in which the Commission expressed its regret at the modification to the legal base and reserved the right to avail of suitable legal means , and I ask which means .
Thank you for your attention and I urge the House to approve the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I am very pleased that at least the Council is present .
Behind the legal cloak of an issue concerning Articles 235 and 100a , the real issue is of high political significance .
It is the clear indication of a lack of political will by the Council of Ministers to have the heart of a Community structure function properly .
We are just about to adopt a report from the committee of inquiry into the Community transit system .
That committee of inquiry came to the conclusion that what is at the heart of our common internal tariff is fraud-prone and error-prone .
There is a lack of statistics and a lack of clarity in the application of the common customs tariff .
This Community structure is a scandal .
What is the Council 's reply to this ?
The Council 's reply is to invoke spurious legal arguments to maintain the semblance of national sovereignty rather than having a strong internal market structured to apply the system .
Because that is basically what we want : we want to have good cooperation between the Member States so that the common customs tariff functions .
What is the Council 's reply ?
Mrs Theato made it abundantly clear : it is to undermine the effectiveness of the system by changing proposals from the Commission to make them less efficient and more bureaucratic and thereby to contribute to the undoing of the internal market .
I hold the Council responsible for a lack of political will to have the system function properly .
That is what is behind this whole issue .
Mrs Theato very clearly indicated that , of course , there is also the question of the institutional balance between Parliament and the Council .
How can one seriously say that the need is to have more democracy and more transparency when at exactly the same moment the Council wants to undermine the codecision power of Parliament .
The titanium dioxide case makes it abundantly clear that Parliament has its rights .
That is the political heart of the matter .
My sole question to the Commission is : will it stand firm , possibly even going to court to make the Council accountable for a failure of the internal market system as it now stands to function ?
Mr President , I am sorry that my colleague Mr Tomlinson cannot be here , but as you all know , the constituent meetings of the various committees are taking place , and it is difficult to be in several places at once .
Looking at the Chamber , one can clearly see that this report is not a great best-seller , even though it deals with a most important sector and is perhaps one of the best reports ever produced by Mrs Theato .
But let me make one thing clear : we must sort out the fraudsters in the EU !
There are many reasons why public opinion in Europe is not always favourable towards the Union .
One of them is the stories about how easy it is to commit fraud with the Union 's money .
To put it another way , one justification for European cooperation can be a continuing fight against fraud .
Another reason for the limited public backing for the EU is of course the ideas about closed doors and the self-perpetuating talk from men in suits .
To put it another way , a further justification for European cooperation is increased democracy and openness in the Union 's decision-making process .
It should be obvious that this situation has to be taken into account and respected , for example when establishing the legal basis in a specific matter .
But let me make a second thing clear .
They have once more been day-dreaming in the Council !
We should use Article 235 as little as possible .
Firstly , because an objective approach in a specific matter should involve the use of Article 100a , not Article 235 .
Secondly , because we wish to have democracy , and openness in the decision-making process .
Thirdly , because the people see Article 235 as a downward path on which the EU , by taking legislative action in new areas , is moving further and further away from openness and from the principle of being closer to its citizens .
It may be that this is not bound up quite in this way with Article 235 , but once again the fact is that the people see this and we have to take account of it .
I can therefore only support and commend to the House this valuable piece of work by the rapporteur .
Another factor is that we have a good committee which is agreed on these matters , and I really do hope that the Council listens and perhaps begins to show more interest in what is happening in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I would expect us not just to have special occasions when the Council goes there once in a while by mistake and sees what is happening in the committee .
The Dutch presidency should listen and take note .
Then it may start to appreciate what is involved here , and perhaps we can do some work for the European project among the individual members of the Community .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , like Parliament , has divided feelings about the situation created by the change in legal basis envisaged by the Council .
Firstly , it is undeniable that the fight against fraud demands that this proposal for a regulation be quickly brought into force .
The strengthened machinery for customs cooperation for which it provides , together with , at least , the legal possibility of creating a database for the customs information system respond to an urgent necessity .
Secondly , the change of legal basis , involving consultation with Parliament instead of codecision and unanimous adoption by Member States instead of qualified majority voting , poses a serious institutional problem for the Commission .
As you know , when the common guidelines were adopted , the Commission insisted that a statement regretting this development be recorded in the Council minutes . I quote : ' the Commission reserves the right to make use of any legal means open to it ' .
Of course , the Council acting unanimously really does have the right to modify proposals from the Commission .
That is not being called into question .
However , the Commission shares Parliament 's opinion that this amendment in particular has no legal basis and also that , by removing the proposal from the field of application of the codecision procedure , the Council is infringing the powers of Parliament .
Consequently , the Commission awaits with great interest the reaction of the Council to the opinion that Parliament will deliver on the matter .
Depending on the decision that will then be taken by the Council , the Commission will take a decision in regard to compliance with Community law .
In more concrete terms , the Commission reserves to itself the possibility of bringing the question of the legal basis before the Court of Justice .
There in a few words , that I hope are precise and clear , is the Commission 's position on the dossier under examination by Parliament .
The Commission also wishes to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Theato , and eagerly awaits your decision .
Thank you Mr President , for calling me again .
I would like to thank Commissioner Bonino very sincerely for her very clear statement .
I think that the Council benches have also given the relevant signal to the House to resolve this conflict .
That is in everyone 's interest , and I ask you not to think we are working here in private .
This is a public debate .
Even if , for various reasons , there are very few Members in the House just now , that does not mean that we are debating in camera .
I think Mr Blak made that point very clearly , and I would thank him for doing so .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 6.25 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , we have had a few problems with voting in the House this week .
In the Minutes under paragraph 39 on the revision of the treaties I am listed as voting for that particular paragraph .
I do not know if it was a malfunction of my fingers or a malfunction of the machine but I intended to vote against it .
Don 't worry , Mr Hallam , we will put the mistake down to the machine and the Minutes will show that you voted correctly .
Mr President , in yesterday 's minutes I am omitted from the list of those present .
In fact , I may have forgotten to sign the attendance register but I was certainly there , as my participation in the various roll-call votes will testify .
I would therefore be grateful for any instructions you can give to have the minutes corrected about this .
Mr Hory , the Minutes will be corrected but your word counts for more than any proof . Your word is all we need to correct the Minutes .
Mr President , I am in the same situation as Mr Hory .
I do not know whether my word carries as much weight as his does but , like him , I took part in several roll-call votes that testify to my presence here but forgot to sign .
Mr Bourlanges , I do not know if your very wide knowledge includes the Spanish saying ' Tanto monta , monta tanto , Isabel como Fernando ' , but it means your word counts just the same as Mr Hory 's .
Mr President , I rise on a point which I would like you to convey to the President of Parliament .
By invitations sent out yesterday , we have just been invited to celebrate his presidency at a musical evening on Sunday evening when most Members will not be in Brussels .
We would all have liked to have been there and as President of the Friends of Music in Parliament I would like to have had earlier notice .
Perhaps you could convey the regret and apologies of Members who will not be present .
Mr Kerr , you can be quite sure that I shall convey that message to the President and I associate myself with them , because unfortunately I cannot be at the evening either .
Mr President , on the same point .
We have this invitation which is headed Exclusive Recital .
Of course it is going to be exclusive as an invitation to Members if it is held on a day when Members are not in the place of work .
However , my question is slightly more fundamental than Mr Kerr 's .
The invitation which invites us to celebrate the inauguration of the new President of the European Parliament comes in the name of Mr Luigi Mormino , chairman of the artistic committee of the European Parliament .
I know that Mr Mormino has all sorts of qualities but I had never directly associated him with great artistic talent .
I wanted to know whether this great responsibility as chairman of the artistic committee is one that is distributed by some sort of administrative d 'Hondt system amongst the officers .
This week we have had to decide how we distribute talent amongst the Members .
Perhaps some time we could be told how Mr Mormino achieves his great rank and honour and how he is then given the authority to have the concert to honour the President at a time when Members cannot come and to do so in association with a private company .
That is something the President might want to look at .


I did not want to interrupt Mr Kerr or Mr Tomlinson out of parliamentary courtesy , but I would remind them that we are still on approval of the Minutes .
So we ought to deal with these issues later .
I have taken note of what Mr Kerr and Mr Tomlinson said though , and I shall open the appropriate investigation into the musical qualities of the person who has been given the responsibility mentioned .
But now , ladies and gentlemen , if there are no more comments on the Minutes , I take it they are approved .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
The importance of extending the regulations on atmospheric contamination and on protecting forests from fire is beyond a doubt , as I already had occasion to point out in the debate a few years ago .
Today I am only interested in underlining that one of the great difficulties about establishing the concept of sustainable development in the rural development zones in the south of the Union arises from the serious consequences of forest fires , the summer plague in that part of the Union .
So the amendments seeking to upgrade the funding for these measures by ECU 70-100 million are essential to proper conservation and regeneration of the forest heritage of the Union .
I will therefore vote in favour .
I end , Mr President , by calling , once again , for the establishment of a common forestry policy for the whole Union .
That would also respond to the Fifth Action Programme on the Environment and the Rio Declaration .
Cornelissen report ( A4-0381 / 96 )
I wish to pay tribute to Mr Cornelissen , the author of the report on ' air traffic management ' , and to the high quality of his work , whose contents are very satisfactory .
For this reason , I am naturally voting in favour .
May I highlight two important elements in the report .
The first is that of the cost efficiency of air traffic control .
Although this can legitimately be optimized , such a step must not entail abandoning consideration of the constraints associated with the maintenance of a public air traffic control service , so that the quality of the service provided can be guaranteed over the whole territory covered .
The second element I wish to emphasize is the promotion of greater safety .
In any actions that are taken , priority must be given to harmonizing the working methods of air traffic controllers and I am thinking here particularly of the terminology used .
These two points are covered in amendments broadly approved by members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
They are a useful and welcome addition to this very good report .
Increased security and better operating systems are required to keep pace with the estimated doubling of air traffic by the year 2000 .
But it should not be taken for granted that it is the EU which should negotiate and regulate these issues .
It is the Member States which should do this as part of an international interstate process , with as many countries as possible participating .
A coordinated European ' air traffic authority ' should of course cover all European countries and must consequently be regulated at a broader level than the EU .
I have voted for this report today because I share the concern that not enough is being done to end the frustration and waste of airport delays .
The frustration caused to the travelling public by such delays is not acceptable .
People with business appointments should be able to rely on Europe 's air traffic control system to get them to their destination on time .
The same is true for the countless holidaymakers who lose some of their well-deserved break through delayed flights .
With Manchester Airport close to my constituency , I also know that the airport , its airlines and staff would benefit from the huge savings in time and money which a better traffic control system would bring .
Whilst I welcome yesterday 's decision in favour of a second runway for Manchester Airport , without better air traffic control in future chaos could result for travellers .
Along with the industry and the millions of air passengers concerned , I will be looking to our governments and the Commission to improve Europe 's air traffic systems .
After all , freedom of movement around Europe is central to our economic future .
Castricum report ( A4-0419 / 96 )
This is for the most part a good report , so we will follow the line taken by the Socialist group and vote in favour of it .
But we do have serious reservations on two points .
These are Article 13 , which states that the best thing for public transport is for it to be put out to private enterprise , and Article 24 which states that running public transport should ' as far as possible be financed with income from tickets ' .
Article 13 discriminates directly against public companies .
There is absolutely no evidence in our country , Sweden , that public transport is any less efficient than private .
As for Article 24 , this is a generalisation which is not always true .
Sometimes ( or even often ) it is necessary , for social economic reasons , to subsidise heavily the operating costs of public transport .
Sometimes there is even a need for zero charges .
In Sweden , public transport would disappear totally from practically all remote areas if operating costs had to be met from the income from ticket sales .
This would be a totally unacceptable development .
Public transport is extremely important to many people because it allows them to live a normal life .
From an environmental point of view it is also an important part of a sustainable society .
Of course , public transport must be run as cost effectively as possible but , in view of its decisive role and society 's overriding responsibility to provide for people 's needs , cost effectiveness cannot be the only driving force for the operation of public transport .
If public transport is to function efficiently , responsibility must rest at local , regional or national level and the same authorities must be responsible for the allocation of financial support .
This is why we are voting against this report .
This initiative report contains many points which we support without any reservation and which we will work hard to give a higher profile in the Member States . These include the fact that policy must work towards a reduction in the use of cars and an improvement in public transport and that public transport is environmentally friendly .
This is why we also think that public transport must be supported and encouraged in a variety of ways .
On the other hand , we cannot understand why the European Parliament wants the issue of public services to be taken up by the Inter Governmental Conference .
Nor do we think that the Union should interfere in how Member States chose to support public transport .
This must be for each individual Member State to decide bearing in mind the different conditions which prevail .
The Member States are all different , particularly with regard to population density .
This is the case in Sweden where public transport requires a large input of public funds in view of the low population density in many regions , particularly in the Northern parts of the country .
This is why it is undesirable for the EU to lay down rigid guidelines and criteria concerning how state subsidies are given to public transport .
Public Transport is a national and regional matter .
There is no reason to regulate public transport in the EU Treaty .
Differing subsidies and means of finance are also national or regional issues .
Freedom of competition is also something which should be examined at national level not by EU edict .
Menrad report ( A4-0411 / 96 )
European business has suffered from the failure to reach agreement on the European Company Statute and related measures .
Having to take account of company law in 15 different Member States involves extra costs and consequently affects jobs .
I applaud the Commission 's attempts to get these measures passed . If they are adopted , however , they must be accompanied by corresponding rules on the participation rights of workers .
If not , current information and participation legislation in some Member States would be bypassed by some companies .
Giving workers a real stake in their companies can only be a positive development both for them and for their firms .
The national consensus that has existed in Ireland for the last 10 years on wages and conditions has been a contributing factor to the current healthy state of the Irish economy and as such is endorsed by the Employers ' Federation , IBEC .
I do acknowledge that extending information and participation procedures to more companies would entail some costs .
For this reason , I endorse the Commission 's cautious approach , particularly the establishment of a highlevel group , representing the social partners , to study this topic in detail as well as the emphasis on respecting national models .
EU Transcaucasian strategy
The next item is the report ( A4-0279 / 96 ) by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission entitled ' Towards a European Union strategy for relations with the Transcaucasian Republics ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0205 - C4-0242 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations , Mr Dimitrakopoulos , cannot present his opinion himself today , because he unexpectedly had an important engagement outside Strasbourg .
On his behalf , I would therefore like to thank Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse for her excellent and in-depth report and also note that she has incorporated all the Committee on External Economic Relations ' proposals in her report , which of course gives us great pleasure .
The Committee on External Economic Relations also welcomes the call for closer regional cooperation between Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan , the leitmotif of the entire report .
Without this cooperation these three countries have little hope of improving their economy and standard of living .
The bilateral partnership agreements between the EU and these three Transcaucasian republics are based on this need .
We are concerned with no more nor less than a global political approach that combines economic , political and financial aspects and also includes humanitarian aid .
The economic resources of these countries can only be developed if the energy and transport infrastructures are modernised on a cross-frontier basis and substantially improved .
Closer cooperation is needed between Azerbaijan , Georgia and also Armenia in extracting the oil resources of the Caspian Sea - greater than those of Saudi Arabia - for export to Europe and the rest of the world but also for processing in situ .
Regional cooperation can also help ease the political tensions in the region .
Access to the Transeuropean networks and other international trade flows is the only way to open the door to close cooperation with Europe .
Politically , the aim is the stabilisation of three former Soviet republics that have achieved independence , which implies very radical economical and social changes .
As a peaceful partner , Europe can achieve a great deal in cooperation with Turkey and Russia .
So we should aim at the necessary coordination of bilateral relations too , in order to ensure that our desire for cooperation is taken seriously by our Transcaucasian partners ; joint and even further-reaching proposals in the framework of bilateral relations , i.e. with Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia , could also act as incentives during the future negotiations .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations , let me also indicate some of the potential prospects for Azerbaijan , which will perhaps make it easier to understand the problems in Transcaucasia .
Azerbaijan is potentially a rich country .
As said earlier , its oil reserves in the Caspian Sea are larger than those in Saudi Arabia .
Its industry , agriculture and services sector also have good development prospects .
But at present it is a poor country , much in need of economic development .
It is suffering severely from the lost war with Armenia .
It is situated on the door-step of the eastward enlargement of the European Union and in a few years will probably only be separated from it by the Black Sea and the Caucasus .
European investors are most welcome there and are particularly sought after in the oil industry , capital equipment for that industry , transport and the emerging construction industry .
Azerbaijan is already providing the necessary framework conditions for investment .
The basic conditions for overcoming the economic crisis are the planning and development of transport routes via Georgia for the oil and derived products .
All the possible routes and networks should be examined in terms of their profitability and environmental compatibility , which must be borne in mind in our future deliberations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have five points to make briefly .
Firstly I must pay tribute to Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , the rapporteur .
Not only is her report technically excellent , in reading it one feels the whole weight of her personality behind the points she upholds in the report .
I compliment her on it .
Secondly , she rightly says that this is a region which has seen much tragedy .
Well , when one studies the problems of these three fledgling republics it becomes clear that their geopolitical and geostrategic importance cannot be overstated and that Europe 's duty towards these countries is thus primarily a political one .
They were independent in 1917 , then absorbed into the Soviet Union , and now they are independent again .
We can do a lot to help here , to ensure that the independence of these countries is established once and for all , that democracy , a very new concept there , is developed , that constitutional rule becomes the norm , that human rights are upheld and a civil society becomes possible .
Thirdly , I would like to say a word or two on each of the three republics , each of which faces serious problems .
First of all Georgia : we must do what we can to see that the peace is maintained , that a lasting solution to the tensions there is found .
Regarding Armenia and the conflict we are familiar with , Karabakh . We must do what we can to ensure that the talks held there with the ' Minsk Group ' lead to success .
On 16 December the Security Council said that the two presidents of the Minsk Group should continue their efforts , continue negotiating and reach agreement .
So let us be positive rather than negative today about those talks and do what we can to make them succeed .
Then there is Azerbaijan : we must do what we can to secure a generally recognized legal status for the Caspian Sea , otherwise the question of oil there will be a dangerous source of tensions in future .
Fourthly , I would make the point that our task there may be a big one , a very big one .
Mr Schwaiger has already touched on the economic aspects .
Let me remind you : transport will be hugely important in opening up these areas .
The European road network will need to link up with whatever happens there .
It is perfectly feasible for them to become a part of the European economy .
Their oil and pipelines are extremely important and we must hope that this question will be resolved in a manner which makes economic sense .
And a modern banking system with central banks which work properly will greatly improve economic relations .
And my fifth point , Mr President , is that this House should approve Mrs Carrère 's proposals by a large majority .
They are most laudable and in this way we can help to open up the route which links Asia , the Middle East and Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I asked to speak not so that I could comment on the report by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , but to congratulate her on her excellent work .
The Transcaucasian area is one with many problems : political , economic , social , environmental , and most of all , problems of stability , peace and democracy .
The report by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse touches upon all these problems with sensitivity , I would even say with political tenderness , but also with realism .
It provides answers and proposes solutions that the European Union as a whole - first of all the European Parliament and then the Commission and the Council - should adopt , and in particular implement , taking advantage among other things of the fact that one of its Member States , Greece , plays a substantial and very useful part in the area .
Together with Russia and Turkey , the European Union must strive in many ways to aid the three countries in the area .
Those countries themselves , however , must cooperate with the European Union and offer solutions of their own , especially at the level of their internal democracy and human rights .
But under no circumstances must the European Union remain inactive .
Even acting on its own , it must do all the fine things recommended in the report and which everyone who spoke in the House today mentioned , even if Russia and Turkey decline to cooperate with us in providing substantial aid to the three countries in the area .
To conclude , I would once more like to congratulate our colleague Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse on her excellent work , which I believe comes as no surprise to any of us here , because she is a Member with vast experience and knowledge of the area .
I would also like to hope , with all of you , that all the fine words and good wishes heard here today will not remain just words and wishes , but will become deeds with a substantive outcome for the essential aid that the peoples of the three Transcaucasian countries so desperately need .
Mr President , once again we are fortunate in being able to benefit from the expertise of Hélène Carrère d 'Encausse .
Both in the Foreign Affairs Committee and in the House we have been able on many an occasion to admire her knowledge of affairs in the former Soviet Union .
Transcaucasia is a powder keg which merits , and is receiving , Europe 's attention .
We welcome the European Commission 's initiative of a communication outlining options for a common European policy and the report we are now debating is a worthy response to it by Parliament .
I hope that the Commission will henceforth always produce a communication on future relations with a region before new agreements are negotiated .
The mandate for negotiations to conclude agreements with third countries can then be shaped in accordance with the needs of the countries concerned and the consensus which the institutions have reached on the course to be followed vis à vis those third countries .
This will increase the likelihood of a coherent policy .
The collapse of the Soviet Union heralded the start of a difficult period for the Transcaucasian region .
Simmering tensions came to the surface and the problems in Nagorno-Karabakh , Abkhazia , Ossetia , the blockade of Armenia by its neighbours are illustrations of this .
The role of neighbouring countries which relapse into a centuries-old reflex of power politics is naturally not conductive to stability .
Stability in the CIS is very much in the Union 's interest .
And priority should be given here to the southern flank bordering on the Middle East .
The Union 's policy must be more than just aid under TACIS .
Member States must appreciate that longer-term stability is more productive than short-term trade or oil supplies .
The European Union must thus devise a global and coherent strategy embracing trade and economy , foreign policy and aid .
This strategy must be based on recognition of the diversity which exists within the region .
In its foreign policy the Union must act in concert with specialized agencies such as the Council of Europe and OSCE to secure a lasting peace in the area .
And I congratulate the OSCE on its efforts over Nagorno-Karabakh and I hope too that the territorial integrity of Georgia can be restored .
The effectiveness of collective European action would also be further enhanced by the setting up of joint embassies of the Union countries .
In economic terms we must help to strengthen the economic infrastructure and promote economic cooperation amongst these countries .
This of course means that the blockade of Armenia by Turkey and Azerbaijan must be lifted .
Partnership agreements will be viewed favourably by the European Parliament .
This favourable attitude on the part of the European Parliament will , of course , depend on the countries concerned showing respect for democracy , civil society and human rights .
Difficult though things may be at present in these countries , gross violations of these principles will never advance the cause of peace and stability .
The rapporteur puts forward some good and fruitful ideas on aid and cooperation .
All in all the Liberal Group concludes that it is a good idea to take a collective approach to our relations with Transcaucasia and that the rapporteur 's ideas emphatically deserve the support of the House .
Mr President , firstly let me note that in her detailed report the rapporteur has set out the European Union 's proposals for a strategy of cooperation for this region .
So the report scarcely differs from the Commission document .
Transcaucasia is important in several respects , we know that .
The Caucasus is a geopolitical turntable and at the same time it is still marked by its variety of ethnic groups and the chequered history and traditions that have resulted from the many conflicts in the region , which in principle could be resolved in modern times .
The region also has enormous raw materials resources , such as the oil reservoir of the Caspian Sea .
A way must be found of bringing peace to the region not through competition with Russia but jointly , by a strategy formulated within the framework of the OSCE .
But among the many own interests at play , I do not see the European Union taking responsibility for the region .
Primarily , Europe is expressing economic interests , which disregard the problems involved in securing a lasting peace and democratization combined with respect for human rights .
In Armenia as in Azerbaijan , democracy is not yet solidly entrenched .
Both states indeed wish to be linked to Europe in the near future and are making formal moves in this direction , but there is a wide gulf between wishes and reality .
There is no real freedom of the press in either country and political opposition is either stifled or banned .
Moreover , political life in Azerbaijan is still marked by clan structures .
The prime example is that the key government and economic posts are occupied by President Aliev 's confidants .
Both in Armenia and in Azerbaijan kinship comes first .
Nationalist tendencies are evident in all sections of the population and there are no measures to oppose the traditional hostilities .
Georgia is attempting to build up a democratic structure through its new constitution , but there is one feature that is unmistakeably missing : there is no provision for the status of the two regions of conflict , South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The consequences of the civil war have by no means been overcome through legislation .
So ratification of the partnership and cooperation agreements ( PCAs ) should be made conditional on a number of criteria , such as respect for human rights and the principles of democracy and also the willingness to endorse the Council of Europe convention .
The PCAs also include a Chapter 71 on illegal immigration .
I believe the provisions give a distorted view of the real situation in these countries .
Warlike conditions still prevail in these countries , which are declared safe third countries by this automatic signature .
The war between Azerbaijan and Armenia continues .
What we have is merely a ceasefire .
Without doubt , at this stage , when torture is still an everyday occurrence , there will continue to be refugees and this third-state clause is therefore a disaster .
The issue of the civil rights of the millions of refugees has still not been settled and there is no way one could say that the standards demanded by the thirdcountry clause , as defined in the agreements , have been met .
The peace talks are making no headway , as we saw at the most recent OSCE summit .
The success of the longterm OSCE mission depends on the support it obtains from the international community and the reputation of the mediators may be high in the field but also depends on that support .
There is no evidence of support in the field from the European Union .
There is no coherent strategy based on a common foreign and security policy .
That is why we should tie ratification of the partnership and cooperation agreements to a peace settlement .
The problem of the blockade would then resolve itself automatically , for that blockade depends directly on this state of war and could be lifted if a peaceful settlement were achieved .
But the attempt by the conflicting parties to maintain the status quo means that millions of refugees have to continue living in camps for years on end .
Whole generations are growing up in camps and I believe that even at this stage of the negotiations it would be possible to provide aid , to obtain improvements , to build a bridge between ECHO and a TACIS programme .
The first part of our amendment is very confused because of technical hitches .
We have distributed an edited version and I ask you to put it to the vote .
The wording is based mainly on the statement by the chairman-in-office of the OSCE summit in Lisbon .
Thank you very much , Mrs Schroedter .
When the time comes - that will be at the vote - we will look at the question of your amendment .
Mr President , Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse 's report is very rich in ideas , very passionate and , may I say , even masterly !
It is based on a detailed historical analysis with whose broad outline I agree .
Yes , Transcaucasia is a strategic region with close and long-standing links with European countries as reflected , for example , by the presence of a very large Armenian population in some of them , particularly in France .
The Transcaucasian countries have a rich history and culture , and a strong national identity .
Europe must develop an active presence there .
The success of our activities , however , will depend on three conditions .
The first is respect for the nations we are addressing .
If Europe is to be a model for the Transcaucasian countries , it must definitely be that of a Europe of nations , not a federal Europe .
We must respect the fundamental choices they make ; we must , for example , respect the choice of nuclear energy by Armenia as soon as the safety of the Medzamor power station is assured : members of the Transcaucasian Delegation who have been there and saw for themselves .
The second condition is that Europe takes its responsibilities towards these countries seriously : by recognizing Armenian genocide , which will allow the people of that country to be alive to its own history ; by giving very strong support - because it is expected by the countries concerned - to the resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
Unquestionably , in this case the principle of the inviolability of frontiers must , because of the conditions under which Stalin drew them at the time , yield precedence to the right of nations to self-determination .
This involves guaranteeing the security of Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh and putting an end to the blockade imposed on Armenia by Turkey and Azerbaijan .
Here , as has already been emphasized , we must monitor the progress of human rights , particularly in Azerbaijan .
The third condition , Mr President , is that faux pas or blunders must be avoided .
We ought not to speak of Community embassies .
Delegations exist and their role must be precisely specified : they cannot take the place of the embassies of Member States .
In Tbilisi , the Community ' ambassador ' calls himself just that .
He makes a fool of himself by travelling about in an armoured vehicle with a bodyguard , demanding precedence over representatives of Member States .
In doing this , he does no service to the good relations between Europe and Transcaucasia .
Let us discourage this sort of departure from reality .
Mr President , Ladies and gentlemen , this report is very interesting but its very title perhaps betrays the extreme nature of a deliberately global approach .
History shows that any artificial attempt to make Transcaucasia into a political and cultural unit is doomed to failure .
At the very least , Azerbaijan does not have the same cultural identity as Armenia or Georgia .
As a result , national policies simply cannot be replaced because they are much more varied in approach than a single European policy .
For example , we should not forget the special relationship between France and Armenia .
Another piece of globalization , another inappropriate mixture , is that of paragraph 12 , which is needlessly offensive to both Russia and Turkey .
After all , it is Turkey and not Russia which is blockading Armenia , and this must be recognized .
Not only that , but paragraph 17 acknowledges the real state of affairs by rightly asking for the blockade to be lifted .
Having said that , and despite these reservations , it is an excellent thing that the European Union has good relations with three such diverse nations whose common interests with Europe are obvious .
That is why we are in favour of the report .
Mr President , ten years ago I worked in newspaper editing and no one then had ever heard of Nagorno-Karabakh , Ingushetia or Dagestan .
This week , all these years later , the French paper Le Figaro talks of Azerbaijan as the Kuwait of the Caucasus .
Times may change .
Why am I as a Dutch MEP interested in this region ?
Because I think that beneath the soil of the Caucasus lies a product which interests the whole world , and that is important for stability .
Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse 's report reads like a historical novel .
One thing becomes clear .
The problems are many and varied and the solutions will be too .
Europe can play a major role here , firstly by drawing up a list of the region 's economic requirements and above all by seeking , by means of an active presence , to underwrite politically the independence of these countries , the furtherance of democracy and the rights of minorities .
A very important part can be played here by the OSCE , for example .
There exists an arrangement called the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Area .
This provides a useful access route to the region , returning via the Danube and the Rhine and ultimately to the North Sea .
Greece is a signatory and Austria and Italy are observers .
It would be very important to have those countries involved in active participation in the region .
Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse has done the groundwork .
The Commission and Council can now get to work .
I warmly endorse this report .
Mr President , I would first like to emphasize the high quality of the masterly report once more presented to us by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse .
Not only that , but I am completely convinced by the arguments developed in favour of close cooperation between the European Union and the three Transcaucasian Republics .
The oil resources in Azerbaijan obviously carry a lot of weight .
The question that arises is to know whether the need for Europe not to leave the field open to American companies already present in Baku should prevail over the risk it runs in teasing the Russian giant on its frontiers .
To this question my reply is ' yes ' .
On the other hand , I do not think we have to take into account the desire of Transcaucasian peoples to become integrated into European structures .
The Transcaucasian Republics are no more European than Turkey , Morocco or South Korea .
The argument for a return to Europe , to one of the sources of its culture , is not acceptable unless we are prepared to envisage the incorporation into the European Union of the former Mesopotamia , of Iran , of Iraq and thus , why not , to make Baghdad the capital of a future greater Europe .
Mr President , I want to begin by warmly thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , for her detailed and excellent report on the strategy towards the Transcaucasian states .
But I specially want to thank her for the historical overview she has given and which , I believe , is most valuable . It shows clearly that many problems in many regions can only be understood and tackled if they are placed in their historical and also their religious context .
However , let me also point out that I see a hint of politics in this historical overview , especially in the description of the Russian puppet Shevardnadze , who I believe is always painted in too good a light .
Finally , I would like to use my brief speaking to underline the importance of the Transcaucasian region - especially in with regard to its links with its neighbours , in particular Turkey - in terms of our future energy supplies .
We must do our utmost , in the interests of the people of Transcaucasia but also in our own European interests , to seek stability in this region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must say how sorry I am that implacably strict time limits prevented us hearing Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , the undisputed authority on the issues in this region .
I want to congratulate her on this very exhaustive and profound report . She has done the Union a great service by highlighting the strategic importance of the region and emphasizing our interests in it .
The first of those interests is the need to help these countries ; help them to evolve into independent democracies , tightening their bonds with Europe and putting an end to the conflicts they are involved in .
In spite of the time that has gone by since the Commission 's communication on a possible European Union strategy in the region was drafted , sadly the situation in the Caucasus has not changed substantially .
There can be no lasting recovery unless the three countries concerned can find a way to coexist with their neighbours , and there will be no return on all the investment we have made in terms of humanitarian and food aid , technical assistance and loans , which amounts to over ECU 800 million since independence .
We hoped to take advantage of our position as leading donor in the region to support the international efforts to resolve the conflicts , especially in Nagorno-Karabakh .
Although the Council did not reach a common position on the lines of our proposal , it did adopt some conclusions which have allowed us to promote regional cooperation in the Caucasus , both through the collaboration and cooperation agreements and through our TACIS programme , especially in the areas of energy and transport .
Thanks to the latter , we still have the resources to pursue our economic cooperation with each republic in line with our policy objectives .
It also provides us with the framework for developing the European economic presence , thus bringing equilibrium to the security issues that dominate politics , especially in Armenia and Azerbaijan .
For all these reasons , I consider early ratification of the three agreements essential . The aim in drafting them was that they should be as similar as possible .
If we aspire to play an important role in the region , our relations with each of these countries requires special attention and , at the moment , the Commission is not only welcomed as an important donor , but is also respected - and this was recognized in some of the speeches here - for its impartiality .
It is essential that we continue to demonstrate that we understand the problems which all the parties must face up to .
And when the report speaks of the need to open the frontiers between Turkey , Azerbaijan and Armenia , we must remember that while Armenia 's concern is the blockade , Azerbaijan 's is to end the occupation of its territories , including those outside Nagorno-Karabakh , and the return with guarantees of over a million refugees .
The Commission will monitor the development of democracy in the region closely and bring pressure to bear to ensure that progress continues .
And the OSCE report on the presidential elections in Armenia reveals that democracy problems are not confined to Azerbaijan .
The most important thing is that the two countries understand that there must be improvements , and to achieve that we must provide support through our technical assistance programmes , and emphasize that the stronger our bilateral relations , the more opportunities we will have to make real progress .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry , but I have to draw your attention to the position of the Greens again .
We could not vote for the report in the form in which it has just been approved , with the amendments , because it represents a very one-sided strategy marked primarily by the desire of the various European states to get at the oil resources of the Caspian Sea fairly rapidly and not to let their rivals get there first .
Anyone who has been down there and seen these heavily polluted oil fields knows that we have a quite different responsibility towards this region , other than getting at the oil resources as soon as possible .
We have the responsibility to establish peace in the region .
I see no really effective strategy in that direction .
Rapid adoption of the partnership and cooperation agreements , not linked to a peaceful solution , and a blanket demand for the blockade to be lifted make it clear , firstly , that Europe has very little understanding of this region and secondly , that this will certainly not promote a settlement of the conflicts .
When the PCAs are adopted and enter into force it will mean that a large section of the population , indeed several millions of people , who do not even live there any more cannot benefit from the aid .
It means that NagornoKarabakh cannot benefit .
Or do you want to give aid to Nagorno-Karabakh via the Latchin corridor , which would go against international law ?
The PCAs cannot enter into force without a peaceful solution to this conflict .
Of course we must use all our funds and energies to help where help is needed .
But the European Union is not doing anything .
It is not doing anything to extend the ECHO mandate and build a bridge .
It is not doing anything about modifying TACIS and adopting social measures to tackle the problem and it is doing nothing when it comes to genuinely promoting a peaceful settlement .
We hear many splendid words , but there is no understanding of the real problems of the region .
We cannot endorse this kind of strategy , which may be well-meaning but totally overlooks the real facts .
Mr President , I wish to explain the reason why , in spite of what I said just now , I voted against the final version of the report before us , thus being the only Member to have done so .
I agree with the contents of the report except for one word , a word that for me is fundamental , when it says that we encourage the Commission and the Council to open Community embassies .
The Community cannot have an embassy in a country .
Doing this , and wanting to do it ignoring reality , is to do the European Union no favours .
At present , contrary to what speakers said just now , embassies of several countries do exist .
There are four or five of them for each of the three Transcaucasian countries .
Contrary to what was said , the ambassadors do coordinate their activities ; there is even a presidency provided by the ambassadors , even though the presidency of the Union is not one of the countries represented by an embassy .
The Commission delegation , on the other hand , must be a delegation and not an embassy .
I saw at first hand in Georgia how dangerous it could be to call what should remain a delegation an ' embassy ' .
That is why I voted against the report , but I must make it clear that I agree with its main points .
We have voted in favour of this report as we consider it important that EU Member States establish relations , trade and cooperation with the Transcaucasian States and give support .
As we are opposed to EU attempts to develop a Common Foreign Policy , we are against the report 's emphasis on CFSP , particularly the ideas on establishing special EU ambassadors .
In my view , the EU should not establish their own embassies but establish relations with the outside world in other ways .
I am totally in agreement with the report 's views on the importance of helping the Transcaucasian Republics .
But I do have reservations with regard to points 1 and 36 where there is mention of the Union 's need to establish specific joint embassies .
I do not consider the EU to be a legal person which can establish embassies .
This should be the preserve of individual nations .
Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin
The next item is the report ( A4-0412 / 96 ) by Mr Fantuzzi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2081 / 92 on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs ( COM ( 96 ) 0266 - C4-0439 / 96-96 / 0159 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I do not know whether all honourable Members have read the explanatory statement to this report .
I think it expresses some concern and also a degree of bitterness about the way in which the application of Regulation No 2081 / 92 on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs is being handled .
And it might be said that even now we are experiencing confrontation between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an issue which I consider to be highly sensitive and delicate .
The background is well-known : on the basis of the decision on feta cheese , which was registered as a typical product of European origin as of June 1996 , the Commission put forward today 's proposal : to set the transitional period during which a product which usurps , evokes or imitates the true origin of a registered product may be authorized - currently five years from the date of publication of the regulation and applicable to all products - at five years from the date of registration of each individual product , in other words , to all intents and purposes , as of now .
It could be said that this is a small , straightforward , technical amendment motivated solely by the objective delay which has occurred in implementing the regulation .
I think otherwise , and that is why I am expressing concern .
Let us be clear about this : Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture also recognizes the delay ; on several occasions we have indeed condemned it , going so far as to describe it as culpable .
I recall that on 26 October 1995 an oral question was put in this Chamber , and in the final resolution the Commission was asked to put an end to this delay , which was having serious effects for producers and consumers .
It seems to me that this issue has not been taken seriously and that improper use of the simplified procedure has been endorsed .
I have to say that not until 1996 , midway through the year , did we have the first two packages of registered products .
So if the delay is the real , objective reason for these technical amendments , I think it behoves the Commission and the Council to accept the ideas contained in my report , namely to increase the five-year period provided for in Regulation No 2081 / 92 to seven years , to run from the date of publication of the regulation , and to allow for a further possibility of extension for certain products , in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 15 , while complying with the spirit of Regulation No 2081 / 92 and the thinking behind it .

I fear , however , that rather than the delay being the real reason , this proposal , as it stands , is using it as an excuse , offering encouragement to those who oppose this regulation , and we know how many they have been and still are .
I do not think that turning the clock back to zero as regards the transitional period gives a good political signal , not least because one of the advantages of the new World Trade Organization is the existence of the TRIPS agreement on intellectual property , Article 22 of which indeed provides for the possibility of protecting agrifoodstuffs with a geographical designation of origin in world markets .
So , with these changes , what kind of credibility are we going to have with our partners outside Europe when we seek their compliance ?
I think , moreover , that we are denying ourselves the opportunity of turning an established source of quality products to good account .
Although , after the mad cow crisis , we have all recognized that an automatic link which used to exist between consumer confidence and the quality of farming has been broken , some vestiges do , after all , remain .
And I think that this idea of typical products could objectively , and with good reason , win back consumer confidence .
I do not think that ' typical products ' should be a label that is just bandied around : they are an expression of the huge funds of knowledge and professionalism of European farming as a whole .
I think it would amount to a big gift to the Americans if we turned our backs on this .
Lastly , I think the Commission should tell us when it will be completing the planned lists , implementing the new packages which will , I hope , finally bring to an end the simplified procedure provided for under Article 17 of Regulation No 2081 / 92 .
In my view , this response is very important , because we must embark on a new phase of applying the regulations , launching the ordinary procedure which will put an end to this mode of operation which has been beset with so many problems and so much delay , and should soon be replaced .
Mr President , I speak to the proposal for a Council regulation amending a regulation .
There is always a case for exceptions as we have seen in the original regulation . The simplified process allowed was an exception .
However , we should not allow the exception to become the rule , except in exceptional circumstances .
We are arguing here about two years .
The Commission wants the date 1996 plus five years .
Our rapporteur proposes the original date 1992 plus seven years .
We say 1999 , they say 2001 .
The protection of geographical indications is a good idea .
It can add value to produce from poorer rural areas .
It can ensure quality .
It can be used by smaller interests to counteract the power of international company interest .
But , if we slacken deadlines , if we loosen the agenda , if we are laborious , it will be thought we are either not serious or not efficient .
The Commission rightly wants to improve the situation .
But Mr Fantuzzi 's amended text is better and I ask you to support it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , agriculture is without doubt in the process of changing direction .
Liberalization through the WTO , more and more new and improved production methods , together with international competition , have brought major changes in recent years .
Obviously we should not lump everything together indiscriminately , yet I do think that somehow BSE fits into the picture .
We must take care that agriculture does not unintentionally move in a direction that is remote from the people .
The coming years will have to bring some reforms with them .
And we must pay special attention to consumer wishes .
It seems quite clear that the consumers largely want natural and healthy products and that natural production methods and small-scale farming will also benefit the rural areas .
One of the main aspects of this new trend is to make the origins and ingredients of agricultural products clearly identifiable .
This also involves designations of origin as provided for in Regulation 2081 which we are discussing here and the labelling of beef , which is finally to be introduced in the wake of the BSE disaster .
That is the only way finally to restore consumer confidence and the only way to ensure fair competition between producers and the free market .
Of course the traditions and cultural differences of the European regions must also be reflected .
I think I may say that every region in this European Union has its own quite specific features and , I am sure , its own advantages .
As a wise man once said , every situation has its own advantages .
The question is , how to use them .
We have an opportunity to ensure that our products enjoy a good reputation and are protected from unwanted imitation .
Of course the natural boundaries are fluid in this area too .
For decades now , many products that originally came from a very specific region are being produced in other regions as a matter of course .
That is why I would plead that we set the appropriate transitional periods to cushion the adverse effects on the producers concerned .
Looking in particular at my home country Austria , I really would ask for your consideration , since very many of our products are produced in problem areas .
Mr Fantuzzi 's report responds to this concern and provides for the possibility of extending the transitional period .
I think that is the right direction .
Mr President , this proposal for a regulation is beginning to look like a kind of amnesty , a somewhat belated response to a problem of vital importance for the relationship of confidence between producers and consumers .
At this point , after so much time has been wasted , we can only hope that the bureaucracy will speed up and allow the procedures to be completed more quickly than the time it took to reach the appraisal stage .
Article 13 provides for a transitional period of a maximum of five years from the date of publication of the regulation to allow Member States to maintain national measures authorizing the expressions mentioned in paragraph 1 ( b ) , subject to certain conditions : first and foremost the products must have been lawfully placed on the market , with the designations concerned , at least five years before the date of publication of the regulation ; secondly , the true origin of the products must be clearly shown on the labels .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal that the transitional period should be extended to seven years and that products should be entitled to benefit from a further extension in the event of proven difficulties .
But , let me see , seven years would take us from 1992 , when the regulation came into being , to 1999 , not as the Commission is seeking to propose .
Five years - but from which date ?
From the date of publication of the regulation , in other words from this year - at least so we hope - taking us up to 2002 with the current difficult state of affairs .
This would mean that , in the meantime , the Danes would carry on producing the infamous Greek feta cheese - thus confusing the consumer - and the Germans would carry on making typical Italian ' grana ' cheese under a German brand .
Mr President , this is not a sign of freedom : it is common commercial plagiarism .
This is not what Europe is about !
Yesterday I read an interview with a sociologist who said he rejected the idea of European integration based on smoothing out identities , on the same beer from Hamburg to Palermo or wine that tastes the same from Greece to Brittany .
Well , I do not think that this is a problem of European unity ; it is just an example of industrial confusion .
Protected geographical designations and indications could serve as a kind of certificate to preserve producer identities , without jeopardizing freedom of movement in a market which , of course , must continue to be on a European scale .
So approval for agricultural and industrial products is simply a political issue , just as is the case for citizens who are born and remain German , Portuguese or Italian but live as European citizens .
This must apply to the products of the land as well .
Mr President , Europe is truly a fantastic continent and the EU is also a fantastic area with its multilingual and multicultural character .
We could even call ourselves ' multi gastronomic ' because we have very different food cultures in the various parts of the Union .
This also means that we often use different names for the same thing , which is only natural as we all use different languages .
On the other hand , sometimes we also call different things by the same name which is not really the right thing to do .
All this is a very difficult area and it is important that we try to sort it out .
It is also important to note that , as a result of European integration and economic integration we are all the time concentrating our activities in large central bodies .
It is not entirely clear whether the food consumer considers this to be a very good thing .
Perhaps it is just that the food consumer would like to keep the local character of their food , or perhaps he or she would like to think that they know how a certain food is produced ?
In this respect , labelling of both origin and geographic area is important as long as this is not misused .
I have some experience of the Swedish membership discussions and I know that this issue was discussed a great deal .
It is true that the names and terms that we use for products in Sweden are not always appropriate in an EU context but we would like to keep them anyway .
For this reason , I think it is important that we settle this matter to avoid misunderstandings in the future .
But there must be some flexibility to allow us to accept that a country may use a certain traditional name in their own country for the time being or until the matter has been resolved by some other means .
For this reason , I value the fact that a time limit has been set and I consider , deep down , the Commission 's time limit to be preferable .
I would also like to think that there could be an extension to this time limit in case of difficulties with any one particular product .
I would prefer not to see any restrictions on this opportunity for extension .
Mr President , I think now that we can vote on this report and I hope that we can , after all , reach agreement .
I agree , for the most part , with Mr Fantuzzi as long as we appreciate that there are a number of problems particularly in the new Member States .
Mr President , high-quality regional farming areas and agricultural products require a powerful European protection system in the context of the single market .
Setting up systems for the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin is a move in that direction .
The Commission is still refusing to consider the request from some Member States for temporary national protection pending final Community recording of new designations .
To begin with , the Regulation allowed Member States to keep their national denominations for five years after publication of the Regulation , in this case until 1997 .
The Commission has proposed that the starting date for the transitional period be changed by replacing the date of the Regulation by the date of publication of registration of the products in question .
You can immediately imagine the difficulty of monitoring that would involve .
Our colleague , Mr Fantuzzi , rightly considers that the Commission has failed in taking so long to deal with the registrations , thus penalizing producers and cultivators who , when the single market was introduced , legitimately expected their denominations to be exclusive throughout Community territory .
The rapporteur 's proposal is simple : to extend the transitional period to seven years to be counted from the date on which the Regulation comes into force .
This is a good proposal , which has the merit of facilitating monitoring .
More generally , in the area of protection and movement within the Community of farmland products , much progress is still needed to create the Europe we all want .
I recently discussed the problem with producers in Alsace and found that agricultural producers , winegrowers and small-holders in our region still face legal , fiscal and administrative constraints in some Member States , constraints that are simply disguised forms of protectionism .
It would therefore seem that , for products of the soil , the great single market is not bringing anything new .
Ladies and gentlemen , our committees must look into these malfunctionings so that our excellent high-quality products can at last circulate freely throughout the Union , with unified regulations to increase transparency and for the greater satisfaction of our European consumers and citizens .
Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal because it picks up on a view which has gained wide support among agricultural producers and , above all , it refers to the opportunities provided for in the market .
There is widespread enthusiasm for the idea of the market as a fundamental reference point for the organization of production and also as a factor in guaranteeing income .
It is well-known that designations of origin of production and geographical designations can help maintain income levels , stimulate agriculture and , of course , also eliminate a policy of subsidies which , up to this stage , has been maintained not least because of the manifestly low incomes in many farms in the European Union .
In those terms , then , we must ensure that the Commission 's action is more specific and better targeted , and further exemptions cannot be tolerated .
Naturally , regulations must not be the only point of reference , because the market can also be approached using specific , carefully targeted action by producer associations and via the quality assurance groups which have also stolen a march on the regulatory approach and made the European Union itself acknowledge that there is an aspect of market operation and a product element in need of protection .
We therefore believe that this action , including that of the producer associations , should be given a further boost and that there is , of course , a need to speed up the excessively bureaucratic and cumbersome procedure which the industry currently has to negotiate in order to be awarded protected geographical indications and designations of origin .
Mr President , by and large I agree with Mr Fantuzzi 's report and I must say that we need the transitional period , for of course it is also a question of jobs in undertakings .
We have to consider that too .
If an undertaking has to restructure , we must realise that this could cause hardship , which needs to be compensated for .
In general I am in favour of promoting our European specialities much more strongly .
Everywhere I go , in every country , I see McDonald 's , Burger King , Coca Cola , even outside Europe .
It really is a reflection of the poverty of our own food industry that we have not managed to create these mass-processing distribution systems because it means we are losing large shares of the market .
In that regard we Europeans should take better care of and do more for our own speciality products , which also have a long tradition and go down well with the consumer .
When examining the question I came across some very curious things .
We have spent a long time on BSE and everyone has said they want labelling so that they will not be infected .
The Swiss then had to observe an export ban and we suddenly found that the Swiss make their world-famous Bündner meat from Argentinian beef .
This meat does not even come from Swiss cows !
Quite honestly , if we are as particular as Mr Baldarelli said , we will also discover that in Italy , as I found during a visit there , Parmesan cheese is successfully being made from milk produced in Bavaria and Baden-Württemberg .
We should not blame each other for something which is in fact not blame-worthy , for the cheese tastes wonderful ; incidentally , it is then sent back to Germany .
I am a lover of Parmesan cheese , I must confess , and drink Württemberg wine with it .
Not a bad idea , because it is a good wine .
So we should set a high level of protection , but I agree with the Commission proposal that we should have a transitional period of five years from the date of publication so as to give enough time for restructuring .
Apart from that I agree with what the rapporteur said .
We should endeavour to give more prominence to our European specialities and thereby also give our consumers a sense of quality on which they can rely .
By the illegal use of hormones , as a result of BSE and so forth , our image has suffered so much in relation to meat that it is vital we use this opportunity to restore consumer confidence .
But we need a certain transitional period to do so .
If we can agree on that , then we will fully endorse Mr Fantuzzi 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , there is a certain historical reality in each European country which must be defended .
There is no doubt at all that uniformization and globalization carried out by all of the Duponts in the history of Europe leading to more and more Duponts , must be avoided .
Thank goodness if we can have something which is not a Dupont .
Something which is not a Dupont obviously is a product of a certain origin , it is a geographical notion , which means that port is port and madeira is madeira and neither of them can be made in California or Australia .
If Europe really wants to defend some of its history , some of its individuality , and not end up resembling the rest of the world - it is not that we are superior it is just that we are different - we really must defend our products , we must defend indications of origin and we must defend geographical indications .
Therefore , the Commission really must not beat around the bush as it has been doing . The Commission should not wait for those who have not asked to be protected which means that those who have asked are not protected .
It really must respect the values which exist and it has failed to do so and that can only be described as censorship .
Mr President , I wish to thank our rapporteur , Mr Fantuzzi , for the very good work he has done on his report , examining and revising the legislation on the protection and designation of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs .
This is an issue of great importance both for producers and for consumers .
Producers of particular high-quality , regional specialities need guarantees that their products are not being copied and then marketed either at premium or cut prices as though they were the genuine article .
Consumers need to know exactly what they are buying , whether it is genuine champagne or Wensleydale cheese or similar , possibly even equally excellent products , but from another region .
As Mr Fantuzzi has pointed out , the Commission was concerned that the five-year transitional period is proving insufficient to register all the products which are seeking designation as protected regional products or foodstuffs .
It has proposed a new five-year transitional period from 1996 for each product not yet registered , starting from the date of application , instead of from the date originally agreed .
As our rapporteur has pointed out , this would mean the whole process could drag on for many years , confusing the situation and undermining the effectiveness of the legislation .
His amendment to extend the transition period by a fixed period namely , from five to seven years - eight in very exceptional circumstances - from the original reference date , should concentrate the minds of both producers making applications and officials processing those applications to ensure that they do meet that deadline .
He also proposes allowing national measures to protect those products until a Community decision has been made .
These are common sense proposals from Mr Fantuzzi for greater transparency and clarity in the implementation of the regulations which will benefit both producers and consumers .
I urge you to support them .
Mr President , I absolutely agree with what Mr Fantuzzi , the rapporteur , has said and with the points made by Mr Santini , and so I will not go over those issues again .
I should like to use the time available to me to identify and explain the implications of today 's debate , which may appear very specific but which does call to mind a number of views of the problems of European agriculture and approaches to those problems .
Before I do this , however , I should like to reassure my colleague and dear friend , Mr Funk , that it is impossible to make parmigiano reggiano - ' grana ' parmigiano reggiano - from Bavarian milk , and that the criteria for monitoring parmigiano reggiano could serve as an example for other products , as regards quality in particular .
I come from a family of dairy farmers who have always made parmigiano reggiano , so I know what I am talking about .
Well , I mentioned that there are a number of views .
We all talk about quality , but - please forgive my schematic approach - there are two ways of looking at quality , which always emerge and have , I think , been apparent in this morning 's debate .
Some of us , when we talk about quality , are thinking of small and medium-sized producers and the need for them to be rewarded if they make quality products ; others are at the same time thinking of consumers , who are entitled to know exactly what they are buying and consuming ; and then there are those who , while they talk about consumers , are actually thinking of the large companies engaged in large-scale agricultural and industrial production , the big multinational distributors , who raise the issue of quality in an attempt to make it serve interests which have nothing to do with those of small and medium-sized producers and consumers .
We need to be clear about this .
I think that we should take measures which enable us to go beyond the limits that are still present in the rules , which must be clear , definitive rules and aim for application of Regulation No 2081 / 92 and not its amendment .
We need for less bureaucracy and more transparency in the distribution of powers between the European Union and the Member States .
If we are to achieve that outcome , I think that Amendments Nos 4 , 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 should be rejected .
I therefore call upon all Members of the House , if they are going to demonstrate consistency , to reject those amendments - Nos 4 , 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 - otherwise , we shall not be practising what we preach .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur , Mr Fantuzzi , for their constructive statement on this issue , which was the subject of an animated debate in the European Parliament last October .
Regulation 2081 / 92 on protection of geographical indications and designations of origin prohibits the use of registered and protected names even if used with certain expressions , except during the transitional period established in that Regulation .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal is to allow producers who can no longer use registered names to adapt to the law .
Consequently this period must be long enough to allow the producers to take the necessary action on marketing , labelling , and so on .
Given that the first proposal for registration of geographical indications and designations of origin under the simplified procedure was not presented until March 1996 , and the current transitional period expires on 25 July 1997 , measures must be taken to make the period effective from the date of registration of the names and not from the date of publication of the regulation .

So the proposal to amend paragraph 2 of Article 13 of Regulation 2081 / 92 is intended to ensure that the 5-year transitional period applies from the date the names are registered .
But this will only affect existing names registered under the simplified procedure laid down in Article 17 , not new ones registered under the normal procedure , laid down in Articles 5 , 6 and 7 .
Secondly , the transitional period will also be applicable to letter a ) of paragraph 1 , Article 13 of the regulation not just to letter b ) of paragraph 1 , Article 13 .
The aim of this provision is that during the transitional period the term ' feta ' , for example , can be used as such , while under the existing rules , only expressions like feta-style , feta-type , feta method , etc . , are used during transition .
Thirdly , given that already existing names used in the Member States are notified according to Article 17 - the simplified procedure , the transitional period must apply only to names registered by virtue of this provision , to prevent damage to producers by granting this adaptation period for new names .
Moving on to the amendments , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 5 , as this proposal is insufficient , in the view of the Commission , to allow the producers affected to adapt to the new legal ban on using registered names .

Amendments Nos 2 and 8 cannot be accepted because under paragraph 3 of Article 17 the Commission must decide for or against each denomination presented for registration .

However , the aims of Amendment No 4 and Amendment No 11 , first part , may be useful and will be examined .
We are going to find a more appropriate formula on these issues .
Amendment No 7 seems to us superfluous given that the Commission 's proposal provides for a period of 5 years , and the objective of Amendment No 6 already exists in the text , so we do not think that amendme