Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 15 November 2001 .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , Spain has once again been cruelly struck by terrorism .
On 23 November , Ana Isabel Arostegui and Javier Mijangos , both officers of the Ertzaintza , the Basque regional police , were killed in a cowardly attack whilst carrying out their duties in Beasaín , in the Basque region of Spain .
Two days prior to that incident , terrorists set off a bomb in Bilbao , injuring two other officers of the same police force .
On my own behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament as a whole , I immediately sent a message expressing my most sincere condolences to the families of the victims of these despicable attacks , as well as our wishes for a speedy recovery to those injured .
Once again , terrorist groups in Spain have acted with fatal disregard , showing that they deny the right to life and totally reject the concept of democracy .
Having made an assault on justice , by killing Judge José María Lidon Corbi , they have , this time , attacked the Basque regional police force .
In doing so , they are showing their determination to attack the main pillars of democracy .
With our heartfelt thoughts for the victims , their families and all those who fight for democracy , I would like to ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Ladies and gentlemen , since our last session , five journalists have unfortunately been killed in Afghanistan .
Maria Grazia Cutulli , Julio Fuentes , Harry Burton and Azizullah Haidari were killed in an ambush between Jalalabad and Kabul .
Ulf Stroemberg was found dead following a burglary in Taloqan .
As you know , we are also extremely concerned about Ken Hechtman , who is missing .
The eight journalists who have died in Afghanistan since the beginning of the conflict were carrying out their duties in a courageous , passionate and tenacious manner .
They believed that it was their overriding duty to inform others .
I would like to pay a warm and sincere tribute to them for the work they did , because they enabled us to keep constantly abreast of developments in Afghanistan .
Freedom of information is one of the most fragile freedoms . The death of these journalists illustrates this .
I admire the way in which they fulfilled their duties .
At this time , our thoughts go out to their families and their colleagues , who are devastated by their loss .
I would like to ask you to observe a minute ' s silence in order to display our deepest sympathy .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Order of business
With regard to the agenda , I have two changes to propose .
First of all , the Committee on Budgets adopted Mr Ferber ' s report on the supplementary estimates of revenue and expenditure of the European Parliament , and has asked for this report to be put on Thursday ' s agenda , pursuant to Rule 114 of the Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The second proposal is from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , regarding the vote on Mr Bouwman ' s report on the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer , requesting that the vote be brought forward to tomorrow ' s voting time .
This is because the Council intends to take its decision on this on 3 December .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The order of business is thus established .
Speeches on points of order
Madam President , I would just like to draw the attention of the House to what happened yesterday in Rome .
A disaster occurred in which many firemen died and others were wounded ; some of them are in an extremely serious condition .
They rushed to save human lives with the same courage displayed by the firemen in New York .
I feel that it is right for us , as European citizens and the European Parliament , to pay tribute to these brave men who have laid down their lives in an attempt to save the lives of others .
A block of flats collapsed , and if these men had not sacrificed themselves , others might have died .
I feel that Parliament should also pay tribute to these brave , remarkable firemen .
Mr Tajani , I have already sent a message of condolences to the Italian government .
Madam President , I , too , would like to express my grief at the deaths which occurred in the incident in Rome yesterday , and to express my heartfelt thanks and full support for the work of the police force and the municipal police , in particular , who are always ready and willing to act in the front line , not just to combat crime but also to come to the aid of European citizens at difficult times such as these , and who are always prepared to lose their lives doing deeds of great bravery , as , sadly , happened in Rome as well as New York .
Madam President , in this week dedicated to employment , I wish to draw your attention to the several thousand Portuguese workers who live in the worrying situation of great instability , with companies going bankrupt with impunity and no one being held responsible , even when it is known that they were viable and had healthy order books , which is what has happened at Molin , Confelis and Norporte .
Despite Portuguese workers having the lowest wages in the European Union , there have recently been countless cases of companies not paying salaries on time , already involving more than PTE 20 billion and many thousands of workers .
I would , in particular , highlight the situation at the Mandata e Mortensen glassworks in Marinha Grande , at the Sotima timber plant in Proença-a-Nova , at Cuftexteis , in Ansião , and the threats being levelled at hundreds of workers at the Eres textiles company in Fundão , because of their local and regional importance and because of the consequences for the development of the areas that are affected .
Apart from showing some solidarity with these workers , Madam President , I should like you to inform the Commission and the Council of this serious situation that is affecting thousands of Portuguese workers .
Madam President , speaking as a Basque and , therefore , as a Spaniard , I would like to thank you for the sensitivity you always show with regard to the problem of terrorism in the Basque country .
On the other hand , and I am sorry to have to say this , I must point out that from time to time on these occasions when , in theory , we are supposed to be observing a minutes silence , there are people in this House who continue to talk , even on the telephone , which seems to me to show , amongst other things , a total lack of consideration .
Under Rule 19 ( 4 ) , may I ask you to personally intervene with the Greek authorities on behalf of my constituents Paul and Lesley Coppin of Mildenhall , and Anna Skinner of Epping , in relation to her brother Anthony Adamiak , and on behalf of the other Europeans who are currently in jail in Greece for plane spotting .
We respect the independence of the judiciary in Greece and the cooperation we have thus far been given from the Greek authorities , but when these people have already been in prison for three weeks without charge and now have a further two weeks before charges are brought , I hope you will agree that there is an urgent humanitarian need for an appeal on their behalf and also a need to remind the Greek authorities of their absolute duty under the Convention on Human Rights to bring charges before defendants .
Twelve people went on holiday and have ended up in jail .
I ask for your intervention on behalf of the European Parliament .
Mr Howitt , you are aware that Mr Van Orden already brought up this issue at our previous part-session in Strasbourg .
Of course , I acted upon Mr Van Orden ' s comments and my Cabinet contacted the Greek permanent representation .
We were given some further details .
There was , in fact , due to be a court hearing this Monday .
We are unable to confirm whether or not this hearing took place .
I am perfectly willing to intervene myself , depending , of course , on how events unfold , and on the situation , which , I can assure you , we are monitoring extremely closely .
Madam President , I should like to thank the honourable Members , whose acute interest in human rights and compliance with the rule of law in the Member States of the European Union is most gratifying .
At the same time , I am glad for this opportunity to point out that all substantive and adjectival rules , human rights and the rule of law are complied with to the highest degree in Greece , as I believe they are in the United Kingdom .
Having said which , I believe that the judiciary in my country will be scrupulous in complying with the requirements of both Greek domestic legislation and international conventions .
However , I should like to take this opportunity , merely for information purposes , to apprise the House of certain facts , so that we know where we stand .
We live in an age in which terrorism operates on an international scale .
The people arrested in Greece had been arrested on a previous day at another airport and cautioned against taking photographs of military installations , especially during operations or exercises and , according to the newspapers , transcripts of communications between air force aeroplanes and between aeroplanes and the base were found among their effects .
They were then found at another airport and it was at this other airport that they were arrested , having been warned what would happen beforehand .
So , as you can see , in these times of heightened awareness of the threat of terrorism , in these times when everyone knows that this sort of ban applies to every military base in Europe , and given that they had been warned , there was no more room for flexibility or turning a blind eye .
Nonetheless , I am sure that the proper procedure will be followed to the letter because Greece is at the vanguard of the 15 in providing the necessary guarantees for all citizens brought before its courts , irrespective of where they are from .
I trust that these few words have given the House the information it needed .
Thank you , Mr Souladakis .
Ladies and gentlemen , given that I have a further ten or so points of order , most of which relate to this issue , and that this matter is almost turning into a debate in itself , I propose that we leave the points of order and proceed to the debate on the preparation for the Laeken European Council , as these comments could be made after the debate .
Future of the European Union
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council and Commission statements on the preparation of the Laeken European Council on 14 and 15 December 2001 ;
the report ( A5-0368 / 2001 ) by Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Laeken European Council and the future of the Union ( 2001 / 2180 ( INI ) ) ;
the report ( A5-0399 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kaufmann , on the Commission White Paper on European Governance ( COM ( 2001 ) 428 - C5-0454 / 2001 - 2001 / 2181 ( COS ) ) ;
the oral questions ( B5-0529 / 2001 ) to the Council and ( B5-0530 / 2001 ) to the Commission , by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the European strategy to promote quality in employment and in social policy .
At the end of the joint debate , I have six motions for resolution concerning the European Council , tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
I would like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Louis Michel .
We are pleased to have you here and I shall now give you the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the areas to be discussed at the European Council in Brussels-Laeken on 14 and 15 December will include the future of the European Union , European security and defence policy , enlargement , the fight against terrorism , the area of freedom , security and justice , the general situation of the EU and its prospects , employment and social cohesion , headquarters and various bodies and agencies , and lastly , external relations .
With regard to the future of the European Union , the European Council will adopt the text of a declaration that will launch the debate on the future of Europe .
The first chapter of the text will analyse the strengths and weaknesses of European integration , the second will bring together the issues that the Convention might tackle , and the third will set out how the debate will be organised .
The General Affairs Council of 19 November has already confirmed that the Member States agree on the procedures .
The principle of calling a preparatory Convention is an important step towards building a Union that is stronger , more readily understood by the people , and more focused on meeting its essential objectives .
Representatives from governments , the Commission , the national parliaments and the European Parliament will take part in the Convention .
With regard to the candidate countries , the Presidency ' s proposal is based on the following principles : they will be fully involved in the work of the Convention with the right to express their views ; they will be represented in the same way as Member States , in other words , by one representative for each government and two parliamentary representatives .
The representatives from candidate countries who have not yet signed their accession treaty will not take part in the consensus when the Convention draws up its final report .
The Chair of the Convention will be appointed by the Laeken European Council .
The Chair will be assisted by a Presidium made up of representatives of the various component groups of the Convention .
The Presidency-in-Office of the Council will take part , but the precise involvement of representatives of the following two presidencies is yet to be decided upon .
Lastly , the Secretariat of the Convention will be fulfilled by the Council ' s General Secretariat , which will be able to enlist the help of the Commission , as well as the secretariats of the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
We have reached unanimous agreement on consulting civil society through representative organisations at European and national level .
We dispensed with the idea of a Forum made up of a separate assembly .
These organisations could be interviewed or consulted in line with methods that are yet to be defined .
The contributions from these organisations will be included in the official documentation sent to members of the Convention .
The Convention will begin its work as soon as possible under the Spanish Presidency and will complete its proceedings by the European Council in June 2003 .
We are still considering the length of time that will pass between the end of the Convention ' s work and the beginning of the Intergovernmental Conference .
With regard to the themes , the Presidency ' s approach was to work on the basis of the content of the Declaration of Nice to draw up a sufficiently broad and coherent mandate , which the Presidency could use for its work .
The Presidency supports the recommendations made by the rapporteurs , Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez De Vigo , on this point .
These themes are placed in five groups of open and impartial questions : the goals and the content of the Union ' s policies , the division of competences between the Union and its Member States , the democratic legitimacy of the system , the ability of the Union to decide on and to pursue policies .
When the Prime Minister visits each capital city , he will present an outline of the Laeken Declaration .
The subjects that the Convention may tackle will be presented in this outline in the form of questions and choices , so as to enable the delegations to issue an opinion with full background knowledge .
To sum up what I have said on this important matter , I would like to make the following comments . Whatever the content of the Laeken Declaration , the Convention will remain in charge of its own agenda .
I think that there would be no point into trying to shackle it with a predefined mandate .
The Presidency has attempted to set out and clarify the themes dealt with at Nice , where the declaration was willingly drafted in a relatively open manner .
Nothing that the Presidency proposes should be interpreted as a mandate for the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
The mandate of this conference will be decided in accordance with the procedures laid down under the Treaties .
Lastly , the goal of the Laeken Declaration is to ensure that the Convention method is fruitful and that its results are taken up by the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference .
The debate on the future of Europe must also aim to make the European Union more transparent , more effective , and bring it closer to its citizens .
In this regard , the Council took great interest in Mrs Kaufmann ' s report on the White Paper on European Governance .
The report contains some valuable guidance .
I particularly support the concern to ensure that the greater involvement of civil society in the way the Union works does not adversely affect the key role played by the representatives that have political responsibility .
I shall now turn to the European security and defence policy .
The Presidency will submit a report to the European Council that sets out the progress that has been made .
Work is well underway on improving military capabilities and strengthening civil capabilities , as shown at the capabilities conferences held on 19 and 20 November 2001 .
With regard to declaring the European security and defence policy operational , the Union is faced with the following dilemma : either it cannot issue the declaration because of a veto imposed by one of the NATO members , who is not a member of the EU , or the Union declares it operational without the declaration having any real capabilities , as it is unable to use NATO assets .
In both cases , I want to draw your attention to the fact that it is , of course , the Union ' s credibility that is at stake .
The third approach recommended by the Presidency is to declare that the Union will decide how to respond to each situation , depending on the military and civil resources and capabilities at its disposal .
These are my comments on the European security and defence policy .
( NL ) I should now like to turn to another topic , namely enlargement .
The Commission ' s report was debated extensively at the General Affairs Council of 19 November .
Remarkable progress was made in the accession negotiations .
Consequently , we should be able to finalise the accession negotiations involving the countries that are ready from 2002 onwards , thus enabling these countries to take part in the 2004 elections .
The Belgian Presidency is proceeding with the same robust and regular rhythm as its Swedish forerunner .
At the same time , attention was focused on the implementation of the acquis communautaire by the candidate countries .
At the European Council of Laeken , the Heads of State and Government will be given the opportunity of sending out a few messages to the candidate countries .
The timeframe that was established in Nice and clarified in Gothenburg will be fully complied with .
Enlargement is irreversible , and ten new Members could be included by 2004 .
In 2002 , the Commission will make proposals to the Council concerning agriculture , cohesion policy and the budget of the Union .
The Commission will sketch a roadmap for the countries that are not involved in the first enlargement round .
Additionally , it will carry out a plan to strengthen the institutions of the candidate countries and will set aside EUR 250 million for that purpose .
I should now like to say a few words about terrorism .
The Presidency will be presenting a summary report at the European Council of Laeken , outlining the Union ' s measures to combat terrorism .
That report will also look to the future .
These days , in my view , it is safe to state that the Union has responded promptly and effectively to terrorism .
Its response was comprehensive , and that is the added value which European action brings : the Union has asserted itself as an effective and credible , in fact , vital partner , on which the United States and third countries can rely in the fight against terrorism .
The Union has established its diplomatic and humanitarian role .
The Union and the euro zone have contributed to the stabilisation of the economy in a turbulent period .
Finally , despite major efforts which the fight against terrorism has required , the Belgian Presidency has not lost sight of the EU ' s other priorities , including enlargement , the follow-up of Tampere and Lisbon , etc .
( FR ) I shall now turn to establishing the area of freedom , security and justice .
The Laeken European Council must reiterate the importance of establishing the common area of freedom , security and justice .
The Union ' s response to the challenge posed by the tragic events of 11 September has shown the political will of Member States to make progress in this area .
The introduction of a common asylum and immigration policy was one of the priorities of the Belgian Presidency ' s work programme .
The progress we expected has not been made .
The Laeken Summit should be the opportunity to reinvigorate the asylum and immigration policy by implementing Tampere , to supplement and strengthen the coordination of instruments for police and judicial cooperation , by finally establishing Eurojust , to reiterate the principle of mutual recognition , thus demonstrating the trust that each Member State places in its partners ' legal system .
On a practical level , the Presidency hopes to reach an agreement in Laeken on the following issues : a framework decision on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States ; a framework decision on the fight against terrorism ; a framework decision on the execution of orders freezing assets or evidence in the European Union and an agreement on the common list of terrorist organisations .
To move on to the next point , which is the economic situation and prospects for the European Union .
This issue will be discussed on the first day of the European Council .
The Finance Ministers will present their ' eurokits ' and will announce the outcome of their negotiations on cross-border payments .
The message from Laeken must be to increase the Union ' s credibility by emphasising the progress we have made , particularly in the area of international trade after the Doha meeting , in stressing the benefits of the single market and in respecting the economic Stability Pact .
The summit will stress the need to reiterate our determination to pursue the process launched at Lisbon and at Gothenburg .
With regard to the preparation of the Barcelona European Council , specific action needs to be taken before the end of the year - we must establish the Food Safety Agency , make progress on Community patents , reach agreement on cross-border payments in euro and on public contracts , as well as implement the Galileo project .
As far as employment is concerned , the European Council will discuss the ' employment package ' .
It will support the aspects of this package as well the guidelines for 2002 .
In these guidelines , the European Council will include a new horizontal objective on the quality of employment and will also adopt a first list of agreed indicators for the quality of employment .
Regarding the headquarters and the various bodies and agencies , the Heads of State and Government will try to reach an agreement on where to locate the headquarters of various bodies and agencies of the EU and the European Community .
As for external relations , the European Council will examine international issues in the light of current events .
If necessary , it will issue an opinion on the situation in Afghanistan , the Balkans and the Middle East .
As you will have noted , the Belgian Presidency has worked hard to show that the European Union has an important role to play on the international stage .
To sum up , ladies and gentlemen , I have outlined for you the work programme of the Laeken European Council .
This Council will be where the European Union takes decisions on some fundamental issues that will map out its long term future , such as the physical introduction of the euro , the confirmation that enlargement is irreversible and the operational aspects of the European security and defence policy .
The Laeken Council will also be the starting point for considering the future of European integration .
The citizens of Europe will be broadly consulted on this issue .
This is the meaning of the so-called Laeken Declaration .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the summit at Laeken can be an historic one .
Our group has every faith in the Belgian Presidency , because Belgium has always been faithful to the ideal of European unification and , above all , because Belgium has always stood for the European Community approach .
We , in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats do not want Europe to be governed by a few great nations , but , rather , we want Europeans to work together , we want the European Community approach , and so we wish you , Mr President-in-Office , great success .
Both you and the President of the Commission have spoken about the enlargement , and the memory is still fresh in my mind of a conference with the leaders of our related parties from the acceding countries , that is to say , from the countries desirous of joining the European Union .
Following on the French foreign minister 's highly misleading statements , we declare loud and clear that we must not give the impression that those who will be ready to sign the Treaties in the coming year will have to wait for the stragglers also to comply with the criteria .
Each country must be judged on its own merits ; it is on this basis that we must proceed with the enlargement of the European Union .
At Laeken , you will no doubt be considering Afghanistan , which is indeed necessary , and we repeat that it is necessary to destroy the al-Qaeda terrorist networks .
Now , though , we must also create the basis on which the international community , comprising the European Union , the USA , and the Arab and Muslim world , will now help Afghanistan to rebuild itself , making it possible for a humane society to come into being there , with a government in Kabul that respects human rights , including the rights of women .
It is that task that is before us in the days and weeks ahead .
I would like to comment on the Middle East .
We urge all the parties involved to return to the negotiating table .
I am being very restrained in my use of language when I say that we greatly regret the way that the Prime Minister of Israel behaved towards the visitors from the European Union .
These were Mr Verhofstadt , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission , Mr Michel , the Foreign Minister and Council President and also Mr Solana , the High Representative .
We have no patience with the way that the Israeli Prime Minister treated our delegation to Israel - and I can remember some of Israel 's great Prime Ministers , such as Ben Gurion , Golda Meir and Yitzhak Rabin .
( Applause )
We encourage the Commission and the Council to keep to the course they have set .
We will always defend Israel 's security , as we have always done in the past , but the people in Palestine are as much entitled to human dignity and a life lived in security , as are the Israelis , who rightly lay claim to that for themselves .
( Applause )
Let me make another comment on the Convention .
We have high hopes for what you will be deciding at Laeken .
The composition of the Convention is , numerically at least , well-known .
I beg you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to use all your influence to ensure that the fifteen government representatives are the sort of people who will work together in the Convention and will feel themselves bound by whatever proposal for a decision results from it , so that the governments , too , will be made to discharge their duties with regard to what the Convention brings into existence .
For the Convention is not some kind of seminar , so - if , at the end of it , we are to be able to say more than just Yes or No , and I know perfectly well that the governments want that to be the case - the Convention must come up with something so convincing that it will be binding on the governments .
Our group will , in any case , be sending its best and most experienced people to the Convention , so that we can achieve a real result .
We also echo President Prodi 's demand and beg you to make your influence felt in order to make it possible for the Convention to start as early as possible in 2002 - in February or early March under the Spanish Presidency - and then be concluded under the Italian Presidency at the end of 2003 , giving us , by then , a new Treaty ready for signature , on which we can then have very comprehensive and repeated discussions here in Parliament .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what I am saying reflects my profound conviction that Laeken is such an important summit precisely because it will be about the future direction of our European Union , about whether we carry on the way we did at the mini-summit in London , with seven countries taking part , eight countries not taking part , and the European Commission not even present , that is not how we envisage Europe . On the contrary , Europe is for us the European Community .
It is our wish that you , the Council Presidency and the Commission make Laeken an expression of this Community , and if you do that , you will have our entire support .
( Applause )
Our debate today is on the future of Europe and I might take that as a point of departure .
President Prodi has talked about the indispensable necessity of the institutional triangle : the Commission , Parliament and Council .
It is indispensable and each part of it has a core , indispensable role and responsibility and benefits by the very fact of the three parts working well together .
Personally , I am getting increasingly fed up with so-called analyses in newspapers and commentaries on issues of personality which miss the points of substance .
The point of substance about the role of the Commission is that it is at the heart and core of the European project - and it is indispensably so - and that is the structure of truth which we must promote , defend and constantly revisit .
With regard to a sense of Europe as Hans-Gert Poettering mentioned earlier , I believe it has been diminished at the highest level through Members of the European Council .
Every State has a right to bilaterals and multilaterals but there is a time and a place for every one of those initiatives .
It is not the time and place to conduct such an initiative immediately preceding and in the same place as a Council meeting that is meant to discuss the same issues , as at Ghent .
When we reduce the European Security and Defence Policy to the somewhat farcical theatre of presence or absence at the dining policy at Downing Street , we diminish the idea of Europe itself and we need , from the top down , at the level of the European Council , a commitment to an internally consistent and coherent sense of Europe .
The Commission President and Enrique Barón Crespo have both referred to this question of the interinstitutional dialogue and balance and President Prodi has talked about the very sensitive issue of call-back procedure .
The one plea I would make , and we have already asked Parliament 's Constitutional Affairs Committee to deal with this question with some urgency , is that before us now is the responsibility , among other things , to begin to implement one major part of the structural economic reform programme of Lisbon , namely to create a single European market for financial services .
If we cannot work out the levels of commitment and lay down rules with proper conditions between Parliament , Commission and Council , we run the risk of failing to meet the target and the necessity for reform .
There is therefore a general urgency and , in some parts , even a specific one .
I hope all candidate countries will participate in the Convention , under the principles of Helsinki , namely equal treatment .
That is all and there are 13 candidate countries .
Secondly , I hope there will be a minimum period between the Convention and the IGC .
I agree with all those who said that this business of reform must be finished before the next European election because then there will be a new Parliament , a new Europe after enlargement and a new Commission .
Madam President , in the short time available to me , I do not wish to repeat what has been said by our excellent rapporteurs , nor do I wish to concern myself with the strategy of the Council and the Member States , who have , for months , been setting this Convention up to be as feeble and unsuccessful as possible .
In this historic context , with one of the most important summits , preparing for an historic Intergovernmental Conference , in the offing , I wish to address the Commission .
Mr President of the Commission , I would very much like to remind you that all the great projects of European integration began with the Commission 's visions and outlines and that the Commission was the spiritus rector and visionary behind almost every great step forward .
Let me remind you of the Single European Act , of the first Delors package , of Maastricht with its second Delors package and the Report on Economic and Monetary Union , of the White Paper on the completion of the internal market , of the White Paper on growth , competition and employment with its visions of the social dialogue and of a social chapter in the Treaty , of the White Papers on environmental policy and on the role of Parliament and of all the great concepts produced by the Commission , which went ahead of the Intergovernmental Conferences to prepare their way .
You speak today of the institutional triangle , which will indeed become a struggle for power between Council and Parliament , but where the Commission should be , I see nothing but a black hole .
Mr President of the Commission , where is the Commission 's White Paper on European democracy ?
Where is your draft European constitution ?
Where is your White Paper on a system of checks and balances in this supranational space , on the Convention 's methodology and on fundamental citizens ' and human rights in Europe ?
None of these have you produced , and today 's marginal comments by you are insufficient .
Just to single out one point : if you do not even give this Convention the right to elect its own president from among its own members , you are disowning it before the eyes of the European public as a whole .
That is only one of the many errors you have been propagating instead of a vision .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I would like to say something about the Laeken Declaration and , in particular , about the Convention .
Especially since the failure of the Nice Summit , this Parliament has agitated for a new method for Intergovernmental Conferences .
Across party boundaries , it has worked jointly with our colleagues in the national parliaments and together with various representatives of civic society , to consign to the past , once and for all , the politics of secret diplomacy behind closed doors , of opaque decision-making and of horse-trading in marathon sittings through the long nights .
I believe this new approach , with the calling of a Convention , to be crucial to the European Union 's future viability , for the primary issue here is the reinforcement of democracy in Europe .
It is , above all , about our citizens , about a comprehensive and broad debate on what shape should be taken by our common European home , which we hope we will , from 2004 , share with ten more European countries .
Mr President-in-Office , today you have put before us the salient points of the Laeken Declaration , which is to be ambitious in its scope .
Let me return to a number of issues .
My group sees the composition of the Convention as being of extraordinary importance , and we take the view that two things , in particular , need to be taken into consideration here .
One is the principle of political pluralism .
There is an absolute need to guarantee that the various political forces are represented in the Convention and that the delegations of this Parliament or of the national parliaments should include not only representatives of the major political parties but also , because we need them , representatives of smaller political parties in the various European Union Member States .
Above all , we need a productive bilateral political debate , without which discussions will be lacking in interest .
Both sexes also need to be appropriately represented .
I see that amendments to the report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Leinen have been tabled on this subject .
I hope that many Members will support these amendments so that , above all , the national parliaments and the Council will also then consider how they may comply with this criterion .
I believe there is an urgent need for purposeful and structured dialogue with civic society , something which you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , have mentioned .
We could , I think , also consider whether the Economic and Social Affairs Committee , which is an important mouthpiece for civic society , might play an intermediary role in this area .
I am very pleased with the announcement that the Convention is to draw up its own agenda , as not only questions about the institutions will have to be dealt with , but also a broad spectrum of the most diverse political issues , as well as the issue of how a wide variety of European policies are to be formulated in the future .
A report by the Commission tells us that 60 million people in the European Union are affected by poverty , at present , and I find myself thinking that this appalling figure alone tells us what a great need there is for political action , and that this Convention must be about a change of direction and a new kind of politics in Europe .
Mr President , the scope of European Union foreign policy needs to be extended in the light of the recent international developments , but the Member States ' governments have to realise that we cannot have a common foreign policy without joint intelligence .
The geopolitical situation , poverty - an increasingly serious problem - and the growth of terrorism - there are now cells in all the countries of the globe - must prompt us to start work at Laeken on a project to introduce genuine joint intelligence , new intelligence which is not created or developed along the same lines as Europol but which is capable of being used transparently with political , economic and cultural analysts who will be able to focus our foreign policy on that cooperation and timely intervention without which the European Union , with or without institutional reforms , will not be able to get off the ground .
With a view to achieving peace in Afghanistan and the subsequent reconstruction of the country , the Union ' s role both as mediator and a proactive force must be defined now so that Afghanistan ' s future is characterised not just by economic recovery and the establishment of a democratic political system , but also by the reestablishment of a role for women in politics and social life .
The Union cannot ignore the fact that , to bring about genuine peace in the Middle East , we must work actively to oppose those who encourage , or , at any rate , do not offer resistance to local terrorism which , it is now quite clear , is supported at international level , and the Union has the economic and political tools to intervene along these lines .
In conclusion , the success or failure of the Convention depends on the will , the genuine European convictions motivating us , our will as individual parties and governments not just to produce documents on reforms but to focus on practical action that , as well as improving the situation of our own countries , can improve the situations of countries that look to us for help too .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , the EU ' s Heads of State and Government have decided to hold a Convention on 14 and 15 December with a view to designing a constitution for a federation of national states .
Now , let us clear up any confusion . A federation of national states is a federal state .
A federal state is a state and not a federation , in the same way as a fruit knife is a knife and not a fruit .
States have constitutions , while federations of states are based on agreements in international law between independent nations .
I call upon the Heads of State and Government to give the Convention a clear mandate .
Is a draft constitution for a federal state to be devised , yes or no ?
Or is a draft agreement between independent nations , not designed to establish a state , to be devised ?
Why not let the Convention devise two different , clear and unambiguous proposals , one for a federal state - model 1 , as envisaged by the federalists - and the other for a federation of states - model 2 , as envisaged by the Euro-realists and focusing upon the cross-border problems we cannot solve ourselves in our own parliaments ?
Submit the proposals for public debate , followed by a referendum in which all EU citizens are asked if they want a constitution for an EU state or an agreement between nations acting together .
When we have their answer , an Intergovernmental Conference can be held with a view to proposing changes to the existing treaties .
The great majority of people in all EU countries want a referendum .
Why , then , not ask for their views before we do anything in their name ?
Let us have a peaceful and competitive debate concerning Europe ' s future , and let the people give their answer .
I believe that people will prefer our version of a Europe of democracies , as set out in the minority opinion of the members of SOS Democracy . I would happily defer to the majority in a referendum , but never to officials and ministers operating behind closed doors .
Mr President , President Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , the report drafted by my colleague Mr Méndez de Vigo and myself enjoys the support of a very large majority in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , with only Mr Bonde , Mr Berthu and Mr Sacrédeus being opposed to it .


So a substantial majority shares the position we have taken and I am pleased to learn today that the Belgian Presidency agrees with many parts of it and that even the Commission can go along with many of the points Parliament has made .
A powerful current of opinion sees Laeken as an important opportunity that we must seize in order to make our European Union more democratic and more capable of taking action . If that is so , Laeken is perhaps the last chance to do this before enlargement , when the EU is enlarged from fifteen States to between twenty-five and thirty .
I am very grateful to all those who have helped to prepare the way for the new method .
I find myself thinking back to the beginning of the year , and back in January or February all this seemed a long way in the distance .
I thank all those who have contributed to a new method really becoming possible - a convention in which the representatives of the parliaments will enjoy equal rights with the representatives of the governments in giving shape to this project for the future of this European Union of ours .
The Convention , though , must not be a merely cosmetic exercise , and I believe it would be very unsatisfactory if we were to simply list the options that are already present in Europe .
That these options are there , we know from the speeches of our Heads of State .
They are well known , and they are nothing new .
This Convention must be a political forum for grappling with solutions , one in which real effort is made to reach a consensus as to how we , in Europe , are to go forward .
That is the real task .
That we are to produce various proposals , be they federalist or , on the other hand , intergovernmental in nature , sounds very appealing , but , President Prodi , if we produce a hotchpotch of proposals , can we then expect strong responses from the Intergovernmental Conference ?
I very much doubt it .
The governments have the same problem .
They can come up with whatever they will , but the Intergovernmental Conference 's unanimity principle results in the same sort of blockade that we had in Amsterdam and Nice .
No , I believe that the Convention represents the great opportunity to use the consensus method to arrive at the overwhelming majority .
What emerges is not unanimity , but the overwhelming tendency , the overwhelming majority .
If we go to the IGC with such a coherent proposal , we maximise the likelihood of it being accepted , because governments naturally find it hard to deny themselves consensus .
Issues still remain to be negotiated , and all this will have to be put into the form of a legal text .
All this work will have to be done by the IGC , but I would warn against restricting the Convention 's role to that of drawing up options using different terminology .
That is not the task for a political forum such as a Convention .
We note that , at Laeken , the Council proposed someone to preside over the Convention ; that is all well and good , but I do think that the Convention should be able to confirm him in office , and should be able to elect him .
A Convention elects its own President , and that is the procedure that should take place .
President Prodi , you spoke in terms of a small Bureau .
Such a Bureau would have a great deal to do , being the organ that would have to direct this great Convention , and it would be advantageous if the opposition parties , both from the national parliaments and from the European Parliament , could have as much a sense of being represented in it as did the majority .
Turning to the timetable , I am glad that the governments themselves state that more or less one year is needed , which would mean that the Convention would complete its work in June 2003 .
There would then be a break , but just for the summer recess .
I am in favour of us all resting from our labours in July and August , so that the IGC can begin in September under the Italian Presidency and we can complete the constitutional treaty by the end of 2003 , in good time for the European elections and also for enlargement .
With such a document we could stand before the peoples of Europe ; it is my belief that , if the Treaty is successful to the extent that children can read it at school and understand it , then we will also be reducing the citizens ' alienation from Europe , which is the task before us .
Mr President , I think that the European Council that is about to take place , this time in Laeken , is of fundamental importance .
We are at one of those pivotal moments , as Karl Jaspers would say .
We will find that the introduction into circulation of euro notes and coins will increase the sense of belonging to Europe .
Negotiations on enlargement will mean that a longstanding dream of many Europeans becomes reality .
I think that the terrorist attacks against Washington and New York on 11 September have awoken the consciousness of European citizens , who are now asking for more Europe and better Europe .
Therefore , your responsibility , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is great indeed .
But let me tell you that I think you are doing a very good job , and I would like to say that this Belgian Presidency has maintained an excellent attitude towards the European Parliament , one that has been based upon collaboration , participation , listening and , in short , the desire to work together .
Support for the Convention is something that this Parliament chose to adopt a long time ago , even before Nice .
In the Resolution of 17 November 1997 , which I had the honour to present together with Dimitri Tsatsos , with regard to the Treaty of Amsterdam , we were already saying that the intergovernmental method for the revision of the Treaties had run its course and that we would have to look for another method .
This method is the Convention .
Do not think that the European Parliament gave its support to the Convention because of some kind of obsession . This is not true .
We did this because the Convention brings Europe closer to its citizens , because it is more open , more public , more transparent , more participatory ; it allows , as the Convention that drafted the Charter proves , that our citizens want to be involved in the construction of Europe .
For this reason we have put our faith in the Convention , and I am happy to say that the Convention will be brought to life in the Laeken declaration .
Make no mistake about the Convention , however .
It is an instrument .
With regard to another famous Convention in history , the Philadelphia Convention , George Washington said that you could talk about everything , propose everything yet decide upon nothing .
This is also true .
What we want is to help the decision making process , bringing Europe closer to its citizens , its people and bringing together the various legitimacies of the European Union .
Therefore , Members of the Council , there is no need to be afraid of the Convention .
There is no need to take a successful instrument and empty it of content .
There is no need to constrict the Convention .
You must give the Convention all it needs to be a success .
The previous speakers - above all Mr Leinen , with whom I have had the great pleasure of collaborating in the drafting of this report - have spoken about many different subjects .
Let me highlight some of these .
Firstly , the European Parliament is asking that , if we take our model to be the Convention that drafted the Charter on Fundamental Rights , the four parts of which it is comprised be balanced .
In that particular Convention , there were 16 MEPs and 62 members of the Convention .
In the proposal that you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , have sent to the capitals there are still 16 MEPs , but there are 120 members of the Convention .
And I do not accept that some of these extra people are observers , because observers have exactly the same rights as everybody else , and so they should , except during participation in the final consensus .
I would also like to say , despite the words of a previous speaker , that the Commission has participated fully , and I would like to praise Commissioner Barnier ' s observations , which have been very important .
However , there is still an ambiguity with regard to the word ' consensus ' : consensus does not mean unanimity .
This was not the case in the Convention that drafted the Charter .
There were members of the Convention that voted against - and there is one very notable opponent amongst us today - but there was a sufficient majority , a sufficient consensus .
Therefore , let it not be said , yet again , that consensus means unanimity .
This is not true . It means final support for the resulting text .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , there is one issue that you , yourself , said is still not resolved , which is to the issue known as ' cooling ' .
And as for myself , when I have to explain that after this work carried out by the one hundred and twelve people on reaching a final result , governments want to ' cool down ' , things become extremely complicated .
What is this ' cooling ' process ?
If the result is a good one , let us adopt it immediately , then we can move on to other things .
We have enlargement to prepare for .
To conclude , Mr President , I think that we have to get rid of this fear of the Convention .
We have to remember that Europe is asking us to give a positive indication .
But what indication ?
This can only be the Intergovernmental Conference .
I also hope that , at the end of this process , the indication will be a Constitution for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the future of the European Union is , as a subject for debate , no doubt closely related to , and in part inseparable from , the reform of governance , which forms the subject of my report .
You will see , on reading it , that it is not exactly sparing with its criticisms .
It takes up a very definite stance on numerous subjects addressed by the Commission in its White Paper , and , to use a phrase currently popular in Germany , a good thing too !
It is precisely for this reason , President Prodi , that it is important to me that I thank you and your colleagues for your initiative in producing this White Paper , above all for the Commission 's willingness , expressed in the White Paper , to unreservedly and even self-critically examine and change all the rules , procedures and ways the EU has of exercising its authority , in short , everything summed up in the word ' governance ' .
This merits every respect , being , in fact , about nothing more or less than the reduction of the prevailing gulf between the EU and its citizens .
In this , the Commission finds in Parliament a close comrade-in-arms .
We are , as is well known , only at the beginning of the debate on the reform of governance .
Many of the Commission 's proposals need to be considered in depth .
The White Paper announces several initiatives , and when they are definitely on the table , we will express our opinion of them .
I assume that certain proposals can become reality quite soon and not only at the end of next year at the earliest .
I would put under this heading the committees and working parties listed in Commissioner Kinnock 's White Paper on reform of the Commission , and which are participating in the consultation procedure .
I will take this opportunity to point out that I think that every future legislative proposal could have an appendix listing all the experts , associations and organisations that played a part in drafting it .
Parliament does indeed support the improved participation and consultation that the White Paper calls for , but we take the view that this requires an interinstitutional agreement on democratic consultation , and I am pleased , President Prodi , that you have mentioned this today and given it your clear support .
President Prodi , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my report takes at length a very definite position on the issue of better lawmaking , and this is not by chance , for the fundamental issue is the role of Parliament as joint legislator .
Parliament has repeatedly emphasised that it puts its trust in the Community method , and that it sees the maintenance of the balance between the institutions as the best way to make progress towards integration .
It is not , then , some concept that we are defending , but rather its content and political essence , so I want to make it very clear today that , to put it mildly , there has been great disquiet in Parliament about the Council ' s and the Commission 's long-standing efforts to draft an action plan for better lawmaking , about the working parties that have already and secretly been drafting papers with the objective of putting this programme of action on the Laeken agenda - all of which has been done without involving or even informing Parliament , the joint legislator .
As item 30 of this report quite clearly states , we see this as a grave breach of the Community method .
The report therefore also demands that the action programme for better lawmaking should not be on the agenda for the Laeken Summit .
This is certainly not about this House being unwilling to take part in any consideration of how lawmaking could be simplified or even improved .
President Prodi announced today that the Commission will be producing a consultative document aimed at starting a dialogue with this House on this issue , and I can tell you that this Parliament is ready for it .
Let me say , though , and say quite emphatically , something to which we attach the highest importance : that if Parliament 's legislative authority , given to it alone directly by the citizens who elected it , is restricted , Parliament will not take it lying down .
It is , especially , co-regulation that is at issue here .
The use of so-called framework directives is something we view with a highly critical eye .
There must be appropriate mechanisms of democratic control , and on this point , Mr Prodi , there are evidently differences of opinion .
We want a time-limited ' call-back mechanism ' .
So I was very surprised that the Council representative made no comments on this of all issues . Better lawmaking is indeed a matter for all three institutions , and I would be interested to know what the Council Presidency has to say on this issue or on that of the proposed interinstitutional working party .
Mr President , despite all the fine words , I cannot shake off the impression that the Laeken Summit is actually intended to clean up the very soiled image of the Belgian Presidency , an attempt to brush successive howlers by the Verhofstadt-Michel government team under the carpet .
These days , one only has to read the foreign quality press , such as The Spectator and The Wall Street Journal , to realise how much damage this Belgian government is currently causing by its incompetent behaviour and , for example , by the insults which Minister Michel , present at the moment , has addressed to Austria and Italy .
That is unfortunate , for the Belgian Presidency could have easily played a significant role in this time of debate about Europe ' s core tasks , about Europe ' s borders and about the democratic deficit .
After all , we know from experience that the Single Belgian Federal State does not work along democratic lines and that consequently , a Single European Federal State cannot work democratically either .
We know from experience that , for example , matters of social security , are best decided at the level of the individual nations and that the principle of subsidiarity has to be followed to the letter .
We know from experience that a high level of respect is needed for linguistic and cultural differences if we are to co-exist in a proper , democratic way .
We know from experience that problems arise when people , citizens , and voters cannot identify with the political structure which decides on their fates .
In my country , Flanders , 70 % of those questioned cannot name even one European institution and nearly 40 % do not realise that they elect the MEPs .
Anyway , this should all be steamrollered by the Laeken propaganda machine , and in that way , the Belgian Presidency will finish as it started : insignificant and at the service of the inflated egos of a few ministers .
Mr President , the Lisbon European Council and the socio-political agenda adopted by the European Council at Nice bring us into a new phase of policy on social affairs and employment in the European Union .
As we have heard from the President-in-Office of the Council and from the President of the Commission , interest is now focussed on the quality of work and of social affairs policy .
We in this Parliament want to be fully involved in this development .
We - by which I mean the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , whose Chairman , Michel Rocard , I represent - are therefore putting an oral question to the Council and Commission , coupled with a motion for a resolution .
It is our conviction that secure jobs , favourable working conditions and appropriate workers ' rights do not diminish productivity and economic growth and hence the creation of jobs , but , on the contrary , promote them .
Work for all is the objective .
We want a strategy for more and better jobs .
Quality of work involves job satisfaction , which improves employees ' motivation , and health and safety at work improve as well .
We are looking to the Commission to produce a proposal on the status of temporary workers .
Moreover , quality of work involves equal treatment of both sexes , the reconciliation of work and family life , and measures to keep older people in the job market .
For this we need the most modern forms of vocational education .
There is a need for further education , in-service training and lifelong learning .
The adaptability of enterprises and their capacity to deal with structural change will be particularly important in creating new and better jobs , and minimum standards across Europe are needed to ensure that employees are involved in this , informed and consulted in due time , and thereby enabled to adjust to change .
In comparison with our economic counterparts , for example , the United States , Europe suffers from a low employment rate .
The Lisbon European Council recognised that this was a problem and proposed an ambitious objective for progressively increasing this rate .
It is absolutely vital that we achieve this objective .
The Commission has presented a communication in preparation for the Laeken Summit , in which it sets down the outlines of a strategy for promoting quality of work and social affairs policy .
The drawing-up of appropriate indicators and criteria , as Mr Prodi informed us , is not the least important of these , but is primary .
As I said at the outset , Parliament expects to be fully involved in discussions .
It is our ever more frequent experience that European social affairs policy is carried on by dialogue between sub-committees of the Council - for example the Employment Committee or the Social Protection Committee - and the Commission .
Parliament is often left out in the cold .
We protest against this .
Parliament must be able to play its rightful part in formulating proposals on subjects such as employment and social protection which , after all , are of immediate concern to all citizens .
If we are to do this , the relevant specialised fora and the Commission have to keep us up to date with the work they are doing , and Parliament has to be consulted in good time before every European Council .
We expect a clear pledge on this from the Laeken summit .
We are , at the end of the day , the representatives of the people and therefore , in essence , the primary organ of the European Union .
President Prodi just used a very fine expression in describing Parliament as the most important expression of democratic Europe .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President , it is for these reasons that we look forward to your answers to our oral questions .
Mr President , after Mr Barón Crespo ' s speech , there remains very little for me to say on this matter .
I am going to refer to the Commission White Paper , and also to the mysterious Council document , the Mandelkern report , to which reference has been made , but of which we have no knowledge .
The two documents deal with the legislative powers of Parliament .
Mr Prodi has made a commitment not to put forward any proposal to the Laeken European Council , and it seems right , in fact , that these issues will not be discussed at Laeken , because , in short , these are issues that affect the very essence of the process of drafting a new European Constitution and which should , therefore , be in the Convention itself , and , possibly , at the Intergovernmental Conference .
What we have to do here is to establish the legislative competences of the European Institutions , and make it clear that , of all the European Institutions , it is the organ of popular representation , the European Parliament , that holds the mandate for this popular representation .
The wording of the White Paper , relating to the powers of enforcement , to self-regulation and coregulation procedures , and to the Lisbon strategy , are all aimed at cutting back Parliament ' s limited legislative powers .
Mr President , I have one minute indeed , and it is outrageous , in my view , for draftsmen of the opinion to be apportioned a meagre one minute of speaking time on such a weighty matter .
Overall , Nice has failed to come up with the goods , but as for the areas of competence of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , of whose opinion I have the honour of being the draftsman , the situation is not actually that bad .
I would particularly refer to the improvements made at our initiative to the workings of the European legal system .
The major concern which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market wishes to express , therefore , is that whatever the fate of the Treaty of Nice may be , the positive changes which I alluded to a moment ago should enter into effect independently of the overall ratification of Nice .
With regard to the Laeken Declaration itself , to put it succinctly , the European Union must show itself prepared to meet the challenges that lie ahead .
It must focus on its core tasks and carry out its tasks properly .
In this connection , the European citizen expects Laeken to send out a clear signal that a great deal of work is being put into a European security policy , both internal and external .
I have been as generous as I can , Mr De Clercq , but one has to recognise the time that is allocated to your Committee .
Mr President , I am pleased that Mr Prodi is here to listen to this .
The Environment Committee is very unhappy with the idea of voluntary agreements , as a way of proceeding .
We want to see a legal framework for them because we believe that this is far too much like secret law-making .
We are not at all happy about the co-regulatory approach - whatever that may be - because we see that as a way of moving away from binding legal instruments , which can sideline democratic control .
Mr Prodi will know that we are very happy with the idea of publishing expert advice .
We are grateful for what crumbs we receive and would like to see sometimes the authorship of the legislation which we then tear apart .
On the question of implementation , we are very worried about the application of the law and I quote " in a way that takes account of regional and local conditions " .
We feel it would be better to draw up the law in a more flexible way in the first place .
If you are going to take account of regional and local conditions , it probably means that you are going to upset the conditions of fair and equal competition .
We see a great need for the Commission to devote more energy to the issue of implementation and we see no real need to establish criteria to focus its work in investigating possible breaches of the law .
What they need is more staff .
Finally , I recommend to Mr Prodi to read the occasional paper produced by the European Policy Centre on regulatory impact analysis .
It provides the idea of having a regulatory impact analysis on all new legislation to assess the need for it , to examine alternatives and to examine its overall impact .
It would include , and this may not recommend itself to Mr Prodi or his staff , the idea of a specific regulatory assessment office in the office of the Commission Secretary-General .
I think that would be a very good idea .
Mr President , five principles form the basis of the Commission ' s reform of the EU ' s forms of governance : openness , participation , efficiency , consistency and a clear division of responsibilities .
The work on these areas cannot be regarded as being complete if one half of humanity is ignored .
No one can say they are working for participation if they do not guarantee that it is both women and men who are participating .
Our Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities called for a council on equality to be set up to , for example , gather information and analyse trends ; for women ' s rights groups and non-governmental organisations to be part of the database on civil society that the Commission intends to set up ; and for considerations of equality to be integrated into information gathering at both national and local level , because women ' s and men ' s priorities , circumstances and needs often differ .
It is unfortunate that none of our demands has been incorporated into the report .
Mr President , the debate on the future of Europe must be conducted in a very responsible manner if it is not to end in failure , as happened with the intergovernmental method at Nice .
We must recognise the legitimacy of the European citizenship of the citizens of the Member States , for this , too , will help to bring the European institutions closer to the citizens once again .
Today , we have to take into account the way the interinstitutional organisations ' systems have developed , and the more sophisticated this development becomes the more it widens the gap between the citizens and the institutions .
When the institutions work properly , problems do not arise , but when they do not work properly - and the number of petitions we receive is evidence of the considerable gap between the institutions and the citizens - the citizens are wronged by the institutions .
Our positive response must be to strengthen the institutions which safeguard the rights of the Union ' s citizens .
The Committee on Petitions has been forced to issue an extremely critical opinion on the Commission ' s proposals on good governance , for it has found no reference in them either to the European Ombudsman or to the Committee on Petitions ' role as the institutional body which safeguards the rights of the citizens , who indeed petition it to uphold their rights .
The proposals for good governance do not appear to contain any significant element that might succeed in bringing the citizens closer to Europe .
This endeavour could be said to be effective in theory but , in actual fact , to have no genuine impact .
Lastly , we hope that it will be possible to make the obscure role of the Council clearer , at least by advertising the institution ' s sittings when it is legislating , to avoid the impression of it being a huge black hole .
I recommend the points made in these reports to the other European institutions , for I am sure that Parliament is the only body with democratic legitimacy .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , there are only two observations I wish to make , and they overlap with each other .
I believe that the European Union 's practical policy after 11 September has made it clear , through the behaviour of a number of Member States which indulged in bilateralism or appeared enraptured by their own managerial airs and graces , that the European Union is strong wherever it works in accordance with the Community method , and weak wherever it does not .
That is the lesson to be learned from the past two or three months ; it shows us how necessary general reform of the European Union is if this approach , which weakens us , is not to recur in future .
The conclusion to be drawn from this is that it is important that we find the right mechanism at Laeken , where the European Council will not yet , essentially , be deciding on content , but where success will depend on the methods by which the content is worked out .
One thing , I believe , must be clear . If there is to be a Convention which owes its existence to the help given by the Presidency , a number of Member States and the Commission , and in which Members of this Parliament and of the national parliaments take part , then it must not be a Convention whose procedures are conceived in such a way that it does not have the room to manoeuvre needed if the right decisions are to be reached .
Nor must it lack a procedure that can serve as the basis for the final negotiations by the Heads of State and of Government .
It is , above all else , unacceptable that so much time is allowed to elapse between the Convention and the summit that the old method of the diplomatic governmental conference destroys all the political momentum built up by parliamentarians .
I believe that this will be the decisive test by which Laeken will stand or fall .
I wish you a great deal of success , knowing as I do that you , in the Council and in the Commission , share this view that these positions must be made to prevail so that we can work together with a view to a result acceptable to all .
The Convention marks the start of a new European Constitution , a bold vision of Europe ' s future , a euro which is not suffering from monetary isolation but which is being embedded in socio-economic policy , a European Commission which is transformed into a European government , European elections with European lists of candidates and with people heading the lists of candidates who , via the European Parliament , can produce a president for the European Commission .
We would like more qualified majority votes in the Council and more codecision in the European Parliament .
The Council meetings must become public , allowing national parliaments to adequately monitor the Council Ministers .
We look forward to close cooperation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
This is a vision and the possible shape of things to come .
The Convention should look to reach consensus rather than draft a catalogue with no strings attached .
The Convention must enter into an open dialogue with civil society , for part of Europe ' s future lies in more European cooperation in those fields where citizens expect to see cross-border results , including food safety , immigration , environmental pollution , international crime and terrorism .
However , an equal share of the areas of policy could be apportioned to the regions and civil society .
I am thus in favour of more positive subsidiarity .
We must avoid a situation of Europe-autism and therefore focus on innovative institutional restructuring which goes hand in hand with cooperation in the various fields of policy .
Bringing about new types of European administration means adopting a more open working method and result-focused approach .
We will achieve this by introducing new instruments , such as co- and self-regulation and open coordination , but , in the event of failure , we must have the assurance that we can fall back on call-back mechanisms .
I am pleased with the resolutions before us .
As the European Parliament , let us today choose in favour of a new , transparent form of European administration and let us vote in favour of the Convention , thus ensuring a democratic future for Europe .
Mr President , in February 1787 , a previous convention met in Philadelphia .
Several of the American States were opposed to calling the thing in the first place and several others were determined to restrict its mandate and to dilute its effect .
The convention 's formal brief was extremely restrictive and it was not itself to decide but only propose .
Yet from that experiment flowered the American Constitution and the post-colonial parliamentary democracy that we still recognise today .
Such a similar result will only come out of this European Convention , if we as a Parliament are bold , well-organised and persuasive .
Beneath the Presidency of our European George Washington , we must draft a clear set of proposals and , while accepting the questions set for us by Laeken , we must retain the capacity to ask ourselves some questions .
Let us be truly creative for Europe .
Mr President , the Union already has implicitly in the Treaties the bones of a Constitution .
We all look to the Convention to make it explicit and clear and to create the proper legal framework for a thoroughly democratic Europe .
That , of course , will involve , as has been said in parts of this debate , fully recognising the prerogatives and powers of this great all-European Parliamentary Assembly .
But democracy at this level will not be effective unless it is also fully effective at the level of the little battalions : at the level of the local authorities , at the level of the constitutional regions , the self-governing internal nations of the Member States .
Now that means that the Convention must look to that question as well , and improving governance in Europe must , as the Commission has said , look closely at the proper involvement of regional and local authorities .
I thought that the Commission was somewhat timid in what they said about that , but alas , Parliament argues yet further timidity and talks down all the references in the White Paper to regional involvement with the Commission .
Recital M and Paragraph 26 are to be deeply regretted as currently phrased in Mrs Kaufmann 's otherwise admirable report .
We want to see these amended .
We want to see a strengthening of the reference to the necessary involvement of the Commission and Parliament with the regional and local authorities , as well as with national parliaments .
We do not want to subvert the constitutional framework of Europe . We want to improve it .
Mr President , the Laeken Summit is to form the basis of a new EU treaty .
The European Parliament ' s resolution demands that this change to the treaties results in a constitution for the EU , that is to say , a decisive step of sorts on the way to a federal state .
I believe that something essential has been forgotten , namely that the Irish people have made use of their right to reject the Treaty of Nice .
This right , and this rejection of the treaty by the Irish people , should be respected at the Laeken Summit and a statement made to the effect that the Treaty should be rewritten .
The message from Ireland is clear : less centralism and supranationalism and more respect for national democracy .
What we need are treaty changes along the following lines : openness in the Council of Ministers , with the opportunity to monitor decisions by the national parliaments , at the same time as the national parliaments are given the opportunity to propose laws instead of this right ' s being located in the Commission bureaucracy .
This is an important debate and I would like to compliment the Commission on its publication of the White Paper on European Governance .
In light of recent developments , it is obvious that it is a time for stocktaking but there can be no doubt about the relevance of the European Union to Member States and its citizens .
In most respects the European Union has lived up to the ideals and aspirations of Europe 's founding fathers .
The achievement of peace alone justifies our existence but we have achieved much more , not least the fact that the ideals enshrined in the Treaty of Rome - of assisting economic and social development of small and under-developed countries - have by and large also been achieved .
Ireland bears witness to this fact and , despite the outcome of the Nice Treaty , Irish people readily acknowledge the benefits of our membership and also support proposals on enlargement .
So what has gone wrong ?
We have failed , in my view , to communicate Europe .
Citizens do not feel part of the European family .
Their perceived isolation from the decision-making process has left them frustrated and cold .
That sense of abandonment has led to the apathy and indifference as demonstrated by the lower turnout in recent European elections and , in Ireland 's case , rejection of the Nice Treaty .
The Commission and Parliament are right about one thing , the EU lacks democratic legitimacy .
Furthermore , no layman , nor many MEPs , really understand how the whole thing works .
The White Paper and this report are all part of a hard sell , the idea being to sell the EU concept to our citizens more aggressively so that the people will learn to love it .
Beneath all of this is the interinstitutional battle and both Mr Prodi and Parliament are desperate to preserve the Community method , fearing there is too much intergovernmentalism about .
Whoever wins this battle between the institutions will make no difference to ordinary people .
It is time to put the true intentions of the EU project to the electorate in each Member State .
Only then will we know whether they want to be a part of it and whether the project can ever work .
But perhaps after Ireland , Denmark and Switzerland , that may be taking democracy a stage too far for all of you .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Leinen have , once again , presented us with a truly sophisticated report , but I feel that they have dwelled a little too much on methodology .
It is , of course , better to have a speedboat rather than a rowing boat , as you can go faster in the speedboat , but if you do not know where you are going , you are not at so great an advantage .
I welcomed the comments made by Mr Poettering , Mr Cox and Mr Voggenhuber , who , for the first time in a long while , focused on the issue of the Commission in their speeches .
In my view , we are now facing a very serious problem .
We have a fight on our hands .
There is a tug of war going on between the Council and Parliament .
We are increasing our powers of co-decision , but , at the same time , we are in the process of destroying the Commission .
In doing so , we are introducing further bureaucracy , and I do not think there is any point , Mrs Theorin , in discussing transparency , governance , co-decision and democratic legitimacy , when we cannot even talk about electing the Commission by direct universal suffrage .
I believe that the balance of our institutions depends on this and that we cannot run our economy along the same lines as the great American model .
It is the balance of our institutions , the check and balance , the division of powers , and not how to share the cake between the various institutions that our discussions , our debates and the Intergovernmental Conference , as well as the imminent Convention , should focus on .
I think that this is the only way to fight against further bureaucracy , the only way to once again make our institutions meaningful , the only way to reinvigorate European integration .
So , as Mr Salafranca said , there are no favourable winds for those who have no clue where they are going , and I think that , first and foremost , the problem that Parliament has is to know and understand in which direction it wants to travel .
Mr President , President Prodi , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs showed , by our unanimous adoption of the Kaufmann report , our ability , in the very short time available to us , to act in concert and respond to important reform proposals from the Commission , on which we will be able to take up a position either today or tomorrow , just in time for the European Summit at Laeken .
Let me just pick out a few points from the Kaufmann report and highlight the following : Mr Prodi , we are delighted to learn that you are sticking with the joint working party proposed in October .
What matters now is that we get it moving quickly and start collaborating appropriately on the subject matter in hand .
We , in the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats insist in any case on an early start being made on this work .
We are glad that the Commission of the European Union has given up developing what would have been , in effect , its own administrative structures right down through the regions , towns and local communities , as we read about , for example , in preliminary drafts of its White Paper .
It is also our opinion that it is fundamentally unacceptable that the Commission should adopt a method of open coordination , bypassing its co-legislator Parliament , with guidelines sanctioned only by the Council of Ministers and with the Commission using the financial reins of the programmes to set their general course .
Here , too , the co-legislator needs to be involved .
We urge you to undertake an in-depth reform of the comitological procedure .
It is not acceptable that , with the help of the national bureaucracies , Parliament 's legislative prerogative should be made null and void by means of implementing provisions whose content , purpose and extent are not laid down in advance .
We also demand that European agencies be kept to a minimum .
May we remind you that the Commission and the European Parliament are born allies when it comes to the promotion of European integration and action in the interests of Europe 's citizens ?
The transposition of European legislation requires at every level its own culture of public administration , which must also embrace the application of European rules through the authorities in the Member States .
There is an urgent need for appropriate instruction and training of civil servants at these levels .
Thank you , Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , this debate is , in fact , far too early to be able to rate the chances of success of the Laeken Summit realistically , but , Mr President-in-Office , it is already a fact that the Belgian Presidency will be memorable , even if it was only because the attack on New York has put the fight against terrorism and Europe ' s role in the world , at the top of the list of priorities .
For my group , it is vital for the Laeken Summit to spell out once more that we have our own contribution to make , especially in the search for political and diplomatic solutions for international conflicts , with full backing from the UN institutions , and that we also want to reactivate the dialogue with the Arab States .
The EU ' s own role means , inter alia , that Europe refuses to ignore or suspend the principles of the rule of law and human rights in the name of the fight against terrorism , and that Europe insists on justice in the framework of an international court of justice and not in the framework of exceptional courts .
Mr President-in-Office , I hope that Laeken will drive home this clear message to the United States , among others .
Nevertheless , the risk remains that this priority could push aside the sixteen other priorities .
That is why , on behalf of my group , I would like to convey a wish to the Council Presidency .
We expect the Council Presidency to make an extra effort at the Laeken Summit to clarify that the Lisbon objectives also apply at a time when we face economic decline , when companies are being restructured and unemployment continues to rise .
It is important for the Laeken Summit to demonstrate to people that Europe is not just about the introduction of the euro . It is also about economic growth , employment , the future of pensions and the fight against social exclusion .
Mr President-in-Office , Laeken ' s pièce de résistance will undoubtedly be the declaration about the future of Europe .
This declaration is still one of the Prime Minister ' s personal projects with which he , in the capacity of President-in-Office of the Council , is doing the rounds of the capital cities .
As the draft document is still a well kept secret for this Parliament too , we are having to make our contribution to the declaration without , in fact , any knowledge of the content of this document .
I find this regrettable .
That is why I should like to pass on a few suggestions which are extremely important to us in the framework of the declaration on the future of the European Union .
First of all , we must avoid a situation where the Laeken Declaration sets up scenarios whereby the competences of the European Union are cast in stone , thus not allowing Europe any room for manoeuvre where this is not explicitly provided for in the Treaty , or a scenario in which use is made of lists of competences .
Mr President-in-Office , such scenarios certainly do not meet the expectations of the citizens .
Secondly , there is the risk , if I can believe the lobbies , that Europe ' s voice will be somewhat drowned out by that of the delegations of the Member States .
We trust that Laeken will launch a balanced Convention and that , furthermore , the participation of women will be guaranteed .
Thirdly , Mr President-in-Office , I was taken by surprise a moment ago when I heard you say - and I hope I did not misunderstand you - that " l 'idée d 'une assemblée parallèle au forum de la société civile a été écartée " .
This is very bad news , for it is obvious to me that the debate on the future of Europe is already being compromised if the civil society is not accorded a clear status , if a structured platform for a dialogue with the civil organisations is not really being created and if all that remains is a virtual computer debate with no room for real participation .
I hope that this can still be rectified in Laeken , but I would nevertheless wish the Council Presidency every success at this stage .
Mr President , you said that openness , efficiency and bringing the EU closer to the people were to be important issues at Laeken .
I could not agree with you more about that .
Following the not entirely successful compromise in Nice , the Irish referendum and , according to many opinion polls , growing scepticism towards the EU project in quite a few Member States , there are high expectations of the Laeken Summit , with changes to the EU anticipated .
The EU must become more intelligible and citizen-friendly .
A clear constitution is needed , explaining how the EU is governed and who does what .
The EU must cut back on the work it does and concentrate on the cross-border problems .
I do not believe people want the EU to do more in all areas . Instead , they want it to deliver the goods in those areas it has made its own , taking decisions openly .
It is completely unacceptable for it to legislate behind the closed doors of the Council of Ministers .
If it is to be possible to simultaneously enlarge and deepen the EU , we must involve people and win back their trust .
That is not something we can do through fine declarations and constitutional exercises of an academic nature , but through genuine reforms and political courage .
I hope the rest of the European Council is as courageous as the Belgian Presidency .
Mr President , I would just like to reiterate what the rapporteur , Mr Méndez de Vigo , said just now .
There is no sense in setting up a Convention and then doing our level best to stop it succeeding .
What do we mean by ' succeeding ' ?
Success means achieving substantial progress towards a stronger , more integrated Union , which will inevitably involve reducing the role and powers of each State , that is the problem , Mr Michel , and increasing the role and powers of the common institutions .
This is your responsibility now as European Council , and this is the decision you must make : to reduce your powers .
At Nice , you failed precisely because the intergovernmental method is an obstacle in itself , in that it favours those who are lagging behind and forces everyone to conform to their slow pace .
The President-in-Office , Mr Michel , and President Prodi have been through some really tough times in recent months , times when the lack of joint instruments was starkly and sometimes cruelly clear .
I feel that the Convention , a genuine Convention , should be an embryonic constituent assembly , and that it is the only thing that can make the future of the European Union brighter than the confusion which reigns at present .
Mr President , with regard to the European strategy to promote quality in employment and in social policy , announcing and adopting plans is not enough : quality employment with rights must be created and tangible objectives must be set to ensure that all social rights are respected .
Creating jobs is not enough : they must not be precarious , employees must be able to live with dignity and must be paid on time , unlike the current situation in Portugal , which , despite the low official rate of unemployment , still has the lowest salaries in the European Union , and where job insecurity is growing worse , the number of companies that are behind in paying their employees is increasing and it is becoming more and more difficult to develop areas that are reaching crisis point .
A policy seeking to achieve quality in social terms calls for priority to be given to employment with rights , with particular emphasis on women and young people , including their training , but also on pay and contracts , and special attention must also be given to the elderly and to pensions , especially minimum pensions , which means that the European Union cannot continue to insist on giving absolute priority to the monetary policies of the Stability Pact , as it is still doing .
Mr President , in our view , the draft declaration that the Laeken Council is due to publish to shape the debate on the future of the Union seems to have been drafted under some very odd circumstances .
According to press reports , the Belgian Presidency says that it deliberately did not release the document to its partners too early , so that they would not have the time to rewrite the text .
This is not a very co-operative way of working and this is what leads us to warn the members of the Council : do not forget that you are representing countries and national democracies , which should have a free hand in these negotiations .
The ideal scenario would be to initially establish an interparliamentary forum consisting of representatives of the national parliaments or which works on the basis of proposals from the national parliaments , as the latter are well placed to sum up the feelings of each nation .
In any case , I would say to the Heads of State and Government , do not allow a mechanism to be imposed upon you that would lead to proposals being made that are out of touch with the interests and preferences of our people .
This is a point that I will explain in greater depth in my explanation of vote on the resolution that will be tabled .
Mr President , many Christian-Democrats have played a leading role at each stage of the development of the European Union , and even now we want to make a joint effort in order to turn Europe into a lasting success story .
The Nice Summit , which was supposed to be the summit of truth , cannot really be described as a run-away success , certainly not in terms of its intention to properly prepare the Union ' s institutions for enlargement .
The Heads of State and Government will now hopefully realise that they can no longer afford any half-hearted or premature conclusions at Laeken .
The report by Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo indicates very clearly what decisions are crucial to secure a bright future for the Union .
We back this report and I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteurs warmly on their work .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , your work is not complete , and neither is the term of your Presidency .
It would therefore be premature to draw up an assessment of your Presidency at this stage , but pending the Laeken Summit , I should still like to say the following . We have noted , and this is also evident from opinion polls , that European citizens have given up .
They are not really turning against Europe , but they no longer feel involved .
Therefore , more attention should be devoted to issues such as : more information , more public debate , more openness towards the NGOs , making it clear that the Union ' s objectives do have a bearing on every single person and that the Union shows equal respect for every human being .
In this connection , I would call on you as Head of Government of a small country not to allow yourself to be pushed into a corner again , as was the case in Ghent and in London , in fact .
People cannot understand this and accept this even less .
I would also urge you to continue to guarantee the same respect for all languages and their users .
I would therefore urge you to discontinue your planned intentions concerning the use of language in the bureaus for the protection of industrial right of ownership .
People do not understand this , neither do they want or accept this .
They do not want a second-rate language , and neither do they want to be treated like second-class citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will just mention five points in the short time available to me .
Firstly , I welcome the Convention .
It is not a constituent assembly but it is all we could realistically achieve .
Secondly , we need to be careful not to undervalue or trivialise the term ' European Constitution ' , and the members of the Convention need to be courageous and innovative in their role .
Thirdly , federalism must not be a matter just for the States and the European Union , with the basic regional and local levels and linguistic and national minorities being excluded .
Fourthly , with regard to the method , Commissioner Barnier is right to talk about ' maximum consensus ' . We are not aiming at unanimity on the reforms .
Fifthly and lastly : the timetable .
We must beware of excessively long delays between the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference supposed to adopt the European Constitution , for it is an unfortunate fact that enthusiasm for reforms wanes fast .

Mr President , Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo 's model of a Convention sets out an accessible and also , I hope , successful way ahead into Europe 's future .
I also agree with your desire , in response to statement 23 , for an enlarged agenda which , however , the Convention should set for itself .
Even such an enlarged agenda , though , offers little hope of achieving the desired result , namely a single basis for decision-making .
I am far more inclined to think that the possibility suggests itself of submitting to the Council various options which could also take account of the different positions .
I know that on one point I stand quite alone , although I am in the right .
I wish to reiterate my warning against setting an earlier date for the Intergovernmental Conference planned for Nice in 2004 , because I am firmly convinced that the people would see it as an evasion of their vote .
If , as all sides in the House maintain , we really are striving for an open debate which is accessible to the public , then nothing could be better suited to that than to include the themes in the next European elections .
Mr President , the Belgian Presidency has played a major role in completing some of the groundwork for the Union ' s enlargement .
One is indeed struck by the optimism which is taking possession of those involved : the naming of the date 2004 suggests that the work is nearly finished .
There is even talk of a big bang of ten countries acceding simultaneously .
Commissioner Verheugen is sensible enough to state that it is possible that up to ten new countries will join in 2004 .
After all , it is not up to us to determine an accession date for the candidate countries .
The year 2004 is an assumption and a hope , but holds no guarantees for any Member State whatsoever .
We , and they , should therefore continue to make every effort to achieve a sound and credible result .
A great deal needs to be done within the current Union in order to clarify the significance of enlargement .
Naturally , many are right to be truly enthusiastic about this fantastic , historic process .
But under the influence of those who believe they can secure political gain from xenophobic sentiments , a climate of uncertainty has emerged .
False representations of the costs involved in the enlargement are doing the rounds .
They are designed to instil fear and are based on worst-case scenarios : as if it has not been clear for a very long time that the cost of this whole enlargement process would be covered by the EU budget .
Far more important is greater awareness of the need for anchoring more firmly the character of the Union as a union of democratic constitutional states .
The events of 11 September have illustrated this more clearly than ever .
The fight against serious crime and terrorism is a common cause , and reticence in this connection will jeopardise the safety of citizens .
It is actually very strange that our union of constitutional states , as such , has not resulted in greater trust among the Member States and their legal systems .
A great deal will need to be done about this in the coming years .
May I offer my congratulations to the co-rapporteurs for an excellent report and also to the Belgian Presidency for having carried the idea , born in Parliament , of preparing the next Intergovernmental Conference by means of a Convention nearly to fruition , although we still have the Laeken Summit to come .
This is a dramatic improvement on the preparations of previous Intergovernmental Conferences .
Instead of the usual group of foreign ministry officials meeting together behind closed doors we will have a publicly representative body taking ideas from a wide public debate and coming up with a coherent set of proposals for reform .
This is a tremendous opportunity but does not guarantee results and it is for us to make something of it .
We will do so if we avoid divisions on the theology or vocabulary of European integration where we are sometimes divided on the word even though we are united on the substance .
Let me give a couple of examples : in some political parties and countries the word " federalism " is mistakenly equated with centralism and they talk of creating a centralised super-state in the way that Mr Farage spoke earlier .
That is not what anybody wants and if you define federalism as different levels of governance , as decentralised as possible but centralised where necessary with each level democratically structured , then we already have the beginnings of a federal-type system and I am happy , under that definition , to proclaim myself a federalist .
In some countries the word " constitution " is an almost sacred text that has emerged after revolution or after national independence .
In other countries such as the United Kingdom it is a more pragmatic concept .
In that pragmatic sense we already have a European constitution , not a very good one , but we have it and we should improve it further .
The constitution is the Treaties which lay down the field of competence of the EU , the powers of the institutions , the legislative and the budgetary procedures .
Let us recognise that de facto they form our constitution .
Let us improve our constitution by firstly codifying it to make it simple and clear in a single text so that citizens can see how this constitution operates , and secondly by clarifying it in several ways : clarifying the responsibilities , what the Union is and is not responsible for and clarifying the structures .
Let me give one example of confusion that we have now .
The functions of Mr Solana and Mr Patten should be merged into a single individual to represent the Union externally , perhaps with a special status as a specially appointed Vice-President of the Commission .
Finally , as regards clarity and democratic accountability : it is essential that all legislation passes the two tests of acceptability to the Council representing the States and acceptability to Parliament representing the citizens , a double guarantee as to the quality and acceptability of European legislation .
I said this is an opportunity , but it is not a guarantee .
We must fight to make the necessary changes come about through the Convention .
Mr President , in the opinion of the Liberal Group the Convention must suggest alternative prototypes for the development of the EU .
One of these alternatives is the trend ( currently underway ) towards a federal state .
The supranational Commission would be developed into a federal government , exercising executive power and directing the Union 's legislation ; this would operate subject to the confidence of the supranational European Parliament .
The Council of Ministers would be developed as the Parliament 's second chamber .
Along with this federal model , we must consider a structure which will be built upon the principles of an association of states .
Here , the leading body would be a reformed Council of Ministers made up of representatives of the Member States .
Since the Council would hold the right of initiative , it would not be able to operate in its present manner as a legislative chamber representing the Member States .
In this case , alongside the supranational Parliament there would be a second chamber formed in order to strengthen the position of the Member States , which would be composed of members of the national parliaments .
This type of decentralised association of states is , in my opinion , better suited to an expanding European Union than a centralised federal model .

Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to start by congratulating the two rapporteurs , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Leinen , for their sterling work and the manner in which they have conducted themselves , for want of a better word , from start to finish in order to include as many ideas and views of the Members of the European Parliament in their reports as possible .
Obviously , there are as many excellent and interesting ideas , visions and proposals for the future of Europe as there are responses to the challenges facing the European Union .
However , not one idea , vision or proposal can be implemented or can bring in results unless the right method is used to put flesh on the bones of these visions and proposals .
And the right method is none other than a convention , a body which needs to reflect accurately all the current political forces in Europe .
The work of this convention , which we believe should be the subject of the fullest democratic dialogue , should result in a proposal which is a synthesis and product of all the views formulated at it .
Only thus will the foundations on which the Europe of the future is built be more representative , more democratic and , hence , more efficient , not to mention permanent and equitable .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I know that you are in a hurry and must go , but I would like to thank you very much for keeping the promise you made to Members of this House , to bring nothing to Laeken on which a decision had already been made , and for being so determined that there should be an interinstitutional working party .
Such cooperation with Parliament is quite exemplary , and I wish to thank you most warmly for it .

I would , though , also like to extend my warm thanks to the rapporteurs , Mr Leinen , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mrs Kaufmann for having focussed their excellent reports so well on the vital importance to us of making Europe 's decision-making structures more democratic and more efficient and for pointing out that there must be no contradiction in this , much as that might have appeared to be the case here and there , with elements of democracy having to be sacrificed for efficiency 's sake .
Both as regards the Convention and legislation , what matters to us is that we , as the people 's directly elected Members of Parliament , are convinced , not that we can do everything , which would be quite false , but that we should have control of the decision-making process .
Mr President of the Commission , some small differences may well still be there .
We want this ' call back position ' only in the event of a delegated decision-making structure being incapable or coming to the wrong decisions - wrong , that is , in the sense of being contrary to what the legislature intended .
It would be better , and is always good , for others to reach decisions along the lines that we have indicated in our fundamental decisions and political approach .
I hope , firstly , that the Council is now willing to set up this interinstitutional working party soon , and , secondly , that we will be able , taking the Mandelkern and Kaufmann reports and the Commission 's Final Conclusions as our basis , to conclude the Agreement as early as June next year , or , at least , that the Council will be able , next June , to agree that the three institutions have found a way to take Europe into a future which will be more highly developed and marked both by democracy and efficiency .
Mr President , the issue of European governance is such a complex problem , and one that our fellow citizens have difficulty in understanding , which is , in itself , a paradox .
We all know that Europe is suffering from a serious democratic deficit , and that is why there is obviously a need to radically reform the way in which powers are exercised at European level .
We must do so and bear in mind three objectives , namely to clarify the decision-making process , to improve the efficiency and transparency of this process , and to encourage the involvement of citizens .
That is why I support the guidelines contained in the White Paper and the Kaufmann report .
We must , of course , ensure there is greater transparency in the Council ' s work , we must encourage the European Parliament and the national parliaments to play a greater role in the legislative process . We must simplify Community legislation and make it possible to undertake genuine consultation with civil society .
Furthermore , I think it is worthwhile , as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs stressed , to draw up an inter-institutional agreement on co-legislation , to guarantee that the European Parliament plays an effective role and fulfils its political responsibility .
The reform of governance is therefore a step in the right direction .
However , it will obviously not be a substitute for the radical reform that our institutions need so badly .
We must provide ourselves , as soon as possible , with a simple and understandable constitution , clearly defining the division of competences , clarifying everyone ' s role so that citizens finally understand who does what , and so that they can know who is responsible .
Lastly , as everyone in this House knows , we cannot have democratic power without democratic legitimacy .
That is why the President of the European executive must one day , and one day soon , I hope , be elected by universal suffrage .
Mr President , the Laeken Summit will be a major but difficult summit , particularly because of the importance of the subjects that will be debated .
In this brief speech , I would just like to focus on the institutional elements of the summit .
The Convention must concentrate on instigating a new phase which will produce a Constitution leading to the creation of a federation of nation States , but it must also establish the competences of the various institutions : the Commission , the Council , the Member States , the regions and the major cities .
These are decisions which will have to be made under the banner of solidarity and subsidiarity , two values which must inspire our new Constitution .
The Laeken Council will also have to discuss the timetable for this progression towards the new institutions .
Indeed , we must ensure that decisions which are fundamental for the future of the Union are not taken at the time of the electoral campaign .
That is why we feel it would be appropriate to initiate the Intergovernmental Conference earlier than planned , during the Italian Presidency in the second half of 2003 .

Clearly , the people must be involved in the process of creating a Constitution through the votes of the parliaments - for example , we would have preferred Parliament to have been given the opportunity to debate and amend the Nice Charter for there are parts of it , particularly those regarding the individual , which are wholly unconvincing - especially regarding the European Parliament , for without the involvement of the citizens and their representatives we will not be able to transform the Europe of the euro into a political Europe which can enlarge its borders in the future , maybe even as far as the Yurals : in other words , a great Europe which will bring a long , lasting period of peace .

Mr President , I am going to concentrate on the legal issues , which are what is most worrying right now when it comes to the structural aspects of the EU .
The Council is in danger of infringing Articles 8 and 10 of the European Council Convention , together with Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , freedom of expression , respect for private life and the protection of personal data .
That is something people cannot do much about .
Because there is no balance of power in the legal area , the terrorist legislation , which is entirely necessary , is in danger of undermining democracy in the long term .
The intergovernmental model is out of date .
The European Parliament must become a co-legislator and the EU ' s Court of Justice be given full powers .
The Council cannot be turned into a so-called state within a state .
On 11 September , the EU ' s structure in terms of pillars ceased to be at all effective .
External and internal security issues became ever more closely connected .
Vigorous measures to combat terrorism and serious crime are now required .
These must nonetheless go hand in hand with increased public control and legal protection , especially when it comes to what are known as the principles of due process , such as , no punishment without law , proportionality , the presumption of innocence and the right to a defence and to be tried before an impartial court .
These rights must become unconditional at EU level .
The Laeken Summit must signal the start of openness and democracy , which are prerequisites for successful enlargement .
They require a convention on a mainly parliamentary basis , obviously with a substantial number of members from the EU institution closest to the people .
The Convention should be able to work towards producing a proposal , so that people in future know what it is they are to adopt a position on .
Anyone who wants to develop the EU and make it better and larger should support the thinking that is being done in terms of devising a constitution which is characterised by an effective division of power and which , it is to be hoped , will develop out of today ' s excellent reports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no democracy without a Parliament .
Today again we find that the European Parliament is the principal integrating element in the European Union .
Nowhere else do Council , Commission and Parliament engage in public discussion , not always achieving unanimity , but openly , and , I hope , constructively .
Our three rapporteurs have presented excellent reports .
This Parliament has , since Nice , been pressing forward with a Community process which must burst forth in Laeken .
I share President Prodi 's concern that the European Union is not yet adequately equipped to cope with enlargement , and so I ask the President-in-Office of the Council to check again , and check carefully , whether what was decided in Nice really does enhance the working capacity of the Council and of Parliament .
I doubt it .
The European Community and European Union have developed splendidly over the past nearly fifty years to date , and I hope that the next fifty years will be prepared for in such a way that we can work even better in the European Union over the next fifty years .
Mr President , the forthcoming summit in Laeken will be an extremely important meeting .
At this summit , the agenda will need to be drawn up for the Convention which has to submit the reform proposals for the European institutions . And everyone knows how important agendas are for the outcome of consultations .
We are happy with the planned make-up of the Convention , except that I should like to add that it is important to strike a political balance .
This will mainly be the responsibility of the national parliaments .
Furthermore , I am also of the opinion that the chairman of the Convention should be elected by the Convention itself .
With regard to the agenda for the IGC of 2003-2004 , the Council has naturally included the four points of Declaration 23 appended to the Treaty of Nice .
I should like to briefly comment on these four points .
As far as the demarcation of powers is concerned , we are in favour of a more federal structure of the European Union , with a clear distribution of tasks among the Union , the Member States and regions .
Concerning the structure of the future treaties , we endorse a basic treaty with a constitutional character which must also include the Charter .
In respect of the role of the national parliaments , we believe that they must primarily encourage and monitor their own ministers in the supervision of the implementation of European policy .
Are there any more topics for the Convention ?
Yes , I should like to outline five .
The common foreign and security policy must be included in the Community Pillar .
The policy in the field of police , justice and criminal law must also fall within the remit of the Community , with a European public prosecution office , a public prosecutor and a Community Europol .
The European Parliament must be granted full legislative and budgetary powers .
The President of the European Commission must be elected by the European Parliament and the European Council of Ministers must meet in public when they discuss legal matters .
I am pleased that Mr Prodi has said this now , and I am very interested to see if Mr Michel shares this view .
These are the topics which mainly centre around transparency and the Union ' s democratic content and which , as far as I am concerned , should be added to the Convention ' s agenda , thus affording the Union a more stable foundation which meets the requirements of a modern constitutional state when the new Member States accede .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in my opinion , the most important aspect of the Laeken Summit is the following : that the Council is able to reverse the trend seen in Nice , that is to say , that we move away from this feeling of failure at the summit that marked the end of the French Presidency a year or so ago , towards a feeling of success at the Laeken summit at political level and for Europe ' s citizens .
I think that this is what the excellent Leinen and Méndez de Vigo report is calling for .
In addition to the details , the concrete proposals , which are , of course , important , the essential thing is to develop a new perspective at Laeken , a constitutional perspective , and this means , without any doubt and as I said before , reversing the current trend .
The method for the forthcoming reform is of fundamental importance .
As is the Convention .
But neither must we let the Convention develop into some kind of tedious rigmarole , and in order for this not to be the case , the Convention should be called in order to prepare reform with true content and a real agenda .
If the agenda for the forthcoming reform remains restricted to Declaration 23 annexed to the Treaty of Nice , we will not be getting off to the right start , and the report that this House will , probably , approve tomorrow , calls for more than this .
It calls for a more wide-ranging agenda .
Above all , it calls for an agenda that , once again , includes the policies of the Union and the institutions that are intended to manage these policies .
It also calls for the Union to have its own legal personality .
It is for this agenda , and so as not to distract public opinion , that the Convention has to be called .
The Convention needs an agenda , but it also needs a mandate , a membership , a working method and a timetable to make it worthwhile .
I would like to highlight the words of Mr Méndez de Vigo : it would be incredible to keep the same number of representatives of the European Parliament as in the Convention that had the task of drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights , when the total number of participants in the next Convention will increase significantly .
This imbalance would , of course , be unacceptable .
Secondly , the Convention should work not on the basis of unanimity , but on the basis of majority consensus .
I think that this is the exact definition .
It should have the right to decide who to choose as President and the right to finish its work on time .
This is important in order to ensure that the conclusions of the Convention are not put on ice , because although time , heals all , it also makes us forget .
This is the commitment that we ask of Laeken : an ambitious reform with a different method of achieving more Europe and a better Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I initially wanted to respond to the points made by each speaker , but unfortunately , I do not think that I will have time to go into details .
I shall , however , try to answer as accurately as I can .
First of all , I would like to give my very sincere thanks to the European Parliament and to the majority of the speakers for the quality of their comments , and for the overwhelming European voluntarism that I have heard in this House .
I must say that I do not always hear the same voluntarism in the other European institutions where I work .
I have therefore found a great deal of optimism here , which I was not expecting .
The ambitious goals that you are setting for European integration are very much in line with the ideas and the ambitions that I share , that we share .
So , with only a few days to go before Laeken , it is most certainly a welcome commitment , one that I heard voiced by almost all Members .
One of the speakers said that the Laeken Summit would be a difficult exercise .
I am sure that it will be , because the EU candidate countries , particularly during the debate on the future of Europe , will be faced with a number of choices which are virtually breaking points , and which are so important for the future of Europe that some of us will just have to demonstrate a virtue that is extremely difficult in politics , in other words , that of the ability to make sacrifices .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to focus briefly on the Convention , and I would first of all like to explain to you what the Convention is not .
I may thus be able to reassure those of you who already see a thousand and one reasons in the Convention for sacrificing some things that they have always believed in , and which are , in fact , crippling Europe .
The Convention is not and no one has ever thought that it was the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Convention cannot , and I think that it was Mr Méndez de Vigo who said this , act as an alibi either .
To my mind , it should , first and foremost , be a worthwhile sounding board .
I could also put that another way .
It can also be a challenge upon the political responsibility of the IGC members , who will have to take up this challenge , because the Convention will , at any rate , make all Council members face their political responsibility .
Let us imagine , for example , that the Convention is proposing three or four options on a specific subject related to an issue that is fundamental for the future of Europe . One of these options receives unanimous support or consensus , another receives the support of 80 % of Members , and the third is given 50-50 .
We are well aware that the Intergovernmental Conference is not going to be forced to choose between these options and that it could very well decide to choose another option , to come up with something else , to give these options a different response to the one that the Convention would have given .
In this case , all IGC members , when shouldering their responsibilities , when adopting one option or another , or when selecting from the options which are presented by the Convention , will , at the same time , risk being at odds , not only with the Convention , but with civil society which must , at some point , make known its intentions , its expectations and its aspirations for this Convention .
Therefore , do not underestimate the Convention due to the fact that it is not a decision-making body ; do not underestimate its political weight or its political force .
I make no secret of the fact that I have several reservations as to the composition , even though I do not believe that we should no longer consider the request to increase the number of MEPs .
I think that this is quite a legitimate question , even if I must reiterate that , in our proposal , we took up the proportions that were used in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The difference compared to the Charter is that we agreed the candidate countries would take part .
We must take this difference into account .
I shall reiterate that , at the Ghent European Council , we received requests that ran counter to the requests made by the European Parliament .
Several countries demanded an increase in the number of members from the national parliaments , perhaps so that the ruling coalition could have better representation , perhaps to take into account sub-national entities or perhaps because of the bi-cameral system .
Essentially , it is quality , rather than quantity , that counts , and I think that the MEPs will always have an advantage because of the fact that they are in control of this dossier and of procedures .
I would still like to add a brief comment regarding the composition , namely that it would be regrettable if latent rivalries between political groups or specific components rise to the surface .
I think that the debate must be open ; we must not consider ourselves according to the grouping to which we belong .
I think we must consider ourselves on our intellectual strength , our intellectual objectivity , on our intellectual , philosophical , cultural and political freedom of thought .
This must be done in an objective manner and I am sure that we are all capable of doing this .
Therefore , as far as I am concerned , I am willing to see whether an increase in the European Parliament ' s representation will cause too many difficulties , such as , for example , too many Members taking part in the Convention , and whether we will encounter similar requests .
This could mean that the number of representatives might prevent the Convention from working smoothly .
In my opening remarks , I gave my thoughts on the outcome of the Convention and how worthwhile it is . I think that our work is moving in the direction proposed by Parliament .
We use the consensus method where possible , and have the possibility , where necessary , of presenting options in preferential order , for example .
However , we must avoid imposing the consensus method from the outset , because I think that this would weaken the Convention , which would then only be adopted by the smallest common denominator .
The possibility for the Convention to present various options must enable us to hold a debate with conflicting views .
I would like to go over the various questions that were put to me concerning enlargement .
I would like to respond to the speakers who are not sceptical , but who are obviously concerned .
Everyone says that they are in favour of enlargement ; everyone says that it is an important political and historical step .
At the same time , however , a number of people seem to put forward arguments as if they have not heard what has been said , to express their reservations over enlargement .
I would like to make something clear . We have always said that we would , first of all , try to keep up the pace of negotiations with the exceptionally rapid pace set by the Swedish Presidency , and that , secondly , we would do this by judging every country on its own merits .
The fact that we can today give a particularly positive progress report on the negotiations does not mean , of course , as some speakers have suggested , that we are being almost politically negligent and would be willing to accept 10 countries before 2004 without any further verification , further judgment or criteria .
Of course we would not , and therefore we continue to say , with regard to enlargement , that yes , it is irreversible , but also , yes , each country must be judged on its own merits .
These are my comments on enlargement .
I think that Mr Barón Crespo mentioned the presidium and wanted the forthcoming presidencies to be a part of that .
I am not against this at all , but we must keep a sense of balance .
A compromise might be for the next presidencies to take part as observers .
The Convention can take up any issue , including European security and defence policy .
As we know , these are the four themes from Nice relating to the Convention .
However , as soon as you say that the Convention was not an Intergovernmental Conference , and was not going to take certain decisions , and I do not really understand why , some people appear to want to limit the scope of the Nice themes at all costs .
If , having considered every aspect of the themes from Nice , other issues are tackled , it would be quite worrying for an exercise , which will widely involve civil society in the debate , to say ' you are going to be restricted to very specific topics and you can only discuss the issues that we want you to discuss .
That is a bit mean .
Instead , we are in favour of a more optimistic view , where the four themes from Nice are more widely interpreted .
I hope that I can count on the European Parliament , at least the more optimistic of its Members , to help us to convince others of this point of view and of this direction .

With regard to Mr Cox ' s comments , I share the point of view that Mr Poettering also expressed , that the Commission must remain at the centre of the Community system .
The question of timing is also important .
There are a number of constraints and there are many elections .
I believe that the time period between the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference must be six months .
If it is any longer , I feel that we will be in danger of undoing all the good work of the Convention and the debates , and the worst scenario would be for everyone to arrive at the IGC having forgotten the options in the meantime , or for some to have had the time to pretend they have forgotten them , or having completely stripped the options of all substance . Thus , all the worthwhile work of the Convention will also have been for nothing .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is largely what I wanted to say .
I have almost certainly forgotten to say something , but it is time now to answer the last speaker , who asked me if I was in favour of transparency in the Council ' s work .
Of course , I am in favour of transparency in the Council ' s work .
Unfortunately , I have many more reservations about carrying out a public relations exercise that would weaken the quality of debate within the Council .
Mrs Maij-Weggen , I am a seasoned parliamentarian , having spent more than 20 years in Parliament .
I was also head of opposition in my country for a long time , too long for my liking .
Even in Parliament , if we really want to take the general interests of our citizens into account on specific subjects and specific dossiers , it is sometimes better to hold the debate behind closed doors , and not only when naming names or individuals .
I think that it would be unwise to turn essential debates on extremely delicate issues into media fodder , debates where 15 Heads of State or Government are trying to reach agreement .
I am not totally against holding public debates on a number of issues , but if all the Council formations had to be organised and carried out publicly , I am not sure that that would yield the results that you want , and that I want as well .
Therefore , I say yes to transparency , but I have much greater reservations as to propaganda .
There were two suggestions as to how to involve civil society in the work of this Convention .
The first suggestion was to create a second forum , a second institution and a second assembly .
The major difficulty in doing this is to determine how to select the members of this second assembly , which would bear the huge responsibility of representing European civil society as a whole .
It is extremely difficult to select who is the best spokesperson for a specific subject .
We would have therefore created a competing institution , existing beside the Convention , made up of representatives of the institutions .
This was one choice , this was the first suggestion .
The second suggestion that we considered was to work with what I will call a structured network whose origins are found in civil society .
We must ensure that this structured network is not at all limiting , ensure that all those involved , all those representing one aspect of public opinion can submit their thoughts , their expectations , their criticisms , their proposals to the Convention , and that the Convention can , if necessary , call upon them to interview them . In other words , this approach is a dynamic exchange of views between the Convention and everyone in European society , be it the academic world , schools , NGOs , or associations .
It is important to give everyone the channels through which they can express their views .
We have chosen a structured network , on the understanding that everything produced will be included in the Convention ' s official documentation , and that all those who contact the Convention will receive an answer , not just an acknowledgement .
I think that the most representative forces of our society will emerge in time .
I am clarifying this so that there are no misunderstandings .
Thank you , Mr Michel .
It is gratifying to hear that you are convinced of the good will of this Parliament , but you will understand that we , and hence the European citizens , also stand to win or lose the most from the success of this Convention .
I will now give the floor to Commissioner Barnier .
Madam President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission I too would like to thank you for the weight and quality of the speeches you have made throughout this debate on the two major subjects on the agenda : governance and Laeken .
Please excuse President Prodi , who had to leave us a few moments ago for an essential engagement with the Economic and Social Committee .
With regard to governance , allow me to highlight the very first words of Mrs Kaufmann , who , like Mr Prodi , I would like to thank most sincerely for her availability and for the quality of the work that she has done on your behalf on this both important and difficult subject .
You put it very well , Mrs Kaufmann : the debate on governance is part of the great debate on the future of the Union .
It is not only our reason for being , our raison d ' être , that is in question , and I will come back to that in a moment , it is also our way of being , our way of acting .
The Commission , particularly in the White Paper on governance , is going to promote the co-legislation function of the European Parliament .
Through this White Paper , we are offering Parliament the opportunity to be in a better situation to exert its prerogatives , including better checking of the quality of the choice of legislative instruments , better monitoring of the quality of the use of expertise - is it pluralist ? - and the quality of the use of consultation - is it fair ?

To be quite frank , there remains a point of debate between us which Mr Swoboda stressed in his speech just now , you pointed it out : we are not convinced of the benefits of a mechanism that would allow legislative acts to be suspended at any time , this famous call-back mechanism , when the Commission ' s responsibility in the current comitological framework is not itself certain .
We proposed looking , together with Parliament and the Council , at other mechanisms that will allow , the European Parliament to exert its responsibility for monitoring in a proportional , that is to say , a balanced manner in the matters currently covered by codecision .
However , ladies and gentlemen , beyond that point of debate on which we need to do more work together , I would like to say that we consider the debate that you have just had on the whole subject of governance to be the means of forging ahead after today ' s sitting .
I would also like to say a few words about the Laeken Summit , on which we , like President Prodi , have worked very hard .
We still have a great deal of work to do on Laeken and on the situation post-Laeken .
But I , too , must praise the quality of the work of your two rapporteurs , Mrs Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo , as I have already done before the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
One of you , with their usual frankness , had very harsh words to say about the Commission , which is at the heart of the Community model and method , and which intends to remain at the heart with the threefold role of proposing , monitoring and implementing which was conferred on it by the Treaties .
With the reunification of the European continent , as the disparities increase and the centrifugal forces become more numerous , that role of the Commission , at the heart of the Community model , is going to become even more necessary than it has been in the past 50 years .
Mr Voggenhuber accused the Commission of having no vision .
I do not think that he is here to listen to my reply , but I am nevertheless going to give it .
Everyone is free to interpret the word ' vision ' as they choose .
Personally , I tend rather to practise the pessimism of reason and the optimism of will , and the reason I quote this fine phrase from Jean Monnet is just to echo what Mr Michel was saying just now , as he confessed that , in a way , he had come here to find some optimism therapy that was not forthcoming elsewhere .
So I just wanted to refer you to that fine phrase from Jean Monnet .
With regard to political will , which has been a common feature of many of your speeches , President Prodi announced four strategic objectives in this House .
We want to pursue them , and he will have the opportunity in his State-of-the-Union speech to the plenary on 11 December to prove that he is serious about them .
What would Parliament have said if , even before the start of the Convention for which we fought together , the Commission had produced its final vision of our Constitutional Treaty or of our Constitution , ignoring or pre-empting the democratic debate that is going to take place , for the first time , on such broad subjects .
I am well aware of this , and I say so under the supervision of my colleague and friend , Mr Vitorino , who worked a great deal with you on the previous Convention on fundamental rights : here we are dealing with subjects that are more politically open and probably more problematic .
The debate needs to take place .
We are going to take part in it but there was no question of us pre-empting it or acting as though it did not count .
Let us not underestimate the approach of governance and the White Paper .
The intensity of your debate , today , proves that they are not trivial matters .
Before concluding , as I promised to be brief on the issue of the Laeken Convention and especially on the situation post-Laeken , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency , Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Michel , in particular , for the political will and courage that they have shown and which they are going to have to show in the few remaining days before Laeken in order to convince the Member States that the draft declaration on which they have worked and which they are proposing to the Member States will be well respected and not diminished .
I , too , heard Mr Michel using familiar words just now .
I feel that , taking into account the Convention and the fact this is the first occasion on which an institutional debate has had to allow time to accommodate the work of a Convention , we do have enough time : two years , and we have an open method which , as it concerns a reform of the Treaty on the institutions themselves , consists of more than just dialogue between the government ministers in the secrecy and comfort of the intergovernmental method alone , of which we have all seen the limitations , both at Amsterdam and at Nice .
Let us use this opportunity and make this Convention serve its purpose as a tool for projecting ideas upwards , to the institutions , to the governments who will ultimately have to decide , and to the people that you represent .
This Convention , let us say it again so that it is clear , will not take any decision .
And once that point has been made quite clear , we need to agree , and I was very pleased to hear Mr Michel ' s words on this point , not to be overcautious or too closed in our reading of the four Nice points .
On the contrary , we need to look at them openly and constructively , to take the four points together and deal with them ambitiously .
It is clear that this leads to a Constitutional process .
Let us not be afraid of words .
And let us be ambitious as we look at these four points , particularly the point on the use of powers , good tools for exercising current powers and the clarification of competences , which , of course , leads us to ask questions about the European plan .
What do we want to do together ?
Do we want to stay where we are ?
Do some want to go backwards and unravel the acquis communautaire ?
Do we want to go further in integration , in the general interest of the citizens , on the third pillar , on foreign policy , on defence ?
These are the demands and requests from the people .
If we want to go further , do we want to go all together or do just a few of us want to go ?
And how ?
All these questions are both central to and pervade the matter , together with the four points , and the Convention , which will not take any decision but needs to make strong proposals , will have a lot of work to do .
This is what I wanted to say and , finally , I , too , think that those of us who are going to take part in this convention need to be open and to listen to what is said outside the debating chamber during that time .
Among the citizens , in each of our countries , in each of our regions , and I am very aware of the forum that the regional framework provides for public debate , for debate among the people , where many useful things can be said and passed on .
We should be open to the debate that will take place during that time in civil society .
The Commission will not be a spectator throughout that period .
It will have its special place within this Convention , as it will subsequently take part in the Intergovernmental Conference and as the President of the Commission will ultimately take an active part in the European Council of the very last Intergovernmental Conference , scheduled to take place at the latest at the beginning of 2004 , before the European elections .
Next week , we are going to decide on a communication , on which I am working with President Prodi , on Laeken , on the situation before Laeken and on the likely scenario after the Laeken decisions have been implemented .
Trust us , trust me ; the Commission will make regular proposals and will put forward contributions and communications on each of the subjects .
I have heard a group Chairman requesting this .
I can assure you , Chairman Poettering , Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Cox , that , not only , Mr Barón Crespo , on the issues of simplification or competences but on all the other subjects as well , although first of all on the issue of competences , which directly concerns us , the Commission will put contributions and suggestions on the Convention table in order to express a vision .
However , I must make it quite clear that that vision , and we will confirm this next week in our communication , will , in all probability , be the preservation of the model of the community method and also , once its preservation is assured , its reinvigoration and legitimisation .
Thank you , Commissioner Barnier .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Procedural motions ( continued )
On 15 November , I brought to your attention the plight of the plane spotters arrested in Greece , amongst them my constituents Lesley and Paul Coppin .
That was two weeks ago and they are still in jail .
Last week I visited Mrs Coppin and she is very distressed .
It may be that some of those arrested have been over enthusiastic in their activities and , technically , may have appeared to have broken Greek law but others in the group , including Mrs Coppin , have done absolutely nothing wrong .
There is no evidence against them and no foundation for holding them .
These people have therefore been held in custody for almost three weeks on no justifiable basis .
Neither they nor their lawyer were present when evidence was originally presented to the investigating judge who took his arbitrary decisions in camera .
For much of the time Mrs Coppin and the other detainees had no idea of the nature of the charges against them or how long they were likely to be kept in prison before their case was dealt with .
This is disgraceful by any standards and a flagrant abuse of their civil and human rights .
Provisions under Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights , along with case-law , make clear that persons arrested within the European Union must be brought promptly - and that means within seven days - before a judge who must free them immediately if no foundation for their detention exists .
It must have been clear to the judge , by 16 November at the latest , that there was no evidence against many of the individuals and they should therefore have been released immediately .
What we are now seeing is a charade of justice .
I ask you , Madam President , and the President of the Council and the Commission President , to take immediate action with the Greek authorities to secure the urgent release of all the detainees from custody , particularly Mrs Coppin .
This cannot be allowed to go on for another day .
Thank you .
The President has already taken this matter up with the Permanent Representation of Greece via her Cabinet .
She has also declared herself prepared to take steps personally if this situation persists .
I now give the floor to Baroness Ludford .
Early this afternoon the President felt she needed to cut short and postpone the opportunity for Members to raise this matter .
She felt she had to prioritise the debate on the future of Europe .
But the future of Europe will be nothing if our people do not support us .
This case is a perfect example of the impact on individuals of the quality or otherwise of European integration .
Parliament had a chance to show its relevance to people and missed it in prime time .
Our motion now clashes with the Presidential debate where most of our colleagues are .
I find it difficult to believe that after nearly three weeks it has been impossible to clarify , let alone hear , the charges against the 12 Britons .
I am also puzzled about the role the Greek air force has reportedly had in reviewing the charges as opposed to an independent prosecutor .
The defendants have not had an opportunity to challenge the evidence in open court and now the higher tribunal to which the case has been referred is to be held in secret .
Mr Souladakis said earlier that the Greek criminal justice authorities had respected all relevant rights .
I am surprised that the European Convention on Human Rights is so weak .
We might need a Europe-wide review with a view to reinforcing those standards and we certainly need that in parallel with the European arrest warrant .
I call on the Greek authorities to clarify the charges , release the defendants on bail and hold a trial in open court by Friday of this week .
I would just like to underline that this is an issue that has the support of all parties in my own country .
It concerns not just British citizens but also Dutch citizens .
It has massive public interest and raises questions at a time when we are proceeding in the field of Justice and Home Affairs at European level on the basis of mutual recognition .
That implies that we need to be confident that every country 's legal system is up to scratch and meets the minimum standards set down in the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is important and I am glad you have announced that the President will take this up .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
The points made by all speakers are absolutely clear .
I have already told Mr Van Orden that the issue is being monitored by the President ' s Cabinet , that action has already been undertaken and that , if necessary , the President will personally see to this matter if the situation persists .
Following on from the points of order made earlier today , I am grateful the President is going to raise the issue yet again with the Greek authorities .
I am speaking particularly about my constituent Wayne Groves from Tamworth .
He did not even possess a camera so I still do not know why he is being held in detention .
He is sleeping on a floor with a thin mattress , as I understand are the other prisoners .
He has been there for three weeks .
Why , when the magistrate said yesterday that there was no real evidence against them , are they still being held ?
I believe along with everybody else that this is in contravention of the European Convention on Human Rights .
If applicant countries have to say that will adhere to it before membership , surely current members should adhere to it now .
I should like to raise the same issue without , however , repeating what has already been said on the matter .
Two lads from my constituency are also still in captivity in Greece on account of the same crime : this is evidently the seriousness with which this matter is being dealt with in Greece .
I would point out that the next item on the agenda is the European arrest warrant .
In relation to what is currently happening in Greece , that is a topic which we , as well as the Council , will have to treat with extreme caution to prevent the situation from causing European distortion in the field of criminal law policy .
Thank you , I have already responded to this point .
Madam President , as we are talking about human rights , I would like to speak on an issue of method , which applies to all the association agreements .
Today , a joint debate is going to take place on the association agreements with Egypt , and it will include oral questions and motions for resolutions .
For the sake of a democratic debate and a more coherent vote on all the association agreements , it is important for it to be split into separate parts .
We suggest that the debate should deal , first of all , with oral questions and resolutions and then , secondly , with the vote on the association agreements .
It is neither logical nor coherent to take a position on these issues at the same time .
The oral questions and resolutions are intended to question the political powers of these countries and to give them time to debate and respond to those questions .
This two-part method allows us to confirm the fundamental importance that we attach to the whole agreement , particularly Article 2 on human rights .
The example of Egypt is telling in that it shows that we do not silently accept a decision that constitutes a violation of human rights , the recent condemnation of homosexuals , and flouts the values that we defend in Article 2 of our agreements .
Our group would therefore like to keep the debate and vote on oral questions and motions for resolutions in one part-session , and put the association agreements back to another part-session .
We have already made a request to that effect by letter to the President .
This point will be dealt with in this evening ' s debate .
Mr President , you may not , but Mrs Fontaine certainly will be aware of the following matter which we have raised in the European Parliament , time and again , over the last ten years .
It concerns three Greek seamen from the lower ranks of the crew of a Greek ship who were arrested in Egypt , found responsible for the 7.5 tonnes of drugs on board the ship and handed down very heavy sentences .
To give the Egyptian courts their due , it was not the owners per se or the master of the ship who were responsible , it was the three unfortunate lower-ranking members of the crew .
Mrs Fontaine and all her predecessors have already expressed their support and asked for them to be released and sent to Greece .
Two and a half years ago , one of the three prisoners died as a result of their appalling conditions of detention .
A few days ago , a second man died of tonsillitis of all things .
The third man is still alive but his health is shot to pieces .
The Bureau should call for his release before he , too , gives up the ghost .
Combating terrorism / EUROJUST
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
Report by Mr Watson ( A5-0397 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission proposal for a Council framework decision on combating terrorism ( COM ( 2001 ) 521 - C5-0452 / 2001 - 2001 / 0217 ( CNS ) ) and the Commission proposal for a Council framework decision on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between the Member States ( COM ( 2001 ) 522 - C5-0453 / 2001 - 2001 / 0215 ( CNS ) ) , and the ;
report by Mrs Gebhardt ( A5-0398 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council decision setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight against major organised crime .
Madam President , it is a matter of regret and perhaps even of shame that it took the events of 11 September to push European governments into tackling effectively a problem which has plagued our continent for over a generation .
In 1997 in Amsterdam , and again in 1999 in Tampere in Finland , the Heads of State and Government committed themselves to tackling terrorism .
Our review of progress early this year showed that they had done nothing about it , which was why we as a Parliament brought forward a report calling on them to take action .
The events of 11 September have fortunately brought such action and I look forward to travelling to Washington shortly to talk about common action between the European Union and the United States of America .
I would like to thank the political groups in this House for their cooperation in drawing up this report , particularly the Members from Spain .
In my report , I broadly welcome the Commission proposals for a Council framework decision on combating terrorism and for a European arrest warrant .
The amendments which I put forward seek to restrict the list of crimes defined as terrorist crimes and covered by the European arrest warrant to the most serious cross-border criminal offences , and if I may quote Amendment No 16 , it specifies those crimes " which aim to destroy the fundamental freedoms , democracy , respect for human rights , civil liberties and the rule of law on which our societies are based " .
We seek too to insert safeguards for civil liberties by basing action clearly on international human rights documents , by reinforcing the principle of ne bis in idem , by taking account of time spent in detention awaiting trial and by allowing Member States refusal to extradite when there are manifestly sound reasons for doing so , including in those cases where a person found guilty could face a penalty of death .
Moreover , we seek to provide aids to victims of terrorism and their families .
I shall ask the House to accept one amendment , which was submitted after the deadline and which takes account of the most recent developments in Council .
One Member State is threatening to block progress towards a European arrest warrant .
There is a method - not one which I recommend - but one which may be needed in extremis , in order to press ahead , and that is to invoke Article 40 of the Treaty allowing reinforced cooperation between a certain number of Member States .
Terrorism is a supranational challenge and calls for a supranational response .
We cannot allow the blockage of one Member State to prevent common action in fighting it .
When we met in this Chamber , on 12 September , we had a debate in which I remember Mr Poettering and many others said that we were all Americans .
Since then , we have discovered that we must first be Europeans .
We acknowledge that recognition of judicial judgements and judicial standards requires trust in each other 's systems , but not blind trust , and for that reason I have put forward an amendment calling for urgent measures to improve judicial systems in our Member States , to encourage benchmarking , to encourage exchange of best practice .
The process of creating an area of freedom , security and justice is similar to that of creating the single market , but it is more urgent and , moreover , we are dealing not with the freedom of movement of goods , services or capital , but with the freedom of people .
The Greens and other political groups are saying , don 't go ahead until you are sure that everybody 's judicial standards are perfect .
Majority opinion , however , on the Committee recognises that the scope of the challenge we face and the historical imperative are such that we must press ahead with these measures with prudence , and with vigilance , but also with determination .
We must ensure effective action against terrorists and yet we must not deny legitimate political expression of grievances .
I was surprised to read in El País this morning an interpretation of one amendment , which I support , that it would outlaw Herri Batasuna .
I do not interpret the amendment in this way , nor would such an amendment be necessary to target those involved in supporting terrorist acts .
Other provisions in what we are proposing do that .
I would say to colleagues , and particularly to our Spanish colleagues , that in our determination to tackle terrorism , we must acknowledge that terrorists sometimes express political grievances , and that these require a political response .
Council is discussing the proposals put forward by the Commission ; Parliament , which desperately needs powers of codecision , may be reconsulted on this matter .
We are determined to assist governments in their work and yet maintain the delicate balance between the security needs of our citizens and preservation of their democratic freedoms .
In this , cooperation in Justice and Home Affairs has received quite a boost .
Whatever it was that we planned at Amsterdam , the paradox is that events are what drives Europe forward : just as Mr Haider 's election led us to adopt effective legislation against racism and xenophobia , so it may be that Mr bin Laden has done much for European Union integration .
May I say , finally , what a pleasure it is to see you as a fellow Liberal Democrat in the Chair in this session .
I wish you a successful debate .
, rapporteur . ( DE ) Madam President , Madam Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the improvement of judicial cooperation between the European Union 's Member States is an important key to the European area of freedom , security and justice .
The establishment , at long last , of Eurojust puts this key in our hands , so that we can combat serious crime , such as terrorism , trafficking in human beings and drug-smuggling flexibly and successfully , without regard to the Community 's internal borders .
When Parliament approved the establishment of Eurojust , as long ago as early 2001 , it envisaged 1 January 2002 as its starting date .
The Council has made substantial changes to the initiatives underlying Eurojust , which made it necessary to consult Parliament again , but , despite this , I do not see Eurojust 's starting date early next year as having been jeopardised .
The Council has , since 11 September , demonstrated its capacity for rapid reaction when circumstances require it , as the safety of people in Europe most certainly does .
The document under consideration today already incorporates significant amendments by the Council at Parliament 's suggestion in the first consultation .
Eurojust 's areas of competence were therefore defined in such a way as to include borderline cases and new forms of serious crime .
Eurojust can also , moreover , at the request of a competent national authority , support investigations and prosecutions outside the areas described .
This ensures maximum flexibility and efficiency in our shared struggle against crime , which knows no boundaries .
Parliament 's proposals for smooth cooperation between Eurojust and the national authorities are also welcomed in the Council 's new document , something for which I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude .
Despite this , we still have to make a few changes in order to make Eurojust the best possible instrument against cross-frontier crime .
If I rightly understand the indications from the Member States ' governments and from the Council , these will meet with wide-ranging agreement between Parliament and the Council .
Last weekend , the German and French governments , at their summit in Nantes , underlined Parliament 's view that Eurojust should become the basic unit of a European State Prosecution Service .
This would strengthen the European Union 's judicial aspect , give effect to conventions that have been drawn up but not yet ratified , and continue existing initiatives in this area .
I also consider it important that Eurojust 's involvement in investigations and prosecutions should not be hampered by unnecessary bureaucracy .
It makes no sense for Eurojust to set up national branch offices .
Investigators and prosecutors , in Eurojust and in the Member States , must be able to communicate with each other directly .
We know from our experience of organised crime that short routes and procedures alone can offer hope of speedy and sure success in investigations .
Let me conclude with data protection , a point which is of especial importance to me .
The processing of data by Eurojust must include an appropriately high level of protection for the individual citizen .
This can only be taken for granted if the storing of personal data is kept to the minimum required and if data is not stored for longer than is absolutely necessary .
It goes without saying that special requirements must apply to the handling of data on victims and witnesses .
There is also a clear need to safeguard the individual 's right to information , which he must be in a position to demand .
It is most encouraging to receive favourable indications from the Council , including in data protection matters .
I hope , though , that they will go much further yet .
Only one wish will no doubt not be granted me : Eurojust will not be based in Luxembourg , which would have symbolised so well this institution 's independence and its closeness to European Community law .
Madam President , I have indeed the honour of representing the Presidency here , because , unfortunately , the Minister of Justice is unable to attend today .
I have been asked to discuss this topic on his behalf , which I naturally do with great pleasure .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would , first of all , like to start by thanking you for the speed and flexibility with which you have worked over recent weeks .
The Council meeting of 20 September , and then the European Council that met the following day , decided , as you know , on rapid implementation of the Action Plan against terrorism , with a December deadline for each of the three decisions that we are discussing today , which are key elements of this action plan .
European citizens would not understand if the European Union did not work as fast as possible to adopt the measures in question .
The speed with which the rapporteurs have worked and with which the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has examined the reports , and you are to discuss them today , are exemplary .
Respecting the deadlines set for adopting these decisions depended on all of that , and the Presidency is very grateful to you for that support for its work .
Madam President , first of all , I will deal with the decision creating Eurojust , then the framework decision on the European arrest warrant , and I will finish with the framework decision on combating terrorism .
I will not go back over the objectives of each of the instruments , or not much .
You know them well enough .
I would like to confine myself to the reason why you invited the Presidency here today , and I will therefore go through the preparatory work for each of the decisions .
( NL ) With regard to Eurojust , the setting up of a permanent unit was one of our absolute priorities in the field of justice .
The terrorist threat has only reinforced this intention .
We are doing everything we can to ensure that this instrument is adopted in December so that we can meet the objectives of Tampere .
I am delighted to be able to inform you that everything seems to suggest that the Council will be able meet this deadline .
Admittedly , a political agreement had already been struck during the Council meeting of 27 and 28 September on Articles 1 to 8 of this Decision .
You are aware of the fact that these articles constitute the actual core of this Decree establishing Eurojust .
Under the Belgian Presidency , the working party has spent 13 meeting days on this instrument .
The entire text has already been the subject of overall reading in the working party . It has also been examined by the Article 36 Committee and is now before the COREPER .
( FR ) An initial opinion from Parliament was adopted on 17 May this year but , given the many changes that had been made to the text , it became necessary to have a fresh consultation .
The Presidency has taken particular care to ensure that the opinions given by Parliament were taken into account throughout the negotiations .
Eurojust should bring real added value compared with the existing instruments .
Bringing together magistrates from the Member States in a single body will surely enable good coordination and close cooperation between the authorities responsible for prosecution .
Eurojust will thus provide an effective instrument with a view to creating the area of freedom , security and justice which has been our aim since the Treaty of Amsterdam .
To this end , we therefore needed to ensure genuine , effective cooperation between Eurojust and the other bodies created as part of our Union .
We therefore needed to be careful to avoid overlaps of responsibility and redundancies .
All these issues are covered by provisions in the draft decision .
Cooperation between Eurojust and Europol and the relationship that those two bodies will have to maintain will be the subject of a separate agreement .
This draft agreement is being drawn up by the members of the pro-Eurojust provisional unit and the representatives of Europol .
It was most desirable to include those primarily affected in the discussion and to better integrate the further developments in Europol that are currently under negotiation within the European Union .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in line with your wishes , Eurojust ' s areas of competence have been set up in such a way as to afford Eurojust the scope needed to deal with borderline cases and new forms of crime .
Eurojust will take part in the coordination of the competent authorities of the Member States and could ask these to set up joint research teams .
The authorities of Member States which fail to meet Eurojust ' s request will need to justify their actions .
A whole host of provisions in the draft Decree concern the introduction of rules to protect personal data .
After all , it was , and is , vital , on the one hand , to provide Eurojust with the possibility of dealing with such data , but , on the other hand , to offer every guarantee that privacy is protected .
The expertise gathered by the interim unit which was set up on 1 March of this year was taken into consideration .
Representatives of this unit took part in the working party and were given the opportunity of sharing their findings during those activities .
I should like to underline the fact that the activities carried out by the interim unit have more than adequately attested to the significance and value of a unit such as Eurojust , particularly over the past few weeks .
Hopefully , you will be pleased to hear that , according to the latest state of activities , it will very much be the task of your Parliament to grant Eurojust discharge for the implementation of the budget .
Despite this , a few important questions remain unanswered , although they are limited in number .
They mainly concern the modalities with regard to the right to perusal of personal data , the entry into force of the Decree and the statute of Eurojust staff .
( FR ) Finally , the issue of the headquarters remains open .
It should be possible to make a decision on this at the Laeken Summit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will finish this part of my statement by drawing your attention to the fact that , on 16 November , the Presidency insisted that the Member States prepare from now on to implement the framework decision creating Eurojust , so that it can be wholly operational as soon as possible .
Allow me to move on to the work regarding the European arrest warrant .
As you know , the Commission ' s proposal is based on the principle of mutual recognition of final decisions .
That means that each national authority must recognise ipso facto , with minimal checks , a request to hand over a person made by the judicial authority of another Member State .
The European arrest warrant is meant to replace the current extradition mechanism for the crimes that it covers .
( NL ) The framework decision on this arrest warrant is technically a very complex instrument , because it deals with important issues within criminal law procedure , but also with issues which , for example , pertain to the description of people which facilitates the tracing of them .
Given the extent of the tasks and the deadlines to be met , the Presidency has speeded up the Council activities considerably .
The dossier was immediately dealt with by the Article 36 Committee , thus allowing the most delicate issues to be discussed there straight away .
This has necessitated the convening of various extraordinary meetings .
Furthermore , a group of experts has also met several times in order to prepare the groundwork for the most technical aspects .
At the Article 36 Committee , the debates to date have mainly focused on the scope of the instrument that addresses the problems involved in the dual criminality requirement and on the modalities of judicial inspection within the implementing Member State .
The Member States are agreed that the scope must be determined on the basis of a positive list of infringements .
It was impossible to retain the principle of a negative list because it has appeared impossible to reach agreement about the withdrawal of the dual criminality requirement with such a broadly defined scope .
During the Justice and Internal Affairs Council of 16 November , there was broad consensus about the Presidency ' s compromise proposal for a positive list and also a mock agreement to apply dual criminality to the infringements which feature on the list .
( FR ) These offences are those covered by the Treaty on European Union , the Tampere conclusions , the Annex to the Europol Convention and the four offences proposed by the Commission , which are sabotage , arson , crimes against humanity according to the statute of the International Criminal Court , hijacking of aircraft and hijacking of ships .
It includes , among other things , terrorism and in the trafficking of human beings . In order to reach a unanimous agreement , it will undoubtedly be necessary to alter the list .
The Council agreed to work on the basis of two proposals .
One envisaged that , for the offences on the list that have not yet been harmonised , the double jeopardy rule should only be withdrawn if the offence is considered to be serious in the issuing State .
That would imply a sentence threshold greater than the twelve months currently established for offences which have not been harmonised among the fifteen Member States .
Under the other proposal , removing dual criminality would be limited to offences committed wholly or partially on the territory of the issuing State , the idea being that a handover could not be refused for acts committed on the territory of the State issuing the warrant .
( NL ) During the Justice and Internal Affairs Council of 16 November , the ministers managed to reach agreement on the conditions under which an appeal may be made to the rights enjoyed in the implementing State , as well as on the deadline for handing over a suspect .
The basic principles are as follows : the law of the implementing State determines the modalities under which the rights can be called upon .
In the event of the wanted person consenting to their surrender , a period of ten days is stipulated .
In the event of an arrest , a period of sixty days is stipulated and in special cases , these periods can be extended by thirty days .
The other provisions of the Commission proposal were discussed in the Article 36 Committee on 22 and 23 November .
The discussions centred around the reasons for refusing to implement the warrant and the conditions for applying the principle of territoriality and the principle of speciality .
It is too premature at this stage to moot the idea of an agreement , but the activities are very constructive and all provisions have already been discussed in detail .
( FR ) Particular attention is paid , and I think , ladies and gentlemen , that this is a concern that you have expressed , to the rights of the requested person : rights to defence , rights regarding the use of languages , rights regarding transfer .
In this respect , it will be stressed that the requested person ' s interest in benefiting from a judicial procedure and appearing before the judge as soon as possible should not be neglected .
Another area of obvious improvement on the current extradition procedure is deducting any detention enforced as part of the execution of the European arrest warrant in the executing State from the prison sentence that the person handed receives .
This is the state of the negotiations concerning the framework decision on the European arrest warrant .
As I have said before , there are still difficulties , but we are hopeful that they can be resolved before next week .
( NL ) The third instrument , I should like to mention today , is the framework decision on the fight against terrorism .
For that decision , we can , of course , draw on the experience already gathered in connection with the two instruments I mentioned a moment ago , but that does not take away from the importance of the decision .
First of all , because it is also essential to promote judicial cooperation by harmonising penalisations .
It is crucial to develop a common strategy on terrorism and in that way to develop a truly European criminal policy in that area .
It is also vital to grant European courts of justice broad judicial powers .
But the significance of the framework decision also lies in the subtleties thereof , as some of you have rightly pointed out : all actions in connection with terrorism , including taking part in and supporting a terrorist group , must be considered .
At the same time , great care must be taken not to go too far , and accordingly , a definition should be introduced which rules out any risk of abuse .
The Council is acutely aware of this , and it is with those elements in mind that the activities are moving forwards .
They are making steady progress and that is borne out by the outcome of the meetings of 16 November .
Indeed , we can already ascertain that the changes that were made have brought the positions closer together .
( FR ) The definition of terrorist offences is almost finalised .
The element of initial intention has been clarified .
Added to this are two elements that can also be characteristics of terrorist intent , namely severely intimidating the population or unduly forcing a State to carry out an act .
At the same time , the types of conduct affected have been redefined so that only extremely serious offences are covered , in response to the concerns and criticisms that the initial definition was too broad .
Two additional elements have been adopted by the Council in order to confirm the guarantees of respect for fundamental rights .
First of all , the preamble will state that the framework decision is without prejudice to the exercising of human rights , in particular , the right of association , expression and demonstration .
Also , a political declaration will add to these precautions , specifying that the decision does not cover people who are acting to preserve or restore democratic values , or people who are exercising the right to express their opinions , even if , while exercising that right , they commit offences .
Finally , the preamble will exclude from the framework decision ' s scope , the activities of the armed forces in a period of armed conflict when they are performing their official duties , as governed by international law .
This is the situation with regard to the crime of terrorism itself .
( NL ) With regard to judicial powers , the Council continues to attach importance to the wide scope of these judicial powers on account of the seriousness of terrorist acts .
A coordination mechanism will be brought about in the event of any conflict of judicial powers among the Member States , which is not inconceivable , given the wide judicial powers of the same States .
Progress continues to be made in the activities in the field of punishment .
The current text provides for the obligation on all Member States to increase penalties for punishable acts of terrorism compared to the same acts without any terrorist intent .
The debates which were held on this topic last Friday in the COREPER were about the very same punishment for punishable acts which are associated with terrorist groups .
Consensus appears to be growing about a maximum penalty of fifteen years for leading a terrorist group and of eight years for taking part in such a group .
If the group has not yet carried out any acts of terrorism , the leading of such a group also incurs an eight year sentence .
However , the debates on this issue have not yet been completed .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that brings to an end the account that I wished to give of the three Council framework decisions that are on your agenda today .
As I have already said , the Presidency expects to see the discussions on these three instruments completed between now and December .
That would certainly be an amazing feat , given the Council ' s loaded schedule , but it will , above all , show , on the eve of the Laeken Summit , that the European Union has now achieved a certain maturity in the development of European criminal justice and that it is capable of realising the objectives that it set itself .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mrs Gebhardt on her report on the creation of the Eurojust unit .
The ideas that the Commission expressed on this matter in its communication of November 2000 and the recommendations adopted by the European Parliament in May of this year , following the report by Mrs Gebhardt , are , to a large extent , echoed in the text that is now being studied by the Council .
I shall , therefore , limit myself to emphasising two or three aspects in greater detail .
Firstly , as Mrs Gebhardt stated , in the version currently under examination , the rules on the protection of personal data have been extended and improved .
The draft document adopts a balanced approach that respects both the legitimate interests and fundamental rights of Europe ' s citizens and the need for the effective coordination of investigations and prosecutions .
There will be an independent joint supervisory body for data protection and , if necessary , legal solutions will be provided for appeals to be lodged in national courts .
Secondly , the role of the Union ' s institutions has been strengthened and the Commission is fully involved in the work of Eurojust in its various areas of responsibility .
Parliament will be kept fully informed of the budgetary issues and I hope that it will also be given the task of discharging the budget .
Mrs Gebhardt ' s excellent report also includes a list of supplementary amendments , most of which meet with the Commission ' s approval .
I shall only mention the examples of the amendments concerning membership of the joint supervisory body for personal data , cooperation with OLAF , the Commission ' s anti-fraud body , and Eurojust , Parliament ' s discharge of the budget , the time limits for the storage of data and the law applicable in the event of damage resulting from incorrect data processing .
I hope that the Council will also bear these suggestions in mind .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the other two initiatives under consideration , the events of 11 September 2001 have , I am sad to say , confirmed the validity of the recommendations adopted by the European Parliament on 5 September 2001 , following an own-initiative report drawn up by Graham Watson .
As Commissioner responsible for Justice and Home Affairs , I wish to congratulate and pay public tribute to Mr Watson , the Chairman of Parliament ' s Committee on Citizen ' s Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , whose efforts and name will always be associated with this initiative of enormous political scope ; the fight against terrorism and against crime in the European Union .
The recommendations in the Watson report , published in September , were , to a large extent , taken into account in the proposals presented by the Commission on 19 September which are now being studied by the Council .
I wish firstly to discuss the proposal for a framework decision on combating terrorism .
The Council debate on this proposal has focused on the three most important and , at the same time , most problematic issues : defining terrorist crime , clarifying the rules of jurisdiction for the prosecution of terrorist acts and the framework of penalties and sanctions applicable to terrorist acts .
With regard to definition , there has been concern to ensure that the framework decision cannot , under any circumstances , apply to legitimate action , for example in the context of the activities of unions or anti-globalisation movements .
The Commission has subscribed to this interpretation from the outset and considers that the solution we are working towards respects the basic structure of the Commission ' s initial proposal , which is to , " define a terrorist offence on the basis of the identification of an objective factor : the terrorist act , accompanied by the identification of a subjective element : a terrorist motivation under the terms of the proposal " . This is the text currently under consideration by the Council .
At the same time , the solution also provides more detail on allowing the requirements that must be met for the offence included in the positive list to be considered a terrorist offence , to be identified in legislation itself . We are , therefore , in favour of improving the definition contained in the text currently being studied by the Council .
This aspect , in fact , provides a further guarantee : no common crime , not even acts of violence committed incidentally in the context of certain demonstrations , will be covered by the instrument to eliminate terrorism .
The Council is currently considering the possibility of issuing a statement explaining that anyone acting in the interest of preserving or restoring democratic values , instances of which occurred in some Member States during the Second World War , cannot be considered to be a terrorist .
This aspect is in line with some of the amendments tabled by Parliament to ensure that the fundamental rights and freedoms on which our countries are founded cannot , under any circumstances , be endangered by the present framework decision .
With regard to jurisdiction , the debate in the Council is close to reaching a solution that is very similar to the one recommended in the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
There is consensus in Council on a balanced formula that combines the Commission ' s initial proposal and the more ambitious project suggested by some Member States and by Parliament on national jurisdictions being extended to cover the entire territory of the Union .
Consequently , Member States can , if they so desire , extend their jurisdiction if the offence has been committed in any part of the Union ' s territory .
With regard to the third issue , that of penalties and sanctions , I would say that this is still the main problem with the framework decision , given the lack of consensus on a common level of penalties and sanctions for individual terrorist offences .
The Commission is not yet satisfied with the approach that is currently applied for individual offences , under which the penalties and sanctions applicable to terrorist offences committed by individuals would not be harmonised . Instead , weightier penalties and sanctions than those provided for under national legislation for the same offences committed without the special intention required for classification as terrorist acts would apply .
If we limit our ambitions in this way , we will not be fulfilling the mandate laid down in the Article 31 ( e ) of the Treaty , nor will we be following the recommendation contained in the Watson report .
Furthermore , we would be acting inconsistently since , in previous instruments , we have managed to adopt common penalties and sanctions for the counterfeiting of the euro , for assisting illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings , and it would be inexplicable not to be equally ambitious when it comes to punishing terrorist acts .
I hope that it is possible to find a solution on the basis of the proposal that the Commission presented on creating a range of penalties and sanctions for the individual offences listed in Articles 1 and 2 of the Commission proposal , with greater flexibility to adapt them to the scale of penalties in force in the national legislation of each Member State .
Lastly , this framework decision stipulates that the Member States must adopt all possible measures to guarantee appropriate assistance to the families of victims , implementing , where possible , Article 4 of the Framework Decision on the Status of Victims in Connection with Criminal Proceedings .
This approach is entirely consistent with Parliament ' s point of view .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the second framework decision , on the European arrest warrant , must be based on the principle of the mutual recognition of final decisions in criminal matters , in line with the conclusions of the Tampere European Council of October 1999 , and with the recommendation made to us by the Heads of State and Government at the Ghent European Council of October this year .
The text we are now discussing , submitted by the Presidency , includes a positive list of offences for which a double jeopardy verification does not have to be carried out .
As you know , the Commission proposal that is being discussed today seeks to make the abolition of the double jeopardy rule universal , with the exception of a negative list identified by the Commission .
Since the Ghent European Council , it has become clear that this approach by the Commission would not have majority support in Council .
Hence the Presidency has moved ahead with a compromise proposal , which assumes that the execution of an arrest warrant for offences included in the positive list does not require double jeopardy verification .
The Commission is prepared to support this compromise proposal by the Presidency provided that the definition of offences included on this positive list is substantial and that it sends a clear , unequivocal message that we are strengthening the mechanisms of judicial cooperation to fight against the various forms of transnational organised crime .
In order to ensure that the mechanism of the positive list works and is effective , the definition of the offences on this list must respect the definition of these offences in force in the legislation of the Member States issuing a search and arrest warrant .
This is an essential component .
Unless this component is complied with , the double jeopardy condition would also be reintroduced for these offences , which is exactly what we are trying to avoid .
I think that we are approaching an agreement on the content of the positive list . However , at the moment , this agreement is not yet completely signed and sealed .
I hope that , by the Council of 6 and 7 December , it will be possible to conclude a unanimous agreement on a substantial positive list that fulfils the objective of a mechanism for an effective European arrest warrant that can be implemented in a straightforward way .
Regarding the last aspect that I wish to focus on , the Commission has included in its proposal a set of rules that are intended to reconcile effectiveness in the fight against crime , on the one hand , and the protection of citizens ' rights and fundamental freedoms on the other .
I hope that the Council resists the temptation to remove provisions that offer protection on the grounds that they are not necessary , since the Member States are , in any event , bound to respect legal safeguards .
It is true that one of the essential elements for the creation of this mechanism is the principle of mutual trust that has resulted from the Member States signing up to the Council of Europe ' s European Convention of Human Rights of 1950 and from having jointly proclaimed the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union in December of 2000 . I would say , however , that it is , nevertheless , important to emphasise some specific mechanisms that should be included in this framework decision in order to guarantee and safeguard the fundamental rights of our citizens .
Other amendments along the same lines consist of bringing the wording of the Ne bis in idem rule , laid down in Article 29 of the Commission ' s proposal , into line with the wording of Article 50 of the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights so as to obviate the requirement for the arrest warrant to be accompanied by proof that the individual has been duly informed of the procedure in time to prepare a defence in the event that he or she is sentenced in absentia .
Another good example of these rules is the deduction of the period of deprivation of liberty from the punishment laid down in Article 24 of the Commission proposal , which states that the period of detention in the Member State executing the warrant must be taken into account for the purposes of calculating compensation in the event that the individual surrendered is not convicted .
There must be a balance between the need for speed and effective cooperation between judicial authorities and the interests of individuals , who must not be subjected to additional or excessive constraints or have their ability to mount a defence hampered .
The Commission feels that it would be desirable , where the identification of the laws and principles that safeguard fundamental rights in a European judicial area is concerned , to extend these rules . The Commission realises , therefore , that it would be desirable to pursue the task of approximating legislation on criminal proceedings in the Member States .
We must , simultaneously , guarantee the effectiveness of prosecutions and the safeguarding of the rights of individuals .
It may , therefore , prove necessary at Union level to address , in a more concerted way , the right to language assistance , the proper treatment of evidence and the issue of the courts ' bail system .
The Commission is considering the possibility of issuing a communication on these aspects that could cover a huge range of factors . These issues require a horizontal approach and , therefore , we propose finalising them at a later date in a specific mechanism .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall conclude by referring to Mr Watson ' s proposal for an oral amendment that was tabled here today .
Now that we are debating the Commission ' s position , we must step up negotiations to conclude an agreement supported by all fifteen Member States .
Not an agreement at any price , but an agreement that responds to the challenge of the fight against terrorism and organised crime before us .
We also welcome the Belgian Presidency ' s commitment to obtaining this agreement . I also wish to make it clear , however , that , where the European arrest warrant is concerned , an agreement can certainly be concluded on the list of thirty-four offences to which Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck has just referred .
I must also clearly state that the list does not include minor offences because this is a list annexed to the Europol Convention .
I would also say that , if these offences are considered to be offences that warrant police cooperation under the terms of Europol , they must also be considered to be unquestionably serious for the purposes of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
Regardless of national legal cultures and regardless of the moral censure that a particular offence might generate at national level , I am convinced that the option we should pursue at the moment is to conclude an agreement with all fifteen Member States , a substantial agreement on the list of offences to which the European arrest warrant should apply .
If this agreement cannot be concluded with all fifteen countries , we will then have to consider what to do next .
Madam President , I think that today our thoughts should focus on the basics , which are the good fortune and responsibility of living in democratic States governed by the rule of law .
In a democratic State governed by the rule of law , any political demand is acceptable and to be respected and the democratic confrontation of ideas is always to be welcomed ; these are our standards , our very essence , our identifying mark , on which the whole idea of European integration is founded .
By the same token , however , the democratic State governed by the rule of law rejects those who express their ideas through bloodshed .
When faced with those who sow the seeds of terror , death and destruction in our societies , there is only one dialogue possible , the dialogue that arises from the implementation of the law .
This is our guiding thought on this matter .
I said that we are constructing , on the bases and principles of our legal systems in democratic States governed by the rule of law , a democratic Europe governed by the rule of law .
We had a situation that was completely lacking in balance between progress in the field of security and progress in the field of freedom and justice .
The three proposals debated respond , and it was about time , to a request from Europe ' s citizens and to the clear political will , at the highest level , of the Heads of State and Government , which , as Mr Watson has clearly pointed out , runs from Vienna to Tampere , and has been strengthened since 11 September at the Extraordinary European Council in Brussels and in Ghent .
These three methods also respond to the principles upon which Europe has been constructed .
Firstly , cooperation and coordination , as seen in Eurojust , where we cooperate and coordinate in order to be more effective in the field of justice .
Secondly , the mutual recognition on which the internal market is based , and this , as the Commissioner has said , a corollary of the confidence between States , which is the fundamental element of the European search and arrest warrant .
Finally , harmonisation wherever this may be necessary and the need for harmonisation with regard to terrorism is obvious , because only six Member States had any legislation covering this area .
Madam President , I trust , no , I am sure , that by voting for these reports with an overwhelming majority tomorrow , Parliament will be giving , as it always has , the political signal that , as responsible representatives of the citizens , we have the obligation to work on the construction of democratic States governed by the rule of law , in those countries in which we are fortunate enough to live .
Madam President , since 11 September , there have been many opportunities to think about and debate upon the consequences of the events of that fateful day and today is no exception .
Without a doubt , the attacks in New York have made us realise that nobody can feel entirely safe from terrorism . When a man and a woman are murdered in Beasaín , as happened last week , for example , each and every one of us is affected , and it is not reasonable to ask the elected representatives of a democracy , Mr Watson , to have to debate under the threat of death .

These events have also reminded us that we were a long way behind in meeting the commitments that the Heads of State and Government had given in Tampere in order to develop the third pillar of the European Union .
The report that we approved by a large majority in committee contains contributions which , in my opinion , are very valid , to the otherwise excellent Commission proposal .
For example , to define street violence as clearly being one form of terrorist expression , or to incorporate a reference to victims and their families and to offer political support and legal protection with the aim of identifying terrorism and bringing terrorists and their supporters to justice through the courts .
This is precisely the purpose of the amendment we tabled in plenary and should be interpreted in this way .
I hope that these and other contributions will be added to the text that the Council is debating , and , in particular , this latter amendment , which I hope the rapporteur will also vote for and will be taken into consideration when the European list of terrorist organisations that Parliament requested is drawn up .
The Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs should fulfil their duty on the 6 and 7 December , and if they do not do so , the Presidency will have to honour its commitment to Parliament to take this issue at Laeken , and if any Member State there is tempted to block a proposal that has the widespread support of our citizens , it seems appropriate to me that closer cooperation should be implemented according to provisions of Article 40 of the Treaty .
The Council ' s requests do not date from 11 September .
In September 2000 , one year ago , the vast majority of MEPs signed a written declaration requesting the methods that today have been submitted for our consideration .
These are the same methods that we are asking the Commission for in the own-initiative report on the role of the European Union in the fight against terrorism that we approved , also by a very large majority , on 5 September .
Therefore , it needs to be made very clear that none of these measures makes the slightest reduction in the civil liberties of European citizens .
The opposite is the case , we are giving the judicial system instruments to enable it to better protect everyone ' s freedom because , faced with the free movement of crime , we must open the doors to the free movement of justice .
Madam President , the two provisions we are debating today respond to both a conviction and an objective : the conviction that we can defeat terrorism and our objective to strengthen the Rule of Law , providing all the instruments necessary to achieve this .
In a democracy , political ideas are put to the test in the voting booth , and not put forward by terrorists .
I am sure that all my fellow Members are of this opinion .
I would like to clearly point out what will be changed by these two initiatives when they are adopted by the Laeken European Council : firstly , Europe will cease to ' show solidarity with ' and instead be ' responsible for ' .
The solidarity of Europeans with Spanish democrats in their fight against ETA will give way to the responsibility of all European democrats to defeat terrorism .
Secondly , and with regard to the European search and arrest warrant , agreements between governments will be replaced with recognition and cooperation between their various judicial systems .
An injunction will have to be able to be executed without delay , whether it has been issued by a Spanish judge or a French judge , against an individual who is sought in one or other of the countries .
To make my position clear , I feel there should be no more disgraceful spectacles such as the one that took place at Olano .
As well as thinking about the future , however , I cannot help but think with a certain degree of bitterness that these two provisions have come far too late , for the victims .
How different their lives would have been if we had done this earlier !
If only this had been done ten years ago , I am sure that ETA would , by now , have been defeated , and that many of my close friends who have been murdered by ETA would still be here with us , still taking their children to school , giving lectures , writing articles for the press , administering justice , representing their voters .
I would , therefore , ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to reflect upon this tomorrow before you vote .
I would like you to consider that the consequences of this will not only be political , but will , more than anything , be of a human nature , and I would ask the Council to rise , in political terms , to this occasion , and not to miss this opportunity .
There are those that think that politics is the art of the possible .
My opinion is that the purpose of politics is to make what is necessary possible .
I trust that the Fifteen will share this opinion .
I assure you that the defeat of terrorism is possible , and , ladies and gentlemen , you do not realise just how necessary this is .
Madam President , the argument that the anti-terrorism measures and the European arrest warrant do not skimp on fundamental rights , is only sustainable if the protection system of the European Convention on Human Rights for defendants is adhered to in practice .
But that is dependant on the ability of every single judge in the European Union to understand and apply ECHR provisions .
We have no coherent EU programme to ensure they do .
Lest I be thought chauvinist in raising the problem of Britons in Greece , let me criticise my own government in the UK .
They are trying to put through an anti-terrorism bill with a derogation from the ECHR in order to detain suspects without a proper trial , with no legal representation , no judicial review and without being able to hear the evidence given by the intelligence services .
This certainly leaves the UK lacking credibility in a campaign for mutual raising of standards in the EU .
Another worrying development in the UK is the intention to let police and security cooperation measures slip through the Westminster Parliament without proper democratic scrutiny .
Here we debate , but we have no equality with Ministers in deciding the legislation .
Coupled with Council secrecy , this means a very unsatisfactory position in terms of democracy , justice and human rights .
Finally , may I make a direct appeal to Commissioner Vitorino to ensure that organisations acting in the field of raising justice standards , such as the admirable Fair Trials Abroad , can be assisted under the Community budget .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against terrorism is an absolute necessity , the legitimacy of which should not be questioned or we could see our democracies collapse .
However , under no circumstances should it serve as a pretext for gagging our fundamental rights and democratic freedoms .
How can we justify a European proposal to combat terrorism if no added value can be gained from it ?
Under the current legislation of the Member States , perpetrators of attacks could not go unpunished .
As the public enemy number one is terrorism , why not limit the European arrest warrant to terrorist offences ?
If the illegal capture of State or government facilities , public modes of transport , infrastructures or public places constitutes a terrorist offence or if the legitimate expression of our freedoms of expression and association , our trade union rights , could , in the future , be criminalised or described as terrorism , if those elements are retained , by voting in favour of these reports we will be renouncing all of our democratic rights .
An explicit guarantee of these rights and freedoms must be included in this proposal for a framework directive .
Our fears also extend to certain offences that could fall under the warrant , as the criterion used is that of the sentence , while the accused persons may deserve protection , for example if they are migrants or asylum seekers .
Even those giving support to those people would , in the future , become guilty of terrorism .
A minimum degree of harmonisation of Member States ' criminal procedures is necessary in order to safeguard the principle of equality before the law and guarantee the protection of rights in the principle of collegiality .
Furthermore , as minors cannot be the subjects of an arrest warrant , their description for criminal purposes also needs to be harmonised .
If we are to establish an area of security , freedom and justice , these three dimensions need to be fully effective .
Unfortunately , we observe that the security aspect is dominating the policies of the Union and the Member States .
The fight against terrorism needs to be reflected in security for all residents , without exception and in total respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Finally , if a new text has to be adopted by the Council in the future , we hope that this House will be consulted once again .
Madam President , there is an ongoing relationship between the constraints on individual and collective freedoms in the United States and those in Europe , just as there is an ongoing connection in the matter of such freedoms that has been maintained by the United Kingdom government , first with the Reagan / Thatcher partnership and now with the Bush / Blair partnership .
Many European governments are using the criminal terrorist action of 11 September against the United States as an excuse to issue further legislation curbing freedoms which has nothing to do with combating terrorism .
Leaving aside the special military tribunals set up by President Bush , it is enough to reflect upon the recent laws issued or proposed in Italy or in the United Kingdom in order to understand that their objective is to curb and control growing political opposition to a world social and economic order which is unfair and inhuman : the wealth , well-being , growth and development of a fifth of the human race are mirrored by the starvation , lack of resources , ongoing economic decline and underdevelopment of the other four fifths .
It is strange that we can never manage to find a legal formula to define this major social massacre as an act of terrorism , while we had no hesitation in labelling as terrorist acts all those demonstrations of social opposition which have taken place recently in Seattle , Genoa and so forth .
Article 3 of the proposal for a framework decision on terrorism sends a clear message to all those who , in the future , attempt to show their opposition to the neo-liberal monopoly on thinking and the resulting social system .
Women , men , workers , students , the unemployed , pacifists and ecologists will no longer be opposing the system but will be terrorists because - as Hegel , then an old man , wrongly said - ' the real is rational and the rational real ' , and for our legislators nothing is more real than the present social and economic disorder and nothing is more irrational , and therefore terrorist , than the need to overthrow and eliminate it .
Lastly , I would like to make it clear that I do support the European arrest warrant and that , as an Italian , I condemn the fact that my country ' s government should be the one to oppose a unanimous decision .
It is shameful because the intention of the Berlusconi government in adopting this position is to prevent corruption being listed among the offences on the ' positive ' list .
Madam President , after the events of 11 September , Europe and the European institutions must also assume their responsibility and find the courage to achieve a joint agreement between the Member States on combating terrorism and , in general , combating organised crime , without delay .
The legal instruments which will make this fight genuinely effective include the European arrest warrant , which will , at last , replace the complex and excessively bureaucratic extradition procedures which have now become insufficient and inadequate for fighting crime , particularly international crime .
That said , we need to move one step at a time .
The emotion of the tragic terrorist attacks of recent months must certainly prompt us to strengthen judicial cooperation between the Member States without delay , but in speeding up this process we must take things one step at a time and act responsibly .
Indeed , good laws are not compatible with haste or with lack of precision or emotional reactions , particularly when it comes to identifying the offences in respect of which the European arrest warrant is to be applied .
We would therefore express our concern at the Belgian Presidency ' s proposal to apply the European arrest warrant to a list of around 30 categories of offences immediately .
In our opinion , terrorism or the trafficking of human beings , to give just two examples , cannot be placed on the same level as counterfeiting or forgery .
It would therefore be more in the general interest to propose and adopt , first of all , with the unanimous consent of all the Member States , an initial , limited list and then , subsequently , to extend this list gradually , thus focusing initially on terrorist crimes , organised crime , the trafficking of drugs , arms and human beings and the exploitation of minors .
Mr President , naturally , measures must be taken to combat terrorism . That much is clear .
Upon reflection , however , it is interesting to note in this context that most countries have adequate rules .
That being said , an extension to the mutual obligation to hand over wanted criminals might be contemplated , but it should be far more restricted than provided for here .
Having said that , I want to say that I have difficulty finding words strong enough to express my rejection of the proposals before us .
That rejection is something I express not only as a politician but , first and foremost , as a lawyer .
I want to say that it is difficult to find even one lawyers ' organisation of any kind in the Member States that wishes to endorse these proposals .
They all have major or minor reservations , and many are forthright in their rejection of them because it is a case of the end justifying the means , and the means to be used amount to a violation of what are fundamental ideals in terms of legal rights , something which , for example , Denmark ' s General Council of the Bar has come out very strongly against .
In my view , this panic reaction has meant that these proposals have been treated with a quite scandalous disregard for any basic demand that they be properly examined .
These fundamental legal reforms , which are among the most complicated of legislative matter and require an extensive consultation procedure , are to be implemented without any substantial debate on the issues involved and on the basis of , if I may say so , Commissioner , what is , to put it mildly , inadequate preparation .
It is unpleasantly reminiscent of political ' body-snatching ' , and that is a violation of fundamental legal rights .
Madam President , there is a pressing need to harmonise judicial standards but I would like to draw the attention of the President and the Members to the need to harmonise the roles of the intelligence and anti-terrorist bodies as well , for otherwise harmonising judicial standards will serve no purpose .
Current events show just how necessary this is , irrespective of the many considerations put forward by Members from the left side of the House which have the effect of shifting our attention away from the numerous dangers presented by the way terrorist groups work and are interconnected .
In fact , by way of example , the revelations published today in the Italian daily newspaper La Repubblica on the change of hands of important nuclear material which is already part of the stock owned by the Mobutu regime , offer a very serious perspective on this trafficking which has taken place and may still be taking place at this very moment in the States of the European Union .
The story of this transaction , the protagonist of which was a former governmental ambassador who was moving freely throughout Europe by virtue of his status as a political refugee , is incredible .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is actually tragic that it took an event like the dramatic terrorist attacks in New York and in Washington to rouse Europe , and the European Council in particular , from slumber , but I am glad that we have managed in such a very short time to put together a package - a counter-terrorism package .
It extends from money laundering , by way of the freezing of accounts , to the measures we are discussing today .
I am glad that , at last , terrorism is defined as an offence in all fifteen Member States and not just in six , as was formerly the case , and can therefore be proceeded against .
I am glad that there is the hope of a European arrest warrant .
I hope that national animosities do not again lead to the postponement of this European arrest warrant , which we so urgently need .
Just go back to Parliament 's proposal , when , I believe , the position we took up was a good one .
I am glad that we will make Eurojust a reality and that the enlarged powers to combat terrorism take us another step forward in the right direction .
I am glad that Europol will have joint investigative teams .
All this is very positive in that we are showing the public just what added value the European Union can have .
I demand , though , that currently unresolved points in certain areas be dealt with .
The Member States must finally be required , and with consequences in the event of their non-compliance , to supply Europol with information and to ensure optimum coordination between Eurojust and Europol and appropriate parliamentary management and monitoring .
Parliament has made some excellent proposals on this point , and I congratulate the rapporteur and the whole team of shadow rapporteurs .
I hope that the excellent work they have done will meet with complete support tomorrow .
Following the attacks of 11 September , policy against terrorism had to be tightened in Europe too .
The Commission proposal on the definition and penalty standards for acts of terrorism therefore deserves our support .
However , the Commission proposal on a European arrest warrant with a general scope , and which abolishes the dual criminality requirement across the board is met with less enthusiasm .
This is a bridge too far for a variety of reasons : it pushes countries with a milder climate in terms of criminal law into the defensive and calls into question the fairness of the course of justice .
The proposed general scope is no longer related to combating terrorism .
As such , it constitutes no ground for the enormous political pressure and the break-neck speed of the decision-making process .
Such a proposal revolutionises the application of national and European criminal law and therefore deserves a well considered and transparent decision-making process , preceded by a proper public debate .
Moreover , Parliament is forced to pronounce judgment on the Commission proposal while the Council has , in fact , already turned it on its head : a positive list instead of a negative one , and behind closed doors .
One can hope and expect that the discussion in the Council will eventually culminate in an acceptable compromise , but we do not know this yet and neither are we voting on this tomorrow .
This is why this plenary debate and the vote in this form and at this time are a little absurd and premature , in fact .
For that reason , the delegations of the Dutch Labour Party will abstain from tomorrow ' s vote on the Commission proposal for a European arrest warrant .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I will adopt a slightly different position from that of the previous speaker . The Members of the European Free Alliance will approve the measures to combat terrorism .
We want to strengthen the criminal law measures to combat terrorism .
However , we do want to underline that the term terrorism is to be defined as proposed by the European Parliament , for I am a little wary in that respect .
A moment ago , we discussed the procedural motions on train and plane spotting in Greece and on the people who are imprisoned in this connection .
You may well say that this is a completely unrelated matter , but the sense of justice is very different in the different countries .
Similarly , the keenness with which some label anything and everything as terrorism , makes me a little suspicious .
But the measures should not be exploited by the authorities and neither should it be possible to exploit them .
Some of our representatives of the European Free Alliance struggle more with the European arrest warrant .
The approval we grant in this connection is clearly conditional .
The guarantees we want to give are contained in the EP amendments which will hopefully be adopted and which we really consider to be minimum requirements .
If the Council refuses to accept these , we will review our position and convince our colleagues in the national parliaments of the fact that better protection of citizens ' freedoms is necessary for a fair course of justice .
In other words , this is about minimum conditions , but further to the speeches of both the acting President-in-Office and Commissioner Vitorino , we are quite optimistic about the right direction which this could be heading .
It is , of course , clear that we must be able to make further progress in the harmonisation of legislation , and in the European judicial procedures involving a European public prosecutor , etc .
A number of people put the federalisation of the Third Pillar first and foremost , and maybe we need to be more pro-active in this direction .
We will not tolerate normal , democratic opposition being muzzled or suppressed , or the actions of trade unions and of movements and associations being thwarted in the name of combating terrorism .
But more than anything , we also want progress to be made in the fight against internationally organised crime .
I have first-hand experience of hopeless situations in the fight to surrender people of whom it had been clearly proven that they had committed crimes .
I therefore want to give you my unqualified support in this matter , but subject to the conditions I have announced .
Madam President , I too would like to join others in welcoming the opportunity to have this debate .
The time is so short that it will not allow us to get fully into all the intricacies and details .
However , I can say at the outset that every one of us is in common cause in opposing terrorism and violence of any kind to further political or other aims To that end , we would support coordination and cooperation between the Member States in protecting the rights and interests of each of the Member States and of the European Union as a whole , as well as its 370 million citizens .
At the Tampere summit we took the first step towards that process .
However , what is before us here today with regard to the European arrest warrant represents a major interference in and alteration of the national criminal justice systems and the civil rights and protections afforded to each individual within each of the Member States .
It is a mistake to move this far , this quickly , without properly understanding or fully recognising the differences between the criminal systems within the European Union .
Therefore , I would urge all Members to support the amendments tabled by myself and my colleagues , in particular , Amendments Nos 92 to 101 , which put in place firstly , the requirement for a judicial review or a right to appeal against the warrant at both the executing and issuing stage , secondly , a common list of positive offences , which must be drawn up and not used as a stumbling block , thirdly , no interference with the double jeopardy rule , fourthly , that there must be prima facie evidence presented before the warrant can be enforced , and finally , to ensure that there is a quick trial process where a warrant is issued .
I have represented constituents in other Member States in the European Union where they have been held without trial for two years , without getting any opportunity for habeas corpus or any opportunity to present their case .
Finally , on the overall package on combating terrorism , we have to ensure respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms .
It is no good for the Commissioner to say that we have the Charter of Fundamental Rights : That is only a non-legally binding political decision .
Each Member State has signed up to the European Convention of Human Rights which puts in place specific provisions for each individual .
I note that one Member State , just in the last week , has ridden roughshod over the rights and liberties of individuals .
We as a European Parliament , representatives of a transnational organisation , should not allow this to continue .
I would like to use the brief speaking time I have to highlight the plight of the too-soon forgotten victims of terrorism .
I sat in the home of one of my constituents the other day , a woman who lost her husband because he was a member of the army and had been killed by IRA terrorists .
When she came to get compensation for her three sons - just young boys - they offered her a paltry few hundred pounds for each son .
I could go on and list a sad litany of how terrorist victims have been treated .
This Parliament should realise that these people need special treatment .
The governments responsible should ensure that treatment is provided to bring some alleviation of the awful hurt and sorrow they bear .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is very difficult to talk about such sensitive issues when there is so little time available but I would like to confirm that , contrary to what many speakers have said , we have increased protection following 11 September and drawn up a raft of measures which include those we are debating this evening .
However , last year , we instituted Eurojust and we have already delivered one major opinion , as has been mentioned , to the effect that Eurojust should harmonise judicial cooperation within Europe .
Today , we are taking a large step forward . We are taking a quantum leap towards laying the foundations for the institution of a European public prosecutor in the future , and I therefore feel that the area of justice in which all this is taking place is gaining in significance , and it is not an area of repression , Mr Vitorino , but an area of freedom .
I am sure you have drawn inspiration from these principles .
I believe that this is an issue of primary importance on which we are about to deliver an opinion and which we feel will certainly open up a whole world of cooperation and solidarity in this area .
There are clearly specific problems and they clearly concern the arrest warrant , which merits close reflection .
Only Mr Di Lello could be so superficial and irresponsible as to cast such hasty aspersions on the Italian government .
I do not feel this is fair .
The legal institutions have their own procedures , and we are fine-tuning this European procedural law , this European area , but it is clear that we must proceed with great caution and not draw up a list of offences , for we would never finish adding to it , and any list of offences will clearly never be comprehensive .
We must realise that transnational crimes do exist , that the crime of international terrorism does exist , Madam President , and that it is a sensitive , significant and tragic issue in today ' s society .
All we have to do , and it must be our priority , to combat it is , of course , to coordinate the activities .
Italian procedural law , for example , has its own peculiarities , and we hope that there will be reasoned , active unanimity within the Council .
Thank you , Madam President .
I certainly welcome the fact that , today , we are finally debating these two reports : the Watson report and the Gebhardt report , although it is unfortunate that this should be a consequence of the tragic events of 11 September in the United States .
However , I think that there is an opportunity here .
We can make an advance of fundamental importance , a giant step forward in complying with the Tampere agreements and in creating a European area of freedom , security and justice , that everybody wants , respecting the balance between freedom and security , the importance of which no one doubts .
And , most importantly , we shall be able to provide our own small contribution to the solution of this difficult , complex and painful problem that weighs heavy upon us and knows no borders , which is terrorism .
Parliament carried out its work before 11 September and it continues to do so now : I am referring to the Resolution we approved on 5 September .
The Commission has proved its fast reflexes in proposing the framework decisions that we are debating today .
We hope that the European Council is also able to rise to the occasion and makes the right decisions as along the lines of those made by the Commission and that Parliament is making today , and that , at the Laeken Summit , it responds to the demands of Europe ' s citizens to close the net ever tighter on terrorists and terrorism in general , despite the technical difficulties , and to appropriately punish the guilty parties who have spilt the blood of so many innocent people and who have cruelly and pointlessly ended so many lives .
Madam President , when we were discussing the Schengen Agreement , one of the most frequent objections raised was that the borders would stop policemen and judges but not criminals .
That was a logical objection , although the Schengen Agreement did represent a step forward .
Well then , the instruments that the Council is about to adopt now , particularly the European arrest warrant , are the answer to these objections .
At last , borders will no longer stop judges and police .
I therefore see the European arrest warrant as a huge step forward in European integration too , and that is why I find the position of the Italian government , which is showing concern at the inclusion of offences , particularly financial offences , in this list , frankly incomprehensible .
I hope that the government will review its position in the coming days and I call upon the Commission and the Council of Ministers to pursue this path , which I feel is quite appropriate given that investigations of any kind include inquiries of this nature .
I would , moreover , point out that , last July , Parliament - including Mr Gargani and the Forza Italia group too - almost unanimously adopted the other Watson motion , which called precisely upon the Council to adopt a decision providing for a European search and arrest warrant in the area , and I would stress this , of corruption and fraud as well .
There is , therefore , already a precedent but , in any case , I feel that this is the right path to take to achieve security and justice in Italy and Europe .
Madam President , I come from a country that has been stunned by the most atrocious totalitarian horror , which seeks to spread terror by indiscriminate and relentless killings .
I can say , with pride , looking at my colleague Bárbara Dührkop , and at so many victims , and almost with emotion , that in my country , nobody has given into the temptation of implementing or asking for emergency measures .
Something that has never been understood and which no one has ever been able to tolerate in Spain is that once murderers have crossed a border that , theoretically , no longer exists , they are not pursued with the same vigour with which they are pursued in Spain .
There is no technical reason , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that can justify this , and no European citizen will accept the explanation that , for technical reasons , we are unable to make progress on tracking down terror and crime .
A common definition of the crime of terrorism and common sanctions are needed , as we have heard the Commission say so many times , to prevent there being safe havens in Europe where criminals can escape prosecution .
These measures would also send out a clear political message of the European Unions ' commitment to this issue .
We can say the same of the proposal for the mutual recognition of final decisions that we have agreed to call the European search and arrest warrant .
We support the Commission ' s proposals for improvements on extradition between Member States and the elimination of the double jeopardy rule .
I also hope that the Council will take Parliament ' s wishes into consideration .
I think , Madam President , that extending judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism and crime is the way to become more effective whilst not reducing , by any means , the very freedom that terrorists and criminals are seeking to destroy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would first of all like to rectify an omission during my presentation .
I forgot to thank and congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent work and I therefore do so now .
I feel that today ' s debate is a very good illustration of the difficulty of the exercise , if I may use that word , of the task that we have before us , which consists of accepting both what Mrs Terrón i Cusí has just said , namely that terrorists should not have the freedom to repeat the atrocious crimes that they have committed , but , at the same time , we need to ensure that the fundamental freedoms which we all hold dear are also respected .
That , in a nutshell , is what is making our task so difficult .
I have tried to explain to you the approach that we are taking to this matter and that we have the twofold concern to work quickly but not negligently , to ensure respect for our fundamental freedoms as well , which should be constant , including the right to defence for those who are accused and including victim ' s rights , as the victims should also receive all the necessary attention and care .
We are trying to combine all of that , and it is clearly not an easy task , especially because , as you well know and has also been pointed out in this debate , what is more , the different Member States do not have the same legal or judicial traditions .
All of that needs to be reconciled too .
What I can tell you , and this is my final point , is that we will continue to keep this twofold concern in mind , and it is with this in mind that we will try , with the support and guidance of the Commission , of course , to complete our task successfully .
Finally , just to be on the safe side , I want to confirm once again , as I did during my introductory speech , that we will , of course , ensure that action taken in the context of the exercising of political or trade union rights can under no circumstances be defined as a terrorist act or , therefore , engender the application of the new mechanisms that we are working .
Madam President , I would firstly like to say to Mr Krarup that no , we have not acted hastily , we have been working for over a year in consultation with national experts and university lecturers .
We have always listened to experts .
It cannot be said that our proposal has not been thought out .
I categorically refute this .
Secondly , I would like to say that there is no need to worry , ladies and gentlemen .
As the Minister has just said , the definition of terrorism has been improved during the Council ' s work .
It is entirely in line with the 1977 Council of Europe Convention .
It is entirely consistent with the Indian proposal which is now under discussion at the United Nations in New York , and I can assure you that it is completely clear in the recitals that we do not include anti-globalisation demonstrations or trade union action in the scope of terrorist activities .
It is so clear that I would describe it as Cartesian .
You will see this from the texts .
Finally , I would like to say that the Commission ' s conscience is quite clear .
We understand the political difficulty and , even , the political drama , constituted by this enormous step forwards that we are taking in order to make Europe an area of freedom , security and justice , and we know that , ultimately , what we need to do is to be true to the values , as I am sure we will be , of respect for the rule of law and the fundamental freedoms of the citizens , but , at the same time , we know that with freedom comes the responsibility to resolutely combat crime and terrorism , and we will therefore combat crime and terrorism resolutely .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 8.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Aviation safety
The next item on the agenda is the debate on the report ( A5-0415 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Foster , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation security . [ COM ( 2001 ) 575 - C5-0481 / 2001 - 2001 / 0234 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , the tragic events of 11 September in the United States have given new impetus to the reinforcement of arrangements for aviation security .
The European Council meeting the day after the terrorist attacks on the USA instructed the Transport Council to evaluate the measures to be taken to improve aviation security and complete its consideration of those already proposed .
The draft regulation itself was fairly straightforward and has been amended .
However , the attached technical annex , Document 30 , based on the European Civil Aviation Conference - or ECAC - was found to be out of date .
Whilst Parliament has responded speedily to the challenge , we believe that this should not lead to a lower level of parliamentary scrutiny and we reserve the right to amend in second reading the revised annex to this regulation adopted by the Council in its common position .
I have met with representatives from the Council and Commission and have consulted widely with the industry .
Due to the difficulty with the annex , as mentioned earlier , I chose to proceed with the report along the following lines : to work with the draft regulation and annex without amending the original annex as given to Parliament but to reserve the right to a second reading after the Council 's common position has been adopted .
This option accords with established procedures and ensures proper scrutiny .
The draft regulation concerns , principally , access control and passenger luggage and freight screening on the ground at airports and is outlined fully in my explanatory statement .
The scope does not extend to on-board security which may need to be addressed at some future date .
The technical standards themselves are those adopted by ECAC in 1992 in Document 30 , part 2 , relating to security issues revised in January 2001 and , as mentioned , currently being updated .
ECAC membership extends to 38 European States including all EU Member States .
It is worth pointing out to Parliament that this agreement reached by the 38 countries will set a precedent in so far as for the first time the agreement will have binding force upon its contracting parties .
Document 30 had previously been used for general guidance only .
Following on from the joint resolution which Parliament adopted at the last plenary session on the subject of aviation , the key areas for amendment to this text are as follows : first , Member States assume responsibility for additional security costs in the light of the terrorist attacks ; second , inspections of airports should be unannounced if airports are to be inspected under real operating conditions ; third , Member States take responsibility in assisting employers in the screening of employees engaged in all security tasks , not least because employers are not always entitled to access personal data due to strict privacy laws ; fourth , where there is a requirement for structural modifications at airports a six month time-limit will be implemented ; and fifth , that a procedure be formulated , as is currently the case in ECAC , that would allow industry access to the Comitology Committee without running into problems of existing legal structures .



In addition , on a general point , we are calling for more effective international cooperation in the area of exchange of information for security purposes .
To conclude , we are all aware of the catastrophic effects on the aviation industry and tourist sector as a result of 11 September .
Around 200 000 directly-related jobs have already been lost worldwide , 30 000 in the EU alone , and this is just the tip of the iceberg .
It is not only big businesses which have been affected but also thousands of small businesses , such as small aviation clubs who produce the pilots of tomorrow .
Airlines , airports , manufacturers , hotels , the transport sector are all reliant on finding a solution to this problem .
This report is not the sole solution but it is a step in the right direction provided that the Member States recognise their moral duty to protect their citizens and accept their responsibility to assist in the financing of these additional security measures .
It is quite clear that urgent action must be taken to restore public confidence which , in turn , would assist the aviation industry , the tourism sector and the European Union as a whole .
Mr President , my group would naturally like to help in the rapid creation of common security rules for civil aviation .
This is self-evident after the events of 11 September .
In our opinion , there are four points at issue which we included in our amendments . In this respect , we want to take account of the interests of the industry , in which security and a fair distribution of the burden and expenses involved , must be the overriding factor .
First of all , we must aim to achieve the highest possible level of security when it comes to the protection of airports and their users .
This is also the least citizens can expect from us .
Secondly , additional measures which will probably be taken at a later date , must be verified against the implementation of present legislation .
This means that we will need to consider very carefully whether what is being proposed will also be viable in practice .
The third point is that the Commission , in tandem with the ECAC and the ICAO , must determine whether airports in third countries , in other words , airports outside the scope of the Regulation , meet essential security conditions , for any loopholes in the new system will surface particularly at those airports .
I know from my own experience how to board a plane in Albania without passing through bomb control .
The fourth and last point is that we would like uniform rules to finance the proposed measures in order to prevent unfair competition .
This could be government aid , provided that that is directly linked to the extra expenditure in connection with the present Regulation .
It should also be demonstrated , of course , that the aid is really needed .
The industry itself , operators and users , must also bear a proportion of the costs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament , the Council and the Commission are united in agreeing that efforts must be made to increase the safety of air travel .
The discussions that have just begun show , too , that we are fundamentally in complete agreement with this .
The events of 11 September have , of course , revealed additional deficiencies , which we have to consider in isolation from the structural problems already suffered by many airlines .
The two must not be confused .
We are of the opinion that there is room for improvement in all the areas relevant to security - the airports , the aprons , the registration and clearing of luggage , even on board the aircraft itself .
My group and I also take the view that , since safety is in the public interest and must be guaranteed for every citizen who uses airlines , public funds must also bear their share of the costs that an increase in safety entails .
This , of course , demands standardised European procedures , without which we will not solve the problem , and because competition would be distorted if the burden were to revert to the airports or the airlines .
We are , of course , aware that we have a problem .
There is , generally in Parliament , constant discussion of liberalisation , meaning that we now want to use public funds to improve safety in this liberalised sector .
This , of course , means that we have to talk in general terms about what standards can and must be applied in order to use public money to intervene in liberalised markets .
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me firstly to express my gratitude to this House , to this Parliament , for including the theme of security in civil aviation on the agenda for this part-session .
I would also like to thank you for your promptness and speed in dealing with this subject , given the urgent nature of the current situation .


I would like to congratulate the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on having concluded its first reading of the Commission proposal in such a short time , because although this has been achieved very quickly , it must be added that this has not been done to the detriment of the quality of work carried out , and with regard to this I would particularly like to thank Mrs Foster , the rapporteur for this initiative , for the excellent work she has carried out despite the urgency of the situation , the lack of time and also for having carefully listened to all the sectors involved , which is the best way of undertaking such work .
Taking the gravity of the situation into account and the need to give an immediate response , and considering the mandate of the European Council of 21 September , our objective was to conclude an agreement before the end of the year .
In her report , Mrs Foster fully recognises the need to strengthen , in a standardised way , the security requirements applicable to civil aviation since 11 September .
I am pleased to be able to tell you that the Commission is , generally speaking , in agreement with the report , given that it supports our intention of introducing common security standards for civil aviation in the European Union , of establishing a Community inspection system aimed at checking the effectiveness and uniformity of these standards , and , therefore , and on this point I insist , at improving the security measures that , as Mr Wiersma or Mr Markov pointed out , are absolutely necessary and urgent .

With regard to the proposed amendments , we can , in principle , accept the first part of Amendment 14 , which refers to the gradual introduction of specific security measures , although the measures involved and the timetable will have to be slightly adjusted .
A series of amendments is dedicated to ensuring that part of the implementation costs of the security measures are covered by the Member States of the European Union , on a permanent or temporary basis .
With regard to these amendments , the Commission fully agrees with the spirit of Nos 1 , 6 , 10 , 11 , 15 , 19 , 21 and 22 , and can accept them in principle , even though they raise important issues relating to the method of financing the security measures .
We will have to take a look at the exact wording they will need in order for the Commission to adopt them .
Today , the situation can vary between one county and another , even between one airport and another ; however , the Commission does not think that this factor could improve the effectiveness of the security measures .
The Commission communication of 10 October , on the economic impact of the terrorist attacks , suggested that the financing , with public funds , of additional security measures could be considered a positive move .
However , I am sorry to have to tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that this measure was not received with any great enthusiasm by the Council , to put it mildly .
To tell the truth , it was not supported by the majority of States in the European Union .
This is how I know that making such a reference in the current regulation will cause serious problems in the Council , although , I repeat , we agree with Parliament ' s position , because we are aware of the tremendous crisis the European Aviation Sector is experiencing at the moment .
This is a sector that is also having to face competition , often unfair competition , from American companies that are benefiting from significant direct aid , provided by the Administration of that country .
It is also possible that the financing of provisions that are not directly related to the improvement of security will not be included in this regulation .
However , with the aim of finding a solution to the significant problem of financing additional measures , I repeat that I am ready to undertake an analysis of the need to harmonise the organisation and financing of security controls in Member States , given what is happening in the United States , and to make the proposals necessary to take the result of this analysis into account .
With this action , the Commission would be taking account of the opinion demonstrated by this Parliament through the various amendments that will surely be approved tomorrow .
With regard to Amendment No 7 , which proposes the removal of a Community control mechanism aimed at checking the proportionality and justification of stricter security measures in civil aviation adopted by Member States , the Commission must reject this amendment , even though Parliament and Council are of the same opinion .
We think that it is legitimate to grant the Commission the power to prevent artificial restrictions that are justified for economic reasons .
Amendment No 9 suggests that the results of the Community inspection reports should be sent to each airline .
These reports , ladies and gentlemen , contain general information on the implementation of the regulation by European Union Member States , and on the functioning of their own quality control systems and their ability to detect faults .
However , they do not include details such as the indication of the level of risk and its changes from airline to airline , and therefore , passing on these reports will not contribute to improving individual security , and with this in mind , the Commission cannot accept the content of this amendment .
Other amendments have been rejected because they cause legal problems , as is the case with the last paragraph of Amendment No 14 , for example , Amendment No 5 , which changes the reference standards produced by an external organisation , the ECAC , Amendment No 12 , which goes against comitology procedures , Amendment No 17 , which would delay the entry into force of the regulation , making it subject to an impact study , without there being any indication of the final decision .
The remaining amendments improve or clarify the text and the Commission can accept them with slight changes to their wording .
The Commission could also accept Amendment No 20 , but would point out that implementing its extraterritorial effects on the basis of bilateral or multilateral controls would be a complicated matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has spared no effort to try to achieve , or to facilitate , an agreement between the Council and Parliament at first reading , on a subject that is so important and , above all , urgent .
I fear that this may not be possible given the absence of prior agreement on tomorrow ' s vote .
I think , however , that in the near future , in March , we could be in a position where we have a text , slightly late , it must be said , but if this results in a better quality text and better proposals , this is not such a serious issue , since some of the methods we have discussed here are already being directly implemented by Member States .
Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Foster once again .
And I would also like to thank Parliament for the urgency and effort it has afforded this measure , which is of fundamental importance , and I hope that in March we will finally reach full agreement between all the institutions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Communities ' financial interests
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0390 / 2001 by Mrs Theato , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the criminal-law protection of the Community ' s financial interests . [ COM ( 2001 ) 272 - C5-0225 / 2001 - 2001 / 0115 ( COD ) ] ;
A5- 0393 / 2001 by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission annual report 2000 on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud [ COM ( 2001 ) 255 - C5-0469 / 2001 - 2001 / 2186 ( COS ) ] and on the Commission communication on protecting the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud - Action plan for 2001-2003 [ COM ( 2001 ) 254 - C5-0470 / 2001 - 2001 / 2186 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , protection of the Community 's financial interests is a concept that the citizen out there finds difficult to understand .
But it is of deep concern to him , as someone who pays his taxes , that his money should be used for the development and extension of a united Europe and that it should not be misused or employed for the purposes of fraud or other kinds of criminal activity .
He has every right to demand that the European institutions to which he entrusts his money will handle it carefully and that , should frauds be committed , these will be detected and punished .
The message we must get across is that we are using every available means to justify the citizen 's trust .
The means to hand have , though , been blunt weapons to date , and there has been increased leakage from the Community budget due to criminal practices - figures show it as having doubled to over EUR 2 billion in the past year .
The percentage of undetected crime , may well , by the way , be even higher .
Despite better detection of fraud , judicial cooperation across frontiers is limping along , far behind multinational organised crime .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament have been lamenting this situation for years , but little or nothing has as yet been done about it .
The agreement on protection of the Community 's financial interests , signed in Cannes all of six years ago , and the protocols appended to it , have still not been ratified by all the Member States and are therefore not in force .
Despite all the appeals and resolutions by Parliament , and several summit declarations by the Council , there is still no common European legal area to protect the Community budget , indeed , not even an unambiguous definition of the concept of fraud against Community funds . Still less are any investigations carried out or punitive sentences handed down , which must be in equal measure effective , proportionate and deterrent .
This blockade situation has now seen the Commission produce a proposal for a directive which recalls elements of the 1995 agreement and incorporates parts of them in the protocols , a proposal which , incidentally , Parliament had already made before the 1995 Summit .
The Commission , rightly , bases its proposal upon Article 280 ( 4 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam under which the Community is obliged to play an active part in protecting its funds .
This should circumvent the sterile debate about allocation to the first or third pillar of the Treaty , particularly as the Treaty of Nice affirms that the protection of the Community 's finances belongs in the first pillar .
So we should not lose ourselves in legal analyses , but send a clear signal .
For us , the criminal-law protection of European funds against criminal misuse is a serious matter .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal for the harmonisation of national legislation .
It can , though , only be a first step towards the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor 's Office to protect Community financial interests , something that was called for at the IGC for the Treaty of Nice but was not , unfortunately , actually discussed .
Mrs Schreyer , we are waiting impatiently for the Green Paper from the Commission on this subject .
It would have been a good thing if we had already had this Green Paper together with the proposal for a directive .
In order to make good this deficiency , the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgetary Control call for the next revision of the Treaties to include the establishment of a European State Prosecutor 's Office , on the corpus juris model and appertaining to the first pillar .
The course must be set for this as early as the Laeken Summit .
The Committee on Budgetary Control proposes , as an intermediate step without amending the Treaty , the establishment of an internal financial prosecutor in accordance with the three-phase model in the second report of the Committee of Wise Men .
As has already been said , we welcome the Commission 's proposal , but call for an effective instrument , that is to say , a regulation rather than a directive .
Why ?
Directives commit the Member States to objectives , whilst regulations prescribe the instruments they are to use to achieve those objectives .
The proposal for a directive is meant to insert into the criminal law of all the Member States a standard definition of offences such as fraud , corruption , money-laundering etc. to the detriment of the Community Budget .
There is no doubt that a regulation is the legal instrument to be preferred in order to avoid new confusion of the sort that there has been in the past .
I strongly invite Parliament , the Commission and the Council to now go down this necessary political road together .
I ask you to adopt my report , on which no amendments have been tabled .
Mr President , if you take a look at the figures for fraud and the irregularities affecting the European Budget in the year 2000 , you see , above all , a massive increase in the irregularities that have come to light .
Just so we can put this beyond dispute for once : for the taxpayer , it is essentially irrelevant whether it is a question of fraud or irregularity ; the money has been improperly spent .
Now , one can , of course , argue about whether more fraud is actually being committed or whether it is being cleared up more effectively , or whether there are more irregularities .
I tend to think it is probably a combination of these .
The Commissioner may well think differently , but we cannot go so far as to say that having discovered 100 % irregularities means that we have had the best way of combating fraud , because then we will not have any budget left .
In my position - and perhaps the Commissioner responsible was herself once a Member of this House in a past life - and in this situation , one asks oneself what would happen in a business if the management presented figures like these one year .
Here , we are always coming up against the fact that people say we are among the best administrations .
We are striving to be that .
I think that what would happen would be something quite different from what the Commission expects from us as an action plan .
The actual point of my report is that I believe we should just consider where this road might take us .
Mrs Theato has already mentioned one possibility , and an important one at that , which we will not be able to avoid if we want to make changes .
We must address the issue of a European State Prosecutor , and do it without excuses about amendments to the Treaty .
The possibilities are already there in the Treaties .
Your opposition to it , Mrs Schreyer , is your own business , but we will not carry on standing idly before our taxpayers and tell them that we just cannot do anything .
That is not what we have a Commission for .
The Commission is there to act , and of that I would remind you , Mrs Schreyer .
In exactly the same way , we must give greater priority to the protection of the EU 's financial interests in the applicant countries .
There were , and are , proposals on this which amount to saying that we will , at some point , have to let our anti-fraud unit be active in an advisory capacity , which we know already .
As the example of Slovakia has shown , the point at issue is not the acceding countries , but the continuing inability of this Commission to get a proper grip on the problematic aspects of enlargement , so that our fellow citizens might get the idea that enlargement has been prepared for in such a way , including financially , that they can happily say yes to it .
The Commission bears great responsibility in this respect .
Madam Commissioner , I am inclined to think that , when one has to submit those sorts of figures and turn them into something tangible , one has to seize every available opportunity to improve matters .
My final point is on an issue on which it would be good if we could seize the opportunity for common action .
It has to do with a question that I will raise now .
Mrs Schreyer , the plan is to appoint Mr Alberto Perduca as Director of the operational department of OLAF , the anti-fraud office .
His qualifications as a public prosecutor , his experience in combating the mafia , and also his experience at an international level make him the ideal man for the job .
Unfortunately , his appointment has been blocked for months now by the new Italian government .
Perhaps , Mrs Schreyer , you might tell us what the Commission has done about this to date .
Would personal intervention by the President of the Commission not be necessary in this case ?
Has this , as is to be hoped , already taken place ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 1995 the Member States jointly signed a convention under which , in order to safeguard Community interests and finances , the Member States make fraud against Community finances a punishable offence .
Subsequently , further protocols were signed also specifying corruption and the laundering of money derived from fraud against Community finances as criminal offences .
There is actually nothing wrong with this convention and the protocols except that they have not all been ratified yet and therefore they are still not in force .
I do not deny that in the year 2000 there was some movement in the direction of ratification .
Whenever I have met with finance ministers I have constantly repeated my request that they be ratified , but the speed is determined by the slowest .
The protocol that makes money laundering a crime has so far been ratified by only seven Member States .
So you can see how long it would take if we were to wait for the process to be completed .
We cannot accept that ; that is why we have put forward the proposal for a directive that converts the main content of the protocol and the convention into a directive ; this has already been discussed in Parliament on a number of occasions and has repeatedly been called for by the President himself .
I would like to thank you , Mrs Theato , and , of course , the committee as a whole , for joining us in saying that things have gone far enough and we are now going to use Community law and not rely on the convention , the third pillar instrument .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has tabled many amendments that were voted on in the Committee .
The Commission shares the objective and concern expressed by many of these .
But the Commission believes the present proposal for a directive is not in legal terms the right place for the vast majority of the amendments .
I must therefore ask you not to take the proposal for a directive as some kind of tree on which to hang many wishes , concerns and suggestions , correct as these may be .
That is especially the case with the European Public Prosecutor .
Again a word on that , Mr Bösch . Of course , the Commission is the guardian of the Treaties .
In our clear analysis Article 280 does not , as it appears in the Treaty , lend itself to that , not even the ' little ' public prosecutor , to use that term again .
In our estimation , and other people do share this view , there is no basis in law for the OLAF Supervisory Committee .
Neither would it be possible to choose the instrument of the regulation , because the proposal as you now have it provides , for example , for the European Court of Justice to have an investigating judge .
But the duties of the Court of Justice and its judicial functions are laid down in detail in the Treaty .
It is , therefore , not possible to use a regulation to institutionalise a new investigating judge .
That , too , requires an amendment to the Treaty .
But we shall be presenting the Green Paper in a few weeks ' time , as Mrs Theato has mentioned .
The Green Paper will , of course , initiate a wide-ranging discussion .
I am sure that , as protagonists of this proposal , you will take this discussion to the experts and to the Member States , so that we do not have a repeat of the situation we had in Nice , where there were only reservations and no agreement .
In our opinion , there is no legal basis for some of the other amendments , either .
Provisions concerning cooperation between the national criminal prosecution authorities would be incompatible with Article 280 of the Treaty since they are concerned with the application of the Member States ' criminal law and their administration of criminal justice .
Neither can the Commission go along with the suggestion of converting the directive into a regulation , since the Community cannot , at present , create law that is directly applicable in the Member States .
I understand your concern and in view of the present situation I , of course , also support the call for your wish to be met swiftly , but we are a long way from a situation where the European Community can create directly applicable law .
I am sure that this would really not meet with the agreement of the national parliaments either .
The Commission is able to agree without reservation to Amendment No 2 and No 11 .
They underline , once again , how important the introduction of the new Article 280 is for protecting the Community ' s financial interests .
Amendment No 27 , which provides for custodial sentences , possibly leading to extradition , is essential for effectively fighting economic crime , and the Commission would also like to agree to the first sentences of Amendment No 3 and No 7 if these should be voted on separately tomorrow .
I also want to explicitly say that the proposals for extending the list of offences for the protection of financial interests are very worthy of note and , in my opinion , very much worthy of consideration , namely that market-rigging and abuse of office should be included .
It is really more a question here of the strategy to be adopted .
The Commission ' s proposed strategy is to adopt the wording of the convention , more or less , as it stands and to present the Member States with a situation where they have already agreed to this very text and there is , therefore , now no reason to convert it into another instrument that sets a clear time for its transposition .
That is one of the legislative measures the Commission is putting forward to protect the Community ' s financial interests .
The Commission has listed the proposals we put forward in the year 2000 in the fraud prevention report , for example the proposal to amend the money laundering directive , the proposal to prevent counterfeiting of the euro or measures to combat product piracy .
That is all part of preventing fraud , after all .
The Commission ' s report also contains 50 pages listing the measures taken by the Member States to protect Community finances in the years 1999 and 2000 .
It starts with Belgium extending its customs administration ' s powers to a twelve mile zone outside coastal waters and includes , for example , the creation of a central control information system by Denmark ' s customs and tax administration and an increase in staff at Spain ' s general inspectorates for agricultural expenditure in the regions .
The United Kingdom has , for example , set up a coordination point for general investigations involving the Structural Funds .
For the Structural Funds , the rapporteur , you , Mr Bösch , has included the Court of Auditors ' highly critical report , which highlights the differences between the Member States in the application of the regulation that irregularities in the implementation of the Structural Funds must be reported .
I can assure you that I share your criticism and that of the Court of Auditors .
We are , therefore , working very hard with the Member States to get a more uniform and above all a more thorough implementation of this reporting regulation .
And this is beginning to bear fruit .
I really must reiterate : even if we will probably continue to differ on the interpretation , in earlier years , transposition was extremely hesitant .
We have found that it took ages for an irregularity to be reported .
It is now de facto better , but that , of course , also means that more irregularities are being reported .
It is like police statistics . Is it a good thing or a bad thing when the number of cases the police detect rises or falls ?
I really must therefore ask you not to discredit those Member States that take their reporting of irregularities seriously and make frequent reports as required by the Regulation by saying they are the ' strongholds ' , because it is a difficult instrument .
There is , as it were , a negative incentive : the more irregularities are reported , the more information we naturally have on the basis of which to make financial corrections .
We cannot do without this mechanism .
I also agree with the rapporteur , I agree with you , Mr Bösch , that we must make the statistics more meaningful so we can see which are the new reports and which were already in the statistics before .
Above all , we must look at what has been the result of the reports , what measures have been taken .
OLAF is working on it , the Directorate-General for the Budget is working on it , the Directorate-General for the Regions is working on it , but it is a laborious business .
I am sure we will not have the success we are actually looking for next year either , but we will see that they are becoming more meaningful , as it were , sector by sector .
It also depends on cooperation with the Member States , and OLAF is working closely with the so-called COCOLAF .
I can inform you , however , that every suspected case of fraud , especially in the Structural Funds , is passed on to OLAF .
The most common irregularities with the Structural Funds are concerned with cases where , for example , the Member States approve projects after the period for support has actually finished .
Irregularities also appear , in particular , because other Community policies are not followed .
One quite frequent irregularity is that projects have been approved without an environmental impact assessment being made first .
A lot of money is spent on infrastructures , and that is a very common error , as I said .
If you now ask what damage results , that is , of course , difficult to say .
There is no financial damage , but there may be environmental damage because the environmental impact assessment was not carried out .
Regarding the financial corrections , another important point , we shall have tighter rules for the new support period .
In the report , you have now called for all irregularities affecting financial corrections and the Structural Funds reported in the period from 1995 to 2000 to be listed individually by 15 December .
We do not have that information available and will not have it available so quickly .
The Commission can promise that we will now try to get this information direct for the new irregularity reports in a way that makes the reports meaningful so that we can see which irregularities result in financial loss .
How is the protection of financial interests directive likely to be treated in the Council ?
Unfortunately , some Member States have already taken quite a clear stance against this directive on grounds of legal dogma .
You have mentioned this .
All the Member States say in the Council , yes , of course , we must do something about this , but then they argue no , that is something that belongs in the third pillar , not in the first pillar .
I would like to see the justice ministers who argue in this way , doing so in a public debate .
Nobody would understand it .
And the population will not accept them saying they can do nothing because one thing is the first pillar but another is the third pillar and the Community can only take action in the third pillar .
It is quite clear that the protection of Community interests requires Community instruments , and I am very pleased and very grateful to you that the European Parliament and the Commission are pulling in the same direction here .
Mr President , those involved in the construction of Europe have always been prepared to take risks . This has certainly been the case as far as the protection of the Community ' s financial interests is concerned .
Parliament , notably its Committee on Budgetary Control , has indeed taken risks . We should pay tribute to the determination shown by Mrs Theato who chairs that Committee and is one of the rapporteurs .
Whatever is achieved in this field will be largely due to her efforts .
Having said that , I must admit that along with many other Members I share the Commission ' s concern .
We need to work towards creating an area of justice , but we must do so in a responsible manner . Throughout the whole process of the construction of Europe , the forces attempting to hinder it have consistently taken advantage of the mistakes made by more enthusiastic individuals when they lose sight of the Treaty .
This is why I am bringing a critical note into today ' s debate .
I do not wish to argue against the concept of a European Public Prosecutor , but I am concerned about laying down the details of the necessary statute . It is indeed a transitional statute but a statute nonetheless .
The House needs to give due consideration to this office . Not only should the Committee on Budgetary Control give it due consideration , but so should the House itself .
Such consideration should also involve dialogue with other institutions , notably the Commission . Not until that has taken place will we be in a position to move forward together and present a proposal consistent with the Treaty .
The same applies , in my view , to the Commissioner ' s comments on the rapporteur ' s idea of resorting to a regulation in place of a directive .
That is not within Parliament ' s competence .
It falls within the competence of our societies and of states governed by the rule of law .
Only in very specific circumstances may direct obligations be imposed on citizens from a Community level .
This is why I have ventured to voice some criticism here today , Mr President . I am , however , full of admiration for the work completed .
I should like , first of all , to thank the two Members for all their work in writing these reports .
They have been tireless workers on fighting fraud in the European Union since they were appointed .
However , there is a problem .
According to the Commission report , there has been a doubling of fraud , in particular , of the revenue collected over the year 2000 .
That is of great concern but we must put it into context and remember that much of this is due to Member States not taking fraud seriously .
They are not collecting the money that is due to the European Union , for example , from cigarette smuggling and the money that we could get through taxes .
Member States are also not taking fraud seriously because we still have four Member States who have not ratified the Convention on the Protection of Financial Interests which means that nobody can move on in terms of fighting fraud .
As regards the Structural Funds , 40 % of the money is spent in the Member States and the data we have , in terms of following up where that money is spent , is unreliable .
This situation is quite pathetic .
What do we do when we find fraud ?
We pass a file onto OLAF who do the investigation and then it sits on a shelf because nobody prosecutes .
This is a real problem .
Who is going to take responsibility for prosecution ?
Only two people have ever been prosecuted by OLAF and this is a green light to fraudsters in the EU .
We must ask if people are against the European Public Prosecutor , then what alternative do they want to see ?
We are asking a little bit too much in this report by asking for a regulation .
But we also know that about half the Member States are against this and there is a possibility of losing an opportunity to have a European fraud prosecutor for the EU financial interests .
We may be asking for too much too fast and I am concerned about that , but I respect the Members for really trying to push the boat out on this fraud issue .
Mr President , I too should like to start with a word of thanks to the two rapporteurs .
I know that they have both worked hard on this topic from the outset .
I should first of all like to turn my attention to the Bösch report .
As the Liberal Group , we have tabled a few amendments to this report , to the effect that we consider mid-2002 somewhat premature as a firm deadline for a public prosecutor .
In order to avoid any misunderstandings , we are clearly in favour of a public prosecutor , but mid-2002 is slightly too early .
In our opinion , more attention should be devoted to the future Member States in Central and Eastern Europe and we would therefore ask the Court of Auditors to issue a report on this as soon as possible , thus enabling us to assess whether these countries are also capable of managing their financial affairs effectively before they accede .
Furthermore , OLAF must obviously work closely together with similar organisations in the new Member States .
We would also like to make our position clear on the Theato report : we are in support of a public prosecutor , but the lion ' s share of the amendments that have been adopted in committee , in most cases by one majority vote , go too far in our view .
At this stage , we prefer a directive to a regulation .
We want to avoid a confrontation course with the Council : the line of the Commission is preferable to the abundance of detail in the various amendments .
If these amendments were to be adopted at this stage , we ought to revisit them in the Committee on Budgetary Control , for we believe that , at this stage , matters of this kind should attract the greatest possible consensus and that the decision should not be made by a narrow majority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , the Prodi Commission ' s existing policy on fighting fraud can really only be described as hesitant and dilatory when it comes to the really crucial questions .
And I have very little hope that this will change , especially in the matter of the European Financial Public Prosecutor .
A Green Paper is all the Commission has planned for the remaining years of its term of office .
Your much-vaunted Commission reform programme lacks the crucial safety net .
Those who abuse their freedoms must be capable of being brought to account .
Your first duty ought to have been to clear up the old cases and call those responsible to account .
Instead , you are hiding behind a hesitant judiciary in Belgium and Luxembourg .
To prevent this sad truth from becoming so evident , you are following a policy of concealing information from Parliament , which you now want to get expressly embodied in the Financial Regulation .
You are claiming for yourself the right to decide whether informing Parliament about a procedure is in the European Union ' s interest or not .
I would like to have seen you when you were a member of the State Parliament in Berlin , Mrs Schreyer , if the Governing Mayor had told you it was not in the city ' s interest to inform you about certain things .
That is precisely how you are presuming to treat the European Parliament today and you clearly fail to appreciate that in so doing you weaken not only this Parliament but , ultimately , also the Commission of which you are part .
Thank you very much , Mrs Stauner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Quality of petrol and diesel fuels
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0389 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the quality of petrol and diesel fuels ( COM ( 2001 ) 241 - C5-0197 / 2001 - 2001 / 0107 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I am here , this evening , to present a report which relates to the improvement of the quality of fuels .
The European Parliament was involved in drafting this legislation , which was originally approved in 1998 , in other words , over three years ago ; and Parliament was quite successful in using the co-decision procedure to push through cleaner fuels , which significantly facilitate a reduction in traffic emissions .
Even at that stage , the European Parliament noticed that one crucial factor in improving the quality of a fuel is a reduction in its sulphur content .
In the course of the co-decision procedure and conciliation , we accomplished a significant lowering in the sulphur content of both petrol and diesel , despite the way in which the oil industry stridently emphasised the costs of this programme .
On the other hand , we can state that the motor industry and catalyst industry considered it absolutely essential that these low-sulphur , cleaner fuels would be introduced to the market , since , otherwise , it would not have been possible for them to bring about cleaner , better and more advanced engines which feature lower emissions .
We are now at the directive revision stage , at which the Commission , quite rightly , has noted that sulphur is an even more strategic ingredient in the quality of fuels than we then understood .
The Commission proposes that by 2011 both petrol and diesel fuel should , for all practical purposes , be sulphur-free .
We are talking about very low contents .
This is of essential importance , since it has been observed that the consumption of fuels also falls when the sulphur content is reduced , and , in the meantime , climate policy has become a central objective in the European Union .
We must find all possible means by which we can reduce car fuel consumption .
This is , indeed , one of the most important aims of this proposal .
Hopefully , then , the European Parliament will come to the decision tomorrow that we will attain one hundred percent of the target of getting these sulphur-free fuels on the market as early as 2008 , rather than by 2011 as the Commission is proposing .
In our judgment , this is entirely possible , and it will be a positive influence on the development of cars .
The motor industry will be able to develop better and more advanced engines , which will use less fuel .
We are also proceeding from the assumption , which the Commission also proposes , that this introduction to the market shall start in 2005 .
It is important that Parliament decides that sulphur-free fuels should be available ( by stages ) throughout the area of the Union , with the first steps being made in 2005 .
We are also demanding that this availability be geographically comprehensive .
Previously , the situation has been that the various Member States have proceeded at slightly different rates with regard to this improvement in the quality of fuels .
The Environment Committee proposes that the Member States be offered the possibility of certain transitional periods or derogations when this directive is next revised .
Parliament is proposing that this revision take place a year earlier than was decided by the Commission : we would like the revision to take place during 2005 .
Despite the demands of certain parties , the Environment Committee has decided that in this connection no topics other than sulphur should be involved .
We can then return to the question of fuel quality parameters other than sulphur during the course of the revision in 2005 .
In my opinion , this is a well-justified policy , since the Commission will have time to study this topic in the meantime .
I would also like to stress that a transition must be made to using cleaner fuels also in work machinery , or non-road machines of this type .
This is entirely possible : in eight Member States diesel fuels are already being used in work machinery .
Hopefully , Parliament will decide , tomorrow , that these work machines must begin to use cleaner fuels to the same extent as vehicles on the roads .
The Industry Committee accepts the desirability of moving to zero sulphur in petrol and diesel .
The hotter burn of modern vehicle engines delivers higher efficiency and thereby cuts CO2 emissions .
However , the resulting increase in nitrogen oxide has to be dealt with by catalysts and the virtual elimination of sulphur renders the catalysts effective in dealing with these .
A further benefit is a reduction in the emission of particulates , so the Industry Committee is in favour of the Commission proposal .
A majority vote in the committee demanded a rather faster implementation than the Commission proposed even if some of us were concerned at the Commission 's assertion that this will , in fact , produce a net increase in CO2 emissions .
So please tell us , Commissioner , if you stand by your warning or whether you can accept the quicker implementation requested by both the Environment and the Industry Committees .
We would also point out that the EU standard of 10 parts per million of sulphur contrasts with an American standard of 15 ppm of sulphur .
This will make it difficult for us to import fuels from the USA in an emergency .
We would also suggest that the Commission instigate research into the implications of ultra-fine particle emissions from gasoline diesel injection engines .
The question of fuel quality for non-road and off-road machinery is still outstanding .
We understand that proposals on this matter will be forthcoming in 2002 .
This is surely urgently needed but we urge the Commission to give full consideration to the interests of those in industry and agriculture who operate such machinery .
We give this proposal a fair wind .
Indeed , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy would suggest that the Commission hoists a spinnaker and speeds up its implementation .
Is the Commissioner prepared to accede to this demand ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission undertook a good deal of preliminary work in preparation for this directive . I refer to the Auto-Oil I and Auto-Oil II programmes .
This work resulted in a balanced proposal which is well-documented from a technical point of view . Congratulations are due to the Commission .
I should also like to commend Mrs Hautala , the rapporteur , very warmly on her excellent work .
I agree with her that it is important to make low-sulphur fuels available as soon as possible . This is because technological advances in the automotive industry permit fuel saving , and , more especially , a reduction in polluting emissions .
It is , nonetheless , true that refineries need to consume more energy and emit more polluting gases in order to produce these fuels . Also , the environmental advantages of low-sulphur fuels will not be felt until vehicles currently on the roads are replaced .
It is a matter of balancing out the emissions . We must therefore be pragmatic as regards schedules and adjust the pace of the introduction of the new fuels to the rate of renewal of the existing vehicle population .
Otherwise , we would be forcing users to change their vehicles , but that is not an option .
I do agree that it would be appropriate to reduce the transitional period during which the various fuels could coexist . For the reasons I adduced earlier , however , a degree of flexibility should be afforded to certain countries .
My group therefore proposes that , whilst bringing the date forward , we should retain the option of granting temporary derogations to those Member States who can demonstrate that the balance of air quality will prove negative .
The new fuel ought to be brought in for non-road mobile machinery as well . It should , however , be introduced more gradually in this case , for the same reasons as I outlined in relation to cars .
This is the reasoning behind our Amendment No 40 . I invite you to support it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all cars can take zero-sulphur fuel , whether they are new or old .
They do not have to be converted , there are no parts to be fitted or retrofitted .
That is a big difference from the debate about leaded and unleaded petrol that we had a few years ago .
So any car can take low-sulphur fuel and it has a positive effect , especially with older types of diesel engines .
Zero-sulphur fuel reduces particle emissions from these older vehicles too .
Most of all , however , we need zero-sulphur fuel because we want new technologies to come on to the market , not in order to reduce conventional emissions but to consume less .
We need direct injection diesel engines and direct injection petrol engines that have a wide range of lean burn .
With lean burn , where little fuel is used , the proportion of nitrogen oxide is greater and we therefore need particular technologies to collect nitrogen oxides in the exhaust system .
Look at it which way you will , sulphur prevents that .
To save fuel and reduce CO2 in the transport sector we simply need zero-sulphur fuel as quickly as possible .
I cannot see , either , why a diesel vehicle with an almost negative particulate value - the air behind is cleaner that that drawn in at the front - is allowed on our streets while on the same street there are tractors and excavators giving off particles en masse because of the poor quality fuel .
I believe these vehicles must be required to use clean fuel , too , if we want to cut particle emissions .
Mr President , I want to say a big thank-you to the rapporteur who has produced one of the best reports we have seen for a long time in the fuel and vehicles field .
I agree with most of what the rapporteur has written .
Above all , I want to emphasise the importance of bringing this proposal forward from 2011 to 2008 .
It is very good indeed that we should include fuels for non-road mobile machinery and treat the latter in the same way as all other vehicles .
There is no reason at all to accord special treatment to machinery we do not normally see on the roads , but the Commission ' s proposal would , if anything , postpone the day when anything advanced could be done in this area .
The fact that the rapporteur proposes a thorough review of alternative fuels and also suggests that we can mix in more ethanol than the five per cent permitted under the present ceiling is also very much to be welcomed .
I have a problem .
This concerns the financial incentives .
I understand the rapporteur ' s train of thought , but I think the proposal is wrong in the way we have written it because , according to the Treaty , we can have financial incentives right now .
If we insert this into every directive we now adopt , there is a risk of our creating a horizontal approach whereby we instead restrict the opportunities , as interpreted by the Council , of obtaining financial incentives .
Through what we have written today , we are therefore doing ourselves a disservice .
That is something I want the rapporteur to think about .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am very pleased to be able to address the European Parliament in this debate on behalf of my colleague , Commissioner Wallström .
I am pleased in one sense , because it enables me to return to a former stamping ground .
I used to be an environment minister in the country I know best .
But I am also unhappy I have to be here because the reason is that Commissioner Wallström is not well .
I wish her a speedy recovery , so that she can perform for me on the Balkans on some future occasion , or even on Egypt .
Can I say as a non-official admirer , as it were , that I recognise that the report by Mrs Hautala contributes significantly to a Commission proposal which will , I would judge bring a combination of environmental and economic benefits to our citizens .
The availability of fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 parts per million will remove any remaining technical barriers to the introduction of the most fuel efficient vehicles , which will in turn provide a basis for further reductions in emissions of carbon dioxide .
When used in older vehicles , there would also be substantial reductions in emissions of conventional pollutants leading to better air quality .
Let me turn to the key issues which are raised in the proposed amendments and first of all deal with the timetable in terms which I suspect the honourable lady will find fairly familiar .
Several of the amendments propose that the final date after which all petrol and diesel sold would be subject to a maximum sulphur content of 10 parts per million , should be advanced by three years to the 1 January 2008 with the possibility of derogation for those Member States where that seems to be justified .
The Commission chose the date of 1 January 20ll , with the date for diesel subject to confirmation by 31 December , five years before in 2006 , so that all Member States would enjoy a mix of air quality benefits and some reductions in CO2 emissions resulting from 10 parts per million fuel .
Although the Commission is willing to consider some advancement in the final date from 1 January 2011 , the Commission does not favour Parliament 's approach linked to possible prolongation .
The Commission therefore , cannot accept Amendments Nos 5,11 , 15 , 18 , 23 , 31 , 32 , 38 and 39 .
However , the Commission can accept Amendment No 30 related to advancing the date for the review .
The Commission can also accept Amendments Nos 22 and 46 and in part , Amendments Nos 8 , 17 , 42 , 43 and 45 , relating to defining in greater detail the availability of petrol and diesel with a maximum sulphur content of 10 parts per million fuel , during the introductory period .
Then there is the question of the quality of fuel used in non-road mobile machinery .
A number of other amendments refer to the need to improve and harmonise the quality of fuel used in this machinery across the Community .
The Commission acknowledges that the relative importance of emissions in this sector continues to grow as the environmental performance of engines used in on-road applications improves .
Indeed , it is already clear that the fuel used in this sector in some Member States will have to be improved in the future .
However , as the work on the next stage of emission standards for compression ignition engines used in non-road applications is not finalised , nor is the required fuel quality for such standards yet identified , the Commission cannot at this point accept Amendments Nos 3 , 12 , 26 , 37 and 40 .
Let me turn to some other amendments .
The Commission does not accept Amendments Nos 10 , 19 and 27 on fiscal incentives in view of the legal basis of this proposal , nor given the possibilities available to Member States under other Community legislation to fiscally promote cleaner fuels through tax incentives .
On the question of alternative fuels , and bio-fuels in particular , the Commission is pleased to consider this subject in more depth , as work on this subject evolves .
The Commission can therefore accept Amendments Nos 33 and 48 and in principle , Amendments Nos 14 and 44 .
The Commission can also accept Amendment No 47 in part , relating to other issues to be taken into account in the review and Amendment No 28 , in principle and Amendment No 29 , relating to reporting .
Concerning the remaining amendments , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 36 and 41 .
We can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 16 and 34 .
We can also accept Amendments Nos 4 , 13 and 47 , in part and Amendment No 35 , in principle .
Finally , I would like to say that the Parliament has significantly contributed to improving this proposal .
There is humility for you !
I therefore would like to thank the rapporteur once again , for her efforts , her professionalism and her dedication and I would like to thank the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy for its input , as well .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Egypt
The next item is the joint debate on :
recommendation ( A5-0387 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision on the signature of a Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and the Arab Republic of Egypt [ 8220 / 2001 - COM ( 2001 ) 184 - C5-0381 / 2001 - 2001 / 0092 ( AVC ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Hughes Martin )
and on oral questions :
B5-0531 / 01 by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to the Council , on the conclusion of an association agreement with Egypt ;
B5-0532 / 01 by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to the Council on the conclusion of an association agreement with Egypt .
Pursuant to rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure , I have received a motion from 39 individual Members and from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance calling for Mr Hughes Martin ' s recommendation on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy concerning the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and the Arab Republic of Egypt to be deferred until the January 2002 part-session whilst retaining oral questions to the Council and to the Commission on this matter on the order of business for today .
Mr President , we realise that the situation in Egypt is one of the best , or least bad in that area .
We are not opposing the association agreement ; we are just calling for its adoption to be deferred because association agreements , in particular , contain a very tough human rights clause .
Thus far , the Commission and the Council have never , and I repeat , never , attempted to use cooperation or association agreements to secure respect for human rights .
Ironically , we are being called upon to vote at the precise moment when Egypt is showing a particularly worrying tendency to persecute homosexuals - with a trial in which 26 people were condemned to up to 5 years of solitary confinement - and Catholics .
Well then , at this specific time , I do not feel that taking a few extra weeks to endorse , to ratify these association agreements in order to obtain sufficient guarantees from the Council and the Commission , as well as from the Egyptian authorities , would constitute an act of hostility towards Egypt .
Quite the contrary , I feel that it would be an act of confidence in their , and our , ability to make human rights an essential , key factor in foreign and cooperation policy .
Mr President , often in this House , we adopt many resolutions and we say many fine words .
Now is a unique opportunity to influence the rights of those in Egypt whose human rights are diminished .
We need to influence and improve the way Egypt operates in this field .
We need to defer to give Egypt , a friend of the EU , time for reflection .
Resolutions and words , albeit well-intentioned , seem to achieve little .
Here is an opportunity for action .
September 11 should have taught us that we must apply the same principles to our friends , as to our enemies .
Egypt is a friend .
We must give Egypt the time to reflect , because if we diminish the rights of individuals living in those countries , ultimately , we diminish our own human rights .
I urge the House to support the motion .
Mr President , the demand for an adjournment of this debate and vote on the draft association agreement with Egypt is completely unrealistic , not to say bizarre . It shows a complete lack of understanding of the agreement and of Egypt , a great country and a friend of Europe .
The draft agreement contains 92 articles concerning not only economic and social issues , but also the political dialogue which is important for achieving progress and peace .
Negotiations leading up to the agreement have taken over seven years and have been conducted in difficult circumstances .
Those who are calling for an adjournment have clearly not thought about the consequences , especially given the current state of world affairs .
Need I remind you that , unlike certain other Arab countries , Egypt has never been a breeding ground for terrorists ?
On the contrary , Egypt has paid dearly for terrorism .
It would be irresponsible not to adopt this agreement .
It is unrealistic to expect Egypt to copy our models exactly .
It is unrealistic to expect to be able to impose our law .
It is unrealistic not to take account of the culture , identity and sovereignty of Egypt .
The Member States and we , ourselves , must ratify this agreement .
We owe it to the European Union because this agreement will be an essential factor in the necessary relaunch of the Barcelona process .
We owe it also to Egypt , a great country and a friend of Europe , acknowledged for its role in working for peace in the Middle East .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the request to defer the debate .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased and honoured to have been appointed rapporteur for the association agreement between the European Union , the Member States and the Arab Republic of Egypt , given the importance of this agreement for both the European Union and Egypt .
I believe it is a balanced agreement which treats both parties in an equitable way .
The Arab Republic of Egypt is the largest Arab country in terms of population : it has over 66 million inhabitants .
It occupies a pivotal position in terms of geopolitical affairs and plays a leading role .
Egypt was the first Arab country to establish diplomatic relations with Israel . Since that time , it has continued to have a moderating influence in the region .
Relations between the European Union and Egypt go back a long way . The first cooperation agreement was signed in 1972 .
We must remember that the European Union is Egypt ' s most important trading partner .
Egypt also receives significant funds from cooperation with the European Union : it received EUR 686 million through the MEDA I programme between 1996 and 1999 .
The report we are discussing today has been called a new generation report . Its fundamental objective is to help achieve peace and security in the region .
It also aims to provide an impetus for the development of commercial and economic relations between Egypt and the European Union , and between Egypt and its Mediterranean partners . The draft agreement is based on respect for democratic principles and fundamental human rights .
The main objectives of the agreement are as follows . Firstly , the establishment of an area of free trade between Egypt and the European Union .
This will entail the abolition of customs tariffs on industrial products within a period of 12 to 15 years after the agreement enters into force . Secondly , regional cooperation , including the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean area of free trade .
Thirdly , it establishes the basis for economic and financial cooperation in many areas , including the fight against terrorism . Lastly , an in-depth dialogue on social issues and cooperation as regards the prevention and control of illegal immigration .
I am delighted that this proposal has received the unanimous support of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
This shows the interest the report has generated . It has also allowed people to express their concerns and fears ; some of these are well founded , others less so .
I would like to outline two of the concerns put forward .
Firstly , there is the problem of the Coptic minority .
Coptic Christians represent more than 10 % of the population .
It appears that , while they are not systematically persecuted , they do not have the same rights and responsibilities as their fellow Muslim citizens .
It is also clear that extremists are to blame for some of the problems as they do everything they can to exacerbate tension between the two religious groups .
However , some progress has been made , as confirmed by the Coptic religious leaders .
One example is the recent construction of new monasteries and churches , despite the red tape involved .
Secondly , certain individuals and groups have been brought before the courts . This has been highly publicised in Egypt and elsewhere .
We need to look beyond the initial verdicts .
The local court judges are sometimes influenced by fundamentalist teaching and hand down harsh sentences .
But , in some instances , higher courts overturn these initial verdicts and act more leniently , in accordance with democratic principles .
I am aware that a lot of work still remains to be done on the issues of fairness and justice , but clearly some progress has been made .
The leaders from the opposition and from NGOs , who I have met with in the country , confirm this .
The report has raised a number of more general concerns .
I share some of these , but I must caution those who very willingly step forward to preach to us and to give eulogies on human rights . They should be aware of the need to put their own house in order .
It is all too easy for the Egyptians to remind us of our own deficiencies , and they are right to do this . We are open to criticism for having been so lax on a number of issues , particularly as regards the fight against terrorism .
We have been reminded that our Member States provide terrorists and murderers , including some Egyptians , with a safe haven where they can live and act with impunity .
We must be on our guard .
Many Egyptians , including some in important positions , do not wish this agreement to be ratified .
They insist that the agreement strongly favours the European Union , especially as regards economic issues , and that it will allow random intrusions into the internal affairs of the State .
The recent letter from the People ' s Assembly on this matter is inopportune but significant .
Given these circumstances , I hope that the great majority of Parliament will vote in favour of ratifying this agreement .
It is to be hoped that the agreement will strengthen the role of the European Union in this region and will contribute towards achieving peace .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 14 July this year , along with some of my colleagues from the Group of the Europe People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I met the Egyptian Foreign Minister and representatives of the People ' s Assembly of the Arab Republic of Egypt in Cairo . This meeting was arranged following the completion of our fact-finding mission , which took us from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and Ramallah .
Our mission enabled us to gain a much better understanding of the gravity of the situation . It also made us more aware of the way in which the European Union is acting as a mediator in the region , thanks to the unstinting efforts of Ambassador Moratinos and his team .
The importance of his work cannot be stressed highly enough .
We decided to hold this meeting because we appreciate the importance of the role Egypt has played in this part of the Middle East . We recall the courageous decisions taken by President Sadat and how he paid for them with his life .
At present , President Moubarak is acting with equal courage and risking his own life .
Both men have worked steadfastly in helping to get the peace process moving .
Sadly , the latter is , today , at a standstill . We were struck by the pertinence of how our Egyptian friends assessed the situation ; and this came home to me at the time of the dreadful events of 11 September .
Three weeks ago , I was given the honour of chairing the committee drafting the final declaration of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum . This was an extraordinary session convened by the President of the European Parliament in order to tackle the new crisis and to reinvigorate the Barcelona process .
It was thanks to the contribution of the Egyptian representative , amongst others , that this forum was able to adopt a statement . One of the things this document calls for is for the relaunch of the dialogue between the peoples living on both shores of the Mediterranean on our different cultures and religions .
This would help us to gain a better understanding of each other .
The dialogue should not be pursued merely in a spirit of tolerance .
We tolerate only those things we find difficult to accept .
Rather , it should take place in an atmosphere of genuine mutual respect in which we accept and benefit from our differences .
This is why I particularly welcome the excellent report by Mr Hughes Martin .
It is indeed in the interest of both the European Union and of Egypt to formalise their association by signing the agreement the Council has put to us . It would be completely irresponsible for the European Parliament to delay the signing in any way .
I would like those Members who are overzealous in defending human rights to consider the impression the West , in general , and the European Union , in particular , give when they preach , sometimes opportunely and sometimes inopportunely , to their partner Arab and African countries .
They should realise that they sometimes have just as much to learn about the issue as they have to teach .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe the rapporteur has done a very good piece of work with this report and we can be pleased that after so many years of negotiations Egypt has at last agreed with us to sign this report .
A short time ago we voted for a deferral of this report and I think anyone who really wants to address the question of human rights in Egypt must vote in favour of this report .
This report gives us , the European Union , the ability to take up this matter because we have this human rights clause in Article 2 .
Anyone who is really interested in peace in the Middle East must support this report in any case because it strengthens a country that has been fighting for peace in the Middle East for years .
I cannot understand why honourable Members who voted unanimously in favour of this report a week ago in committee now have reservations .
Nothing in Egypt has changed , I do not know where anything has changed that would make anybody take a different stance now than the one we took in committee .
I would like to raise one final point , that is the letter that the Speaker of the Egyptian Parliament has written to us .
I would like to say that it is unusual to try to influence a decision in this way , an absolutely independent decision of a parliament , and for this reason I shall tomorrow be tabling an oral amendment on behalf of my group , as already arranged with the rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , clearly , the signature of any agreement constitutes an important milestone in the Barcelona process .
This is particularly so if the agreement is being signed with Egypt , which is such an important country . We know and believe it can play a leading role in North-South and South-South dialogue , and be in the forefront of economic and commercial development .
As General Morillon stated , we also believe that Egypt is ready to take the lead in all issues relating to cultural dialogue and civil society , not just in economic and financial matters , and that it is in a position to do so .
Furthermore , Egypt ' s key role as a mediator in the Arab-Israeli conflict is patently obvious .
For all these reasons , substantiated cases of infringement of fundamental human rights and freedoms , such as those referred to today , give cause for particular concern .
Article 2 cannot therefore be simply a political clause . It has to have tangible value .
It is important for those countries to progress along the road to democracy . We believe the Egyptian government should take this fully into account .
I should like to make one point clear to Mr Sakellariou .
Nobody has raised the possibility of voting against this report .
The previous vote was not for or against this report .
As I see it , sounding a note of caution simply amounts to giving Egypt the importance due to it as a country . It does not mean penalising it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the proposed signing of an association agreement between the European Union and Egypt , which will help to strengthen the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
The European Union attaches great importance to the chapter on fundamental rights and freedoms .
We should only sign this agreement on condition that these rights will be respected strictly .
Since 1981 , Egypt has been subject to an emergency law granting wide powers to the authorities , to the detriment of human rights and democratic freedoms .
Today , these so-called freedoms are regulated and are subject to strict control by the authorities .
The valuable work undertaken by NGOs has alerted us to this matter .
We call upon the government of Egypt to repeal this emergency law , so men and women can enjoy all their rights . This would mean that people would not be criminalised on the grounds of their sexual orientation , their religion or their opinion .
We will not remain silent on the decision to take legal action against homosexuals , which constitutes a violation of human rights which goes completely against the values we hold dear .
We must not interfere , we must not claim that our values are superior , we must not preach but we must denounce and condemn .
Human rights are universal and transcend all borders .
Mr President , the fact that the European Community and its Member States are entering into an association agreement with Egypt evokes very mixed feelings in me .
My reservations mainly revolve around the unequal and unsafe social position which Egyptian Christians find themselves in .
The oral question to the Commission underlines this anxiety .
How does it intend to persuade the Egyptian authorities to improve the situation of the Coptic community ?
Bear in mind that at least six million Egyptian citizens are involved .
It is therefore extremely regrettable that precisely the violation of their fundamental constitutional rights is not explicitly mentioned in the motion for a resolution .
By way of illustration , I should like to quote three serious instances of abuse with which Egyptian Christians are weighed down : not only do the Egyptian authorities veto the construction of new churches , they also take part in the criminal persecution of Muslims who want to convert to Christianity .
The latter is done under the veiled indictment of subversive activities .
Thirdly , there is legal uncertainty among the Christian community in Upper Egypt : it is exposed to downright religious persecution by Muslim extremists .
Such a vacuum in authority is not acceptable and cannot be solved by combining the arrest of Islamists with the random rounding up of a number of indigenous Christians .
I would therefore urge the Commission , the Council and the Member State governments to put these abuses on the agenda during the consultation with the Egyptian authorities .
They are duty-bound to do this on account of the content of this association agreement .
The positive element , namely that since 11 September , the Coptic churches have been having talks with the Egyptian authority , reinforces this essential provision .
Mr President , I , too , want to make it clear to the rapporteur that , here , nobody has proposed rejecting the association agreement with Egypt .
We are not trying to play the high-handed human rights idealists who are against realpolitik and interests .
Quite the opposite , rapporteur : I feel that we are just a little more realistic in our approach .
Given that seven years have already passed , as you have said , deciding to wait maybe another month or two to give ourselves the time to find a response to specific issues before implementing an agreement which , I am glad to say , is irreversible on many points , is , I feel , being realistic .
Attempting to pursue the issue of human rights with empty , worthless declarations of which we have made thousands in the past and will make thousands more in the future , depriving ourselves of a practical pressure lever at precisely the moment when we could be getting down to the nitty-gritty is , I feel , being unrealistic .
What we requested is that , for once , the European Commission and the European Union should view the issue of human rights as something which needs to be given practical expression in relationships where we have bargaining power with other countries too .
We know that there is a human rights clause , we know that this clause could , theoretically , encourage respect for human rights in Egypt and maybe even increase comprehension of a country such as Egypt in Europe .
The problem is that the upholding of human rights , the possibility of making a direct impact , of putting tangible pressure on the human rights situation , is a policy which is not part of the European Commission ' s strategy . It is a policy which has no practical expression whatsoever .
We have endeavoured , in our proposal , to be just that little bit more realistic than you . You do not have time to wait ?
No problem . I am all for the association agreements , I am all for free trade and I am all for Egypt !
However , it will not be easy to further the cause of human rights .
Mr President , first of all , should we hurry to forge closer bonds with Egypt , assuming that unanswered questions and miscarriages of justice will fade away and resolve themselves , before we have stopped and thoroughly examined what exactly is at the heart of the State i.e. the way it treats its citizens : the cases of fundamental human rights abuse , the 52 men put on trial for their homosexuality , for Egypt wanting " to protect order and its national values " , the conviction of 23 of these men , the repression of Christians by Islamic extremists which is allowed to go unpunished , the case of Dr Saad El-din Ibrahim and other intellectuals imprisoned for having used funds that we , the European Union , gave them .
Moreover , correspondence with the President of the People 's Assembly of Egypt and the Ambassador in Brussels only seemed to underline Egypt 's complacency on this matter and eagerness to fudge and gloss over the issues .
Does Parliament condone violations of the right to a fair trial , freedom of expression , and freedom of association whether it be social , political , religious or sexual ?
For that is what we are saying if we gloss over the human rights issue .
We must send out an unequivocal message that such blatant abuses of fundamental human rights cannot , must not , and will not be tolerated by the European Community .
As this is a joint debate I propose to deal with both the report and the oral question together and I should like to say , at the outset , that we very much appreciate Egypt 's position as a key regional power .
Egypt , as a number of speakers have said , plays a significant role in supporting the Middle East peace process and the point that the honourable and gallant gentleman General Morillon made about the sacrifices that some have made in supporting that peace process is entirely correct .
We are also delighted that Egypt supports a more substantial involvement by the European Union in the Middle East peace process .
It is also very active in other regional issues , notably in promoting a resolution of the civil war in the Sudan , in promoting regional free trade through initiatives like the Agadir process which also involves , of course , Morocco , Tunisia , Jordan and COMESA .
We are also grateful for what Egypt does in helping to consolidate the support of the Arab world for the campaign against international terrorism .
I can only say I am relieved at the way the vote turned out a few moments ago given that we pressed Egypt so hard to conclude the negotiations on the association agreement .
I can remember standing in this Chamber and being asked what I was doing to press the Egyptians to come to an early agreement for the negotiations .
So it has been a rather unusual experience for me today to find a deferral being urged .
The association agreement was a long time in negotiation but its signature marked an important new stage in Europe 's relations with Egypt .
The 1978 Cooperation Agreement served its purpose very well but the European Union and Egypt have changed beyond recognition and a new agreement was necessary to underpin what has become an altogether more mature relationship .
The Agreement responds to the enormous interests , both economic and political , both bilateral and regional , that the European Union and Egypt have in common and the result of the negotiations is good for both sides .
It is good for Egypt because it will help the Egyptian economy to face the challenge of globalisation more successfully and more competitively and to carry through reforms within the context of a privileged economic and political relationship with us .
It is good for the European Union because it will give a new depth and quality to our relationship with this key political and economic partner and , in addition , the agreement is good for the Barcelona process .
With this agreement the infrastructure of association agreements which underpins it is now largely in place and I hope that we will make good progress shortly with Algeria , the Lebanon and Syria .
There is now a critical mass of agreements to allow other Barcelona initiatives to flourish .
Let me just refer again to the free trade area which is proposed between the countries which signed that agreement in Agadir .
We must now look beyond the negotiation of the agreement into the need for prompt ratification and adequate implementation and I want to underline the point about ratification .
It is more than a shame that the agreement with Jordan , for example , has still not been ratified by all the Member States and we need to encourage people to get on with the ratification of these agreements rather more rapidly .
We obviously welcome the excellent report which has been drafted by the honourable gentleman Mr Martin .
It is a very professional piece of work and we are grateful for that and the support for the rapid ratification of the agreement by Parliament .
It is in everyone 's interest that all the provisions of the agreement enter into force very quickly and I hope that the ratification process in this case proceeds expeditiously .
This will be an important procedural step but also a very positive and encouraging signal to the Egyptian and Member State parliaments .
Certainly , the procedural delays in the ratification process by some Member States are often incomprehensible to our Mediterranean partners .
I have noted the concern of certain parliamentarians that our agreements with Mediterranean partners give insufficient stress to interparliamentary relations .
Existing practice indicates that Parliament will not hesitate to develop increasing close contacts with its Egyptian counterpart but , in addition , let me stress that interparliamentary relations are well covered in the relevant texts .
I have also noticed the European Parliament 's concern , which I understand , at the state of civil , religious and political rights in Egypt .
I can assure Members that I have not hesitated to discuss these matters regularly with my Egyptian counterparts .
All aspects of the European Union 's relationship with Egypt , including the respect for human rights , are continuously monitored by the Commission which is vigilant on human rights issues irrespective of the agreement .
The provisions of the new agreement provide both sides with important safeguards and a valuable additional forum .
When the agreement comes into force we will be able to raise , and hopefully resolve , any major issue at the appropriate association council or committee .
I just make the point - very gently to honourable ladies and gentlemen who might not agree with this point and who came in a flurry of enthusiasm earlier to vote against going ahead with the ratification of this agreement - that this agreement gives us a much better forum for discussing with the Egyptians exactly the issues which they raised .
Individual cases including alleged restrictions on the Coptic community are taken up from time to time by the Commission .
We collaborate closely with Member States in taking positions on these issues and I hope that Parliament will have noted that we never hesitate to make our views known to the Egyptian authorities .
I note that , as far as the inordinately light sentences on those accused of instigating murderous riots against Christians in Upper Egypt were concerned , the Court of Appeal in Egypt has ordered a retrial .
Most recently , the Commission delegation has explained the contractual basis of grants to non-governmental organisations in the context of the Saad Ibrahim appeal which I have discussed in the past with my Egyptian counterparts .
We have joined with Member States in expressing our concern to the Egyptian authorities at the outcome of the recent trial of homosexuals and I understand the concerns that have been expressed by honourable Members about their case .
But we should also note encouraging developments , the new social legislation on the rights of women , the supervision of elections by the courts and the important rulings by courts on the constitutionality of contentious legislation .
The need for good and fluid European relations with Egypt can seldom have been more important .
In the last few weeks everybody has been talking about the vital importance of trying to demonstrate to the Arab and Islamic world that the campaign against terrorism is not the West setting Europe and the United States against the world of Islam .
Everybody sensible has made the point that it is , at the least , unwise for us to lecture the Islamic world as though we had a monopoly of virtue .
Everybody has talked about the importance of deepening the dialogue with the Islamic world .
We have an agreement which gives us the chance of putting in place a foundation stone for our relations with the countries around the Mediterranean .
The idea that you could have a serious policy on the Mediterranean without having an agreement with Egypt is " for the birds " , as the Americans say .
We obviously have to take up human rights ...
( Interruption by Mr Cashman )
I respect the honourable Member but think he will do me the credit of knowing that I do not have to take lectures on human rights from anybody .
We want to pursue our dialogue on human rights with Egypt and other countries in the Barcelona process but it would be bizarre to argue that Europe should have a serious constructive policy in the Mediterranean and that it should have a deep and profound dialogue with Islamic countries and at the same time reject an association agreement with Egypt .
So I hope that Parliament will continue to take its cue from the excellent report widely commended by all Members prepared by Mr Martin .
I hope that Parliament will continue to be vigilant about civil , political and social rights in Egypt but will also continue to work hard for a stronger relationship between the European Union and the people in government in Egypt .
Mr President , I would just like to point out to Commissioner Patten that we already have an association agreement with an Arab country . We have had one with Tunisia for two years now and things are going from bad to worse !
Need I say more ?
That was not on a point of order !
I would like to inform Commissioner Patten that it was not the intention of the House this evening to reject the association agreement but to defer it .
As to lectures in human rights , we all - regardless of our record - need to be lectured on human rights .
The debate is closed .
In accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received a motion for a resolution .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Aid for reconstruction
The next item is the joint debate on the following four reports :
A5-0386 / 2001 by Mr Lagendijk on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2666 / 2000 on assistance for Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1628 / 96 and amending Regulations ( EEC ) No 3906 / 89 and ( EEC ) No 1360 / 90 and Decisions 97 / 256 / EEC and 1999 / 311 / EC , and Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2667 / 2000 on the European Agency for Reconstruction [ COM ( 2001 ) 551 - C5-0477 / 2001 - 2001 / 0223 ( CNS ) ] ;




A5-0385 / 2001 by Mr Färm on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the proposal and on the amended proposal for a Council decision amending Council Decision 1999 / 733 / EC providing supplementary macro-financial assistance to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia [ COM ( 2001 ) 519 - C5-0486 / 2001 + COM ( 2001 ) 613 - 2001 / 0213 ( CNS ) ] ;
A5-0411 / 2001 by Mr Färm on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the proposal for a Council decision on amending Council Decision 1999 / 325 / EC providing macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina [ COM ( 2001 ) 610 - C5-0558 / 2001 - 2001 / 0250 ( CNS ) ] ;
A5-0410 / 2001 by Mr Färm on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the proposal for a Council decision on amending Decision 2001 / 549 / EC of 16 July 2001 providing macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [ COM ( 2001 ) 618 - C5-0559 / 2001 - 2001 / 0258 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the answer to the question of whether we can support the Commission proposal to extend the activities of the European Agency for Reconstruction to include Macedonia is , in fact , quite simple .
When one or two months ago the Commission presented its proposal for the first time , there was some doubt .
This doubt had nothing to do with the appreciation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for the European Agency for Reconstruction .
Indeed , this Agency has had very positive feedback right from the outset .
This positive assessment was confirmed recently by a very complimentary remark by the Court of Auditors about the prompt and effective way in which the Agency has carried out its work to date .
Our initial doubts were , therefore , quite unrelated to the Agency , but stemmed from the fact that the Commission itself appeared unsure as to which direction to take with regard to assistance in the Balkans .
Should it run its entire operation via the Agency for Reconstruction , first in Yugoslavia , subsequently in Macedonia and soon , perhaps , in Albania and Croatia , or should the Commission adhere to its original policy to devolve its powers to the delegations in the various countries ?
We have , meanwhile , had the opportunity of talking to the Commissioner about this .
He promised that the Commission will soon , early next year , come up with an opinion about the strategy to be pursued with regard to assistance in the Balkans and that it will specify more clearly the role of the Agency for Reconstruction and the role which the devolved delegations must play .
We await this report with interest .
At the moment , and this removes the last lingering doubt , there is no alternative but to accord the Agency an important role if we want to grant assistance in Macedonia promptly and efficiently .
I believe that , as far as this aspect is concerned , we are in complete agreement with the Commission .
Why is it so important to grant aid in Macedonia so quickly now and to do this , therefore , via the Agency ?
I have pointed out the great significance of the developments in Macedonia for the European Union many times , both earlier in this debate and at other occasions , notably after 11 September .
Macedonia ' s importance is many times greater than that of a relatively small country in the Balkans .
Indeed , it is the first time that the European Union has managed , in talking with one voice , to do a reasonable job in the Balkans , in Macedonia , something which we would have liked to have seen a long time ago .
It is the greatest success story of European foreign policy so far .
Talk with one voice and do what you do best : that is , after all , what the Commission and the European Union have been doing to date in Macedonia .
There have been talks and consultations , compromises have been reached , financial aid pledged and limited military aid promised .
In my view , that is the best that the European Union has to offer at the moment , and it is important for this effort , namely having prevented a civil war from breaking out a few months ago , to be followed up by sufficient financial aid and sufficient reconstruction equipment .
Hence , a positive opinion , from Parliament too , about involving the Agency .
If the situation changes for the worse in Macedonia , then I fear that that will rub off in the Balkans as a whole .
Hence , once again , my urgent plea for involving the Agency , but also for mapping out a sound strategy .
It is a well-known fact - fellow MEPs , Swoboda and Pack , and the Commissioner , himself , have visited the region many times - that tension in Macedonia is currently very high .
Under pressure from the European Parliament , the European Union and many international bodies , the Macedonian Parliament has , at long last , ratified the constitution .
That has led , and is still leading , to major tension .
Europe can do a great deal to clear that tension , and one of the ways is to translate words into deeds swiftly .
That is where the Agency comes in .
In short , prompt aid in Macedonia is needed , both materially and politically .
At the moment , we need the Agency there for reconstruction .
I would urge the Commission to clarify its strategy in the Balkans soon , and also to specify the role which the Agency has to play and the role which other sections of the Commission will need to play in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , I have probably set some kind of record here today , for I have been given a whole 15 minutes in which to speak , because I am rapporteur for three different , but quite similar , matters .
Perhaps I shall not need all this time .
It now finally looks as if developments in the Balkans are heading in the right direction and in a more stable way .
We finally have something resembling peace , albeit under armed supervision , with continued violence between ethnic groups and still a long way to go before there is peaceful co-existence .
It has been possible to successfully implement the disarmament of the armed groups in Macedonia , especially following important efforts by the EU .
We can therefore feel a certain optimism , even though history has all too often shown us that peace is fragile , especially in the Western Balkans .
Democracy , too , is making progress .
Last autumn , the Milosevic dictatorship collapsed through the Yugoslav people ' s decisive action .
In Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , albeit with a number of problems in the last case , the democratic powers have made progress .
Last week ' s election in Kosovo was conducted impeccably .
It felt like a privilege to be present at this historic event as an observer from the European Parliament .
A lot remains to be done , however .
There is a great need for purely physical reconstruction , but also for the development of the economy and infrastructure that were allowed to fall into decay during the nineties .
The most important thing of all is , perhaps , to bring about a genuine process of reconciliation through which the ethnic cleansing that has taken place in large parts of these countries can be got to grips with and solutions found to the serious outstanding problems involving refugees and displaced persons .
It is against this background that those of us in the Committee on Budgets have adopted three reports on temporarily extended , and also , in certain cases , increased , macro-financial assistance to Macedonia , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Yugoslavia .
First of all , a word about Macedonia .
In November 1999 , the Council decided to give Macedonia macro-financial assistance to the tune of EUR 80 million , part of it in the form of a loan , together with a contribution of up to EUR 30 million .
The decision was taken against the background of the war in Kosovo because this crisis gave rise to large costs in Macedonia , to which hundreds of thousands of people fled .
The aim has been to facilitate the implementation of structural reforms and to offset the consequences of the economic disruption caused by the Kosovo conflict .
The aid , of course , has conditions attached to it , mainly to the effect that the programme of economic and public administration reforms continue and that the agreements reached in Ohrid earlier this autumn be implemented .
As is well known , Macedonia has suffered as a result of this internal armed conflict .
The conflict has , of course , also given rise to further problems and caused delays in making the assistance available .
It has only been possible to pay out a portion of it within the relevant time-frame .
That is why we now want to extend the legal basis for these forms of assistance .
That is something we have no problems with at all .
However , the Commission also proposes an increased financial contribution because there are beginning to be problems with Macedonia , where developments have otherwise been positive .
The problems have been exacerbated by the conflict .
That is why the Commission is now proposing increasing the contribution by EUR 18 million .
Against this political background , the Committee on Budgets believes the Commission ' s proposal to be well considered .
Nonetheless , we have tabled a number of amendments in order to emphasise that this aid must be administered by the Commission , but in close consultation with both the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The background to this is that we see it as important to monitor not only the purely financial management of the assistance but also more political aspects with a view , for example , to making sure that no part of the assistance is used to equip the Macedonian army .
We would also emphasise that this type of aid , that is to say , contributions in combination with a long-term ' soft ' loan , must be seen as exceptional and not allowed to constitute the norm for the future .
We then have the matter of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In May 1999 , we decided to provide the assistance in question , comprising a loan of EUR 20 million and contributions of up to EUR 40 million .
This was , of course , also done to ease the economic situation and to support reconstruction in Bosnia and was obviously conditional upon the economy and the institutions of democracy continuing to be reformed .
We have had a number of problems with implementation , as a result of which assistance amounting to EUR 15 million remains to be paid out .
If we are to be able to make this available , we need , then , to extend the legal basis .
In this assessment , we must also take account of the fact that the elections held in Bosnia in November 2000 led to everything ' s having taken an extremely long time , what with negotiations and the High Representative ' s having had to intervene etc .
All this has delayed both the reforms and the legislative work and , thus , also delayed our making the aid available .
Economic growth has not been particularly good .
These forms of assistance are , therefore , genuinely needed , which is why those of us in the Committee on Budgets support the Commission ' s proposal to modify this Council regulation so that we can extend the period up to the end of 2002 .
When it comes to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , the same conditions must , nonetheless , apply in this case , as apply in the case of Macedonia .
Finally , something about the third matter , Yugoslavia .
We decided , as late as this year , to provide this macro-financial assistance of up to EUR 300 million in the form , in this case too , both of loans and of contributions .
The primary aim is , of course , to provide financial , social and political support for a stable Yugoslavia , but it is also , and this is something I want to emphasise , to promote Yugoslavia ' s role as a stabilising factor throughout the region .
This year , it has emerged that the economic situation has , perhaps , been a little more strained than we had previously believed .
In particular , the privatisation process has taken longer , which has also led to the State budget ' s losing income from the privatisation .
We also know it has been a tough process finding a solution to the problem of Yugoslavia ' s relationship with the World Bank , the IMF etc .
If no money is provided , there is obviously a great risk of the economic situation ' s deteriorating further .
We should , therefore , bear in mind that Yugoslavia now already has major debts amounting to more than 140 per cent of GDP .
That is why the Commission wants these new amounts , constituting an increase of EUR 45 million , to be in the form of contributions .
The Committee on Budgets says OK , but emphasises that these must , nonetheless , be seen as part of the EU ' s multiannual programme and that they constitute exceptional assistance .
We have also arranged for the assistance to be paid out , provided that Yugoslavia continues to develop into a constitutional state and that the country continues to cooperate closely with the International Court of Justice in The Hague .
In all these three cases , we also believe that , in order to produce new resources during the current budget year , ordinary budget procedure must be followed .
This can only be done by means of a parallel process involving a transfer of funds from other budget items , something which requires a decision on the part of the budgetary authority .
Mr President , even before the last part-session in Strasbourg , the Commission wanted these matters to be dealt with as a matter of urgency .
I said at that time that , in my view , there were nonetheless two matters that needed to be cleared up first .
So that we , too , could see where the funds were to be taken from , we wanted , first of all , to see the Commission ' s practical proposals for transferring funds in such a way as to produce the necessary EUR 45 or 18 million .
These proposals for transferring funds are now on the table and have been discussed in the Committee on Budgets .
Secondly , we wanted to sort out the conciliation with the Council concerning next year ' s budget so as to be able to guarantee that this aid can be combined with a continued high level of other aid for the Western Balkans and for reconstruction etc .
We have now reached an agreement with the Council whereby this increased macro-financial assistance is to be seen as front loading for next year ' s budget appropriation .
At the same time , we jointly accept the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget for the Balkans , something which I also hope will be the result of the second budget reading during the next part-session in Strasbourg .
Against that background , we therefore support these three proposals .
Allow me , finally , just to say a few words about my and the Committee on Budgets ' opinion on Mr Lagendijk ' s report on the European Agency for Reconstruction .
I have , myself , on quite a few occasions had the opportunity to see the Agency ' s work at first hand , and I view it as a model of efficiency , as does Mr Lagendijk too .
Moreover , this view is also confirmed by the Court of Auditors ' report .
I believe there are a number of specific reasons for this success . Among these are the fact that , in accordance with Parliament ' s demands , a more decentralised model for decision-making and the employment of EU aid has been implemented and that it has been possible to avoid the unwieldy and duplicated decision-making that we formerly had under the traditional committee system .
In spite of these excellent results from the Agency , the Committee on Budgets nonetheless wishes , in its amendments , to emphasise the importance of correct budget principles for distinguishing between administrative and operational expenditure with a view , for example , to our being able to make a proper , skilled assessment of the Agency ' s activities .
Moreover , we wish to introduce a reference to Article 274 of the Treaty , in order to emphasise clearly that this is aid which the Commission and not , in the first place , the Member States have the responsibility for implementing .
Mr President , Mr Lagendijk has produced a very good report .
I would also like to thank Mr Färm sincerely and on behalf of my group , of which I seem to be the only representative here today , thank them both and in general terms agree with everything they have said .
I would also like to highlight a couple of things .
I think this rapid reaction facility , this way of getting money to crisis regions quickly , efficiently and without bureaucracy , really is a good instrument .
In Yugoslavia in particular , as the Commissioner has seen , they were grateful for this really quick and efficient assistance that was only possible because we had this instrument and did not have to use the usual longwinded procedure .
I also believe it really must be extended to Macedonia , because something simply must be done to help the difficult political processes .
The process is far from being completed .
Laws need to be implemented so that the Albanian citizens can see that they really have gained something from these constitutional changes .
The region ' s Macedonian inhabitants must see that if they behave as is expected in democracies , they will also be rewarded with an improvement in their everyday lives .
We agree to everything , we also agree to the reservations Mr Färm has mentioned .
But I think the Commission knows all this very well and I am sure it respects it .
This brings me back again to the establishment of the agency in Macedonia .
In view of the pathetic results of implementation and of spending the money earmarked for this country since 1996 , I am of the opinion that it is high time we sought to remedy the situation .
Of course , the Macedonian government lacked the will , and we who were down there know they were simply not in a position to do anything .
Whether they were unable or unwilling I would not like to say now , but there was a lack of will on the part of the government , and , in the end , the delegation on the spot was unable to give the government the help it needed .
The necessary technical assistance that the Commission should have given to this government was lacking .
I think it is therefore good that the Commissioner has now thought about measures that can be taken to speed things up .
It will be good for the agency , which is doing excellent work in Kosovo - I expect we shall see that in Belgrade next weekend .
We want it to be possible for them finally to do what the Macedonians are all waiting for and I have nothing against it being used .
However , Commissioner , my problem is that there is so much tinkering around going on now .
Now it is being done in Macedonia .
I do not know when you will be so effective again next time .
I would very much like to see a structure for this work in the region , and I would like to hear from you this evening whether you are willing or able to produce a scheme that will either , deconcentrate the delegations and enable them to do this work , or that you intend to deploy such agencies in the whole region .
I believe you owe us an answer on that this evening and I hope that this evening you will tell us how soon you , in the Commission , believe you can lay such a scheme before us .
On this condition , I am prepared to give you my unreserved best wishes for setting up this agency because we have all had excellent experience .
I do not want to criticise the delegation on the ground here .
The delegation on the ground was not able to do what we expected of it because it was not deconcentrated , whatever that means , and it could not give the technical assistance .
In that regard , I really am looking for a longer term scheme from you so that all the countries down there can feel they are being treated , more or less , equally and I think that is also important if we are to avoid creating rivalries between them .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs sincerely for their work .
Mr Lagendijk has already indicated that the situation in the Balkans today is quite different from that six months or a year ago , especially if we think of the elections in Kosovo and the settlement in Macedonia .
But that must not mislead us into saying everything has been done , the matter has been dealt with , we can just hang around and everything will turn out well .
I also think the step the Commission proposes is correct and justified .
But , Commissioner , we have already said , if it is really so and I believe it is , that there are serious differences between the work of the agency and the work of the delegations , and somewhere in between them , as a sort of happy medium , the decentralised delegations , then we must draw general conclusions from that , not because , in the one case , they are good people and , in the other , bad people .
It must surely also have something to do with the structure of the decision-making processes .
In this respect I am sure you will not be able to give us an answer today .
I want to ask you , however , one more thing , namely that , when restructuring the Commission ' s work and policy in the Balkans ; you will really use , to the full , the imagination that I am sure you , Commissioner , and many of your colleagues possess .
For my part , I believe that the agency , which is not only a reconstruction agency but already a development agency , ought to play a greater part over all .
I admit it can also be done jointly with delegations that are given additional tasks to do with decentralisation .
But I do think that early next year , at the start of next year , we ought to suggest what the Commission ' s assistance , support and development structure for the Balkans should look like for the next ten years , for it will take , at least , ten years to achieve the take off we all want for the Balkans and that we need for peace and stability in Europe .
Mr President , I guess it would be a slight exaggeration to say that the Chamber was packed with knowledgeable friends of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , but those who are here are eminently qualified to address this subject because I think that the honourable Members who certainly know most about Macedonia and who are , in some respects , most knowledgeable about Southeast Europe as a whole are in this Chamber .
I am extremely grateful for the contribution which honourable Members have made to what has been a pretty successful development of Europe 's strategy in the Balkans and I am particularly grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Lagendijk , for his report .
Perhaps I can just re-establish the context in which we are having this debate .
Honourable Members know that Macedonia was the first country with which we negotiated a stabilisation and association agreement .
While we were negotiating that agreement , during each of my visits to FYROM - and I have visited Skopje probably more than any other capital city in the world in the last couple of years - we were regularly on the receiving end of grumbles about the lack of speed of our delivery of development assistance .
When the crisis came this year , we worked very hard and I pay a particular vote of gratitude to the work of my colleague , Javier Solana .
We worked extremely hard to try to get FYROM back on the rails .
We were delighted by the Lake Ohrid Agreement and said straightaway that we would do everything we could to help the implementation of the framework agreement in Lake Ohrid .
My concern , as I have explained to honourable Members , was that unless we made a special effort , we would not deliver that assistance quickly enough .
I would have very much liked to have gone through the process of deconcentration rather more rapidly to FYROM and delivered our assistance in a conventional way , but that was to run a risk .
The most certain way in which we could deliver the assistance was by extending the work of the Reconstruction Agency and that is why we are all here this evening .
I know that some honourable Members were understandably a little confused about our management strategy .
With the benefit of hindsight , with which we are all much wiser , it would perhaps have been sensible if I had consulted honourable Members earlier .
But I hope that we have managed to convince honourable Members that there was no intention on our part to downgrade our relationship with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I saw President Trikovsky earlier this week .
He was en route to a prayer breakfast - I am afraid I was not - and I think that we have managed to convince him and the authorities in Skopje now that we are just trying to deliver assistance as rapidly as possible and we have already been delivering assistance in the sectors electricity and housing , etc .
It is understandable that honourable Members should think that there is some confusion in our management strategy for the whole region , But I do not feel that I am being inconsistent in arguing , on the one hand , that we have to work through Europe Aid , through deconcentration , which has now begun and which we must now push as rapidly as possible , while on the other hand , saying there may be odd occasions , particularly crises , which require different sort of arrangements .
We are considering for example , at the moment how to deal with the situation in Afghanistan - whether we should put a task force into Afghanistan in order to get quick-acting projects going as soon as possible .
So I do not think that it is inconsistent to press ahead with the reform of Europe Aid , while at the same time thinking that from time to time other arrangements are necessary .
Perhaps I can just remind honourable Members that we pledged EUR 30 million to the implementation of the framework agreement and that we have also been disbursing EUR 12.5 million under the rapid reaction mechanism .
We have committed about EUR 5 million through ECHO to humanitarian relief and we have got a regular CARDS programme of EUR 42 million for this year for FYROM .
All that work , except the ECHO dimension , will be put through the Agency over the next couple of months .
As far as we are concerned , the next event on the horizon will be the donors conference , which we will try to organise with the World Bank .
There are a number of conditions , as honourable Members will know .
We were first of all insisting on the implementation of the framework agreement on the passage of amendments to the Constitution through the Parliament in Skopje .
We also wanted a law on local government passed , because frankly if it is not , the United States is unlikely to come to a donors conference .
It is absolutely crucial , as my colleague Commissioner Solbes would assure you , if we are to provide macro-financial assistance at a donors conference , that there must be an agreement with the International Monetary Fund .
Macro-financial assistance is never given unless there is such an agreement .
President Trikovsky assured me this week that an agreement with the IMF is now on the cards and I think the relevant meeting in Washington is at the beginning of December .
I hope therefore that on the back of the passage of the legislation , which I have referred to , the constitutional amendments and the recommendation of an agreement to the board of the IMF , we can hold a successful donors conference .
If it is agreeable to all the parties , and to FYROM , we will do it before Christmas , but at the moment when it looks as though it is likely to be most successful .
What I do not want to do is to set a date for a second time and have to postpone it , because that would be calamitous .
I am very grateful to honourable Members for the fast delivery of their opinion on what we are proposing .
I am sorry that I cannot express my gratitude by accepting all the amendments which have been put down .
Characteristically , I am not able to do that .
Some of the amendments , for example the references to the provisional nature of what we are doing , are of no real legal value .
Others , I am advised , are not really suitable for inclusion in a legal decision .
I want however to respond slightly differently to two of the arguments which have been put and which you will understand .
First of all , I want to assure the Parliament that it would of course be consulted if there were any question of extending the Agency to other countries .
If we were to propose that , we would of course consult the Parliament .
Secondly , honourable Members , and this is a point that Mr Swoboda has made very eloquently , are concerned about the integrity of the management of what we are doing in Southeast Europe .
They are concerned about the coherence of what we are doing in Southeast Europe and understandably press us to set out our strategy for the management of community assistance for the Balkans .
I am happy to do that .
I just beg Parliament not to press me to do it by 31 January . I will tell the Parliament why .
We have a good team of people working on the Balkans in the Commission .
They spend three-quarters of their time in meetings in the Council , in consultative task forces and in drafting reports ; we are in the middle of drafting a report for the Council , which of course the Parliament will see , on the overall progress of the stabilisation and association process .
I do not want to make unreasonable demands on them , but I can assure Parliament that , as early next year as I can manage it , I will come to Parliament to try to set out the sort of strategy which I think honourable Members are entitled to ask for and which we should be pleased to give .
It is very important that Parliament should make sure from time to time that we actually know what we are doing .
I have been in this job for just over two years and what I am going to say does not suggest that all that has happened is because there has been a new Commission - I am not suggesting that at all .
But we have seen , first of all , a transformation in the region with the latest admirable events , as the honourable gentleman said : the elections in Kosovo and the developments in FYROM .
We know that every time we take a couple of steps forward , something will happen which pushes us back again , but I think that from Croatia to Serbia , to Macedonia and Albania , we are heading in the right direction .
We have a coherent strategy and we have made a remarkable amount of progress .
We have made that progress because we have worked together in a way which has extended stability to the region and underpinned those who are prepared bravely to argue and work for economic and political reform .
At the end of the stabilising and association process is the prospect of potential membership of the European Union .
That has been the most formidable element in bringing greater peace and stability to Southeast Europe .
We must make sure that the huge amount of political and financial investment that we have made in the last couple of years continues to pay off in steady progress and development .
That will of course be more likely if we are able to continue to work with Members of the Parliament .
Does the Commissioner agree that early next year is before the end of March ?
Commissioner , I can also confirm that President Trikovsky was at the prayer breakfast , you were not .
But I also note that if things go on as they are , we will soon have more Commissioners than Members in Parliament .
That is also good to hear .
I suggested , President that he should pray for me .
Mr President , as I take over from Commissioner Patten who spoke on various aspects of the political situation in the Balkans , I shall focus on the three programmes for macro-financial assistance .
As far as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , Mr Farm has made it quite clear that we are dealing with two distinct issues .
These are firstly , increasing the amount of aid , and secondly , extending the period in which it is granted .
To date , we have disbursed EUR 30 million . This is partly due to delays in reaching agreement with the International Monetary Fund on the economic programme .
It is , indeed , the case that the conditions laid down pertaining to the constitutional changes now under way , and the much-needed support we are giving to economic stabilisation and the reform process mean that the International Monetary Fund ' s cooperation is required . According to our information , the authorities in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will soon have in place an economic framework with associated follow-up .
This would act as a link with a support programme sponsored by the Fund .
The economic situation remains extremely precarious .
The International Monetary Fund has therefore informed us of the short-term financial requirements , and of the need for increased contributions by the various donors to cover the foreign financing deficit for the years 2001 and 2002 .
This is the main reason for our decision to increase our additional contribution to Macedonia by EUR 18 million .
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina , we are currently implementing aid .
EUR 60 million is committed , of which 40 million is grants and 20 million is loans .
The first two tranches have already been disbursed , one at the end of 1999 and the other at the end of 2000 . Progress is being achieved in the areas of stabilisation and economic reform .
We have yet to disburse the final tranche of EUR 15 million . The conditions of disbursement are close to being met .
A Commission mission charged with assessing progress achieved is in Sarajevo this week . Speaking more generally , it is fair to say that the new government formed after the elections does , on occasion , take some time to carry through reform processes .
It is currently negotiating a new programme with the International Monetary Fund . Mr Farm also mentioned the need to extend the period agreed on , since that initially planned for implementation of contributions has expired .
From another perspective , the rapporteur also referred to the need to adjust financial or macro-financial aid to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The current EUR 300 million , of which 225 is loans and 75 is grants is proving insufficient .
EUR 260 million has already been disbursed and the Commission is currently preparing to meet with the Yugoslav authorities again in the near future . We hope it will then be possible for the second tranche to be disbursed , providing the conditions are met .
According to information received from the International Monetary Fund , however , it is clear that additional external financing will be required to eliminate the further financing deficit of EUR 150 million . This is why we are proposing to increase the grant element by EUR 45 million to a maximum grant level of EUR 120 million .

I must commend Mr Farm on his devotion to this issue and on the speed and urgency with which he has dealt with it .
Thanks are also due to Mr Wynn , Chairman of the Committee on Budgets and to Mr Brok , Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for their support .
I should like to classify the amendments tabled into groups .
The amendments concerning political conditionality , the financial Regulation and the multiannual financial framework are acceptable , in principle . In some specific cases , however , they do present certain difficulties with regard to presentation or consistency .
To take the reference CARDS in connection with multiannual assistance as an example of consistency , we have stated quite clearly on a number of occasions in plenary that CARDS has nothing to do with macro-financial assistance .
The two elements are quite separate and I think the processes for using them correctly , in cases that might arise , should remain distinct .
We are not favourably inclined , either , to the comment that this assistance is exceptional and will not set a precedent for the future .
That is certainly the case .
Nonetheless , the same is true of all macro-financial assistance .
We do not , therefore , feel that it makes much sense to debate that today .
Neither do we believe that it makes much sense to include elements involving additional delays in the whole process of making this assistance available .
In this connection , whilst keeping Parliament duly informed , it would be wise to give more thought to the role of the Assistance Committee , which is quite a different body .
More detailed information on all these issues can be made available later . I simply wished to give some indication as to our initial position .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Global Fund to fight HIV / AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria
The next item is the proposal for a European Parliament and Council resolution on the contribution to the Global Fund to fight HIV / AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria [ COM ( 2001 ) 612 - C5-0520 / 2001 - 2001 / 0251 ( COD ) ] .
Thank you , Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I take the floor to defend the European Community ' s contribution to the fight against HIV / AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria , a bittersweet task .
I am pleased that we have contrived to approve a significant financial contribution by the Union to the creation of a Global Fund as suggested by the United Nations ' Secretary-General . The aim is to fight against the three most common contagious diseases in the world .
They affect the least developed countries who find themselves trapped in a vicious circle of poverty and disease .
The higher the level of poverty , the greater the risk of contagious diseases . In turn , a higher level of disease aggravates the degree of poverty .
It is pleasing , too , that we have achieved this in record time , through the codecision procedure , with urgency and at first reading . A number of amendments were tabled and negotiated with the Council .
In our view , these improved the text of the original proposal .
On the other hand , I have to say how much we regret that the Council and , especially , the Commission , have put us in such a difficult position . They have presented us with a text which , as originally drafted , bypassed Parliament and denied us the right to exercise our responsibilities as a budgetary authority .
No account was taken of Parliament ' s repeated statements on the need for much more energetic action in the context of a global strategy to fight against poverty , and , in particular , against AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria . I refer , in particular , to the report by Bashir Khanbhai , who is with us today .
A lot of time and energy went into it .
It was approved by a resolution in plenary on 4 October this year , yet the initial document put before us did not even refer to it .
In their common declaration last May , the Council and the Commission welcomed the United Nations Secretary-General ' s proposal to set up this Global Fund .
Back in July , the Commission announced its intention to commit EUR 120 million to finance it .
It was only last month , however , that Parliament received the documentation enabling it to begin its work . Furthermore , the documentation was incomplete and did not allow us to work properly .
It is only fair to note that , in the last fortnight , Parliament and the Council have demonstrated more of the willingness and flexibility required to reach agreement on the amendments we wished to introduce . I trust the latter will be adopted tomorrow morning .
In our view , the additional nature of the contribution to the Fund is a key issue .
As stated in our Amendment No 2 , the first EUR 60 million from the 2001 budget should be added to existing resources and not withdrawn from other budget lines already earmarked for development programmes . As stated in Amendment No 3 , the EUR 60 million in question should not pre-empt or impose conditions on future annual contributions .
This is clearly stated in our Amendment No 4 . I shall probably be tabling an oral amendment on this tomorrow , Commissioner , prior to the vote .
In our view too , given the very nature of these diseases it is crucial to maintain the Union ' s contribution to the fund over a period of time .
The fight against AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria must continue to be pursued energetically in the years to come .
If it is not , it will be unsuccessful and the EUR 60 million we are contributing will be to no avail .
Parliament cannot abrogate its responsibilities as a budgetary authority . In Amendment No 6 , we therefore request the Commission to make all the necessary information available to Parliament .
As stated in Amendment No 7 , the last of our amendments , we shall then be in a position to guarantee the suitability , transparency , sound management and working practices of the Global Fund . A report will duly be prepared , and should be included in future annual reports on contributions to external aid that the Community will be required to present .
At the G8 Summit held in July 2000 in Okinawa , the rich industrialised G8 countries pledged substantial funds to fight communicable diseases and help the sick in poor countries .
In September last year the Commission held a conference on the subject in Brussels but no action followed .
Four million of the poorest people died in one year .
In July 2001 another meeting took place in Genoa and Mr Prodi announced to the world 's media a donation of EUR 120 million .
My report , unanimously approved on 4 October this year has been sitting on the shelf collecting dust .
The Council adopted a proposal for a legal basis for the fund to be implemented but so far not one euro has been given , and a further 2 million people have died .
When terrorist bombs cause death the victims attract money very fast but the 3-4 million people who die from diseases are not in our minds .
Why does it take the Commission so long to present a plan for implementation when they know that every day 10 000 people are dying ?
We promise with pride but we fail to deliver .
Do these people not matter to us ?
The Commissioners have gone .
There is no interest .
Look at the audience in this Chamber , hardly anyone is here .
That shows what priority the European Union gives to such an important project .
This is not FYROM or Macedonia .
This is AIDS affecting the poorest people in the world and it is about time that the EU contribution is not just EUR 20 per person dying , not just 1 % of what is required , but that it is EUR 6 billion per annum .
We have often debated these problems in the past , but quite rightly do so again tonight : 36.1 million people are living with HIV / AIDS in this world , tuberculosis is making a tragic comeback , 300 million people suffer the debilitating and painful effects of malaria .
If anything needed a visionary , innovative and international response , it is the prevalence of these communicable diseases .
We want to support , in principle , this global fund to fight communicable diseases .
We want to see it concentrate on prevention as well as treatment of all three diseases .
We want an innovative and workable governance framework .
We want a true international partnership so it is not just seen as donor business as usual .
We want funding mechanisms that fast-track funds so that we can maintain the political commitment and mobilise further resources .
These are difficult issues and I sympathise with the Commission for the delays that have been forced on it in bringing forward this request for a legal base .
But it should reflect also on why the second reading proposals on our own support through the poverty diseases line were cut back from Parliament 's demands , and why President Prodi announced EUR 60 million of support from the global health fund from the ACP countries , which it was not his right to do and , as we heard in this Chamber from their President-in-Office they oppose .
We must be concerned that this money actually adds to the global efforts and does not simply go into the pockets of the pharmaceutical companies .
The amendments that we have constructively negotiated with the Commission and Council improve this proposal : the recognition that we need additional money , the fact that this is simply a first payment and the request to the Commission both to bring forward a legal base for future contributions and to provide a report so that some of these information issues can be dealt with .
I ask Commissioner Nielson if he can give us a time-scale as to when that might be brought forward during the course of next year so we can deal with it properly in the budget process .
Mr President , we have long been calling for an increase in funds for AIDS given the appalling situation .
The European Parliament has made its stance on this issue clear in voting for the Khanbhai report .
We were naturally very encouraged by the decision to release a further EUR 120 million .
However , the proposal put before us today , after some prevarication , only amounts to EUR 60 million .
Furthermore , this will come from the existing budget . This is not extra money .
These funds are not ongoing . We also wish to question the allocation of this money to a single international fund .
What is the aim of this fund ?
Is it only for prevention ?
Or will it also provide access to treatment for people living in the countries of the South ?
Will it provide health care infrastructures and medicines ?
These are the questions we must ask .
How will this fund be managed ?
How will those that need this money , namely the countries of the South , be involved in these decisions ? It is not simply up to the donor countries .
I think that we must ask ourselves all these questions because people are dying everyday , but we have money and it is up to us to help them .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are faced with an unprecedented human catastrophe .
According to the WHO report published today , 40 million people have so far become HIV positive and 3 million will die before the end of this year . It is clear that the majority of the people affected by this disease live in Sub-Saharan Africa .
AIDS is not just a crisis in terms of human health ; it also constitutes an ecological and economic disaster .
The WHO predicts that the least developed countries will lose a fifth of their GNP between now and 2010 because of the disease .
In countries like Zambia , one million children will die . The funds announced may appear to be substantial , but as my fellow Member said a moment ago , some questions remain to be answered .
Who will manage these funds ? Will the money really reach the people in the greatest need , for whom it was intended ?
As we are all aware , work to combat these diseases must involve the provision of infrastructures such as dispensaries , social support structures and doctors . This cannot be done when we have diktats from the IMF and the World Bank which do not allow us to employ civil servants and doctors .
Once again Mr President , I would like to call for the cancellation of Third World debt and for this money to be allocated to education , prevention and health . This is the right way to combat AIDS in the long term .
I would like to finish by saying that we can no longer tolerate the arrogant attitude the pharmaceutical industry adopted last year in relation to certain countries .
This is totally unacceptable .
We know that pregnant women who are given AZT give birth to healthy babies .
I hope this arrogance will cease once and for all .
Let me first of all thank you for the kind reaction from Parliament .
The Commission requested the urgency procedure to establish a legal base for a financial commitment to the fund under this year 's budget amending the legal base of budget line B7-6211 Aid for Poverty Related Diseases in Developing Countries .
We proposed to transfer EUR 60 million to this line .
This proposal is of high political importance as the fund has attracted wide interest and these are high hopes for its success .
I agree with the content of comments by Mr Sylla and Mr Rod reflecting the fact that there are indeed many questions to be asked .
We still have many unanswered questions .
This is the real reason why it has not been easy or possible for the Commission to move this dossier forward in a very nice , elegant and timely manner .
It has not yet been negotiated at international level , but we still need the budget operation that we are discussing tonight .
I regret that the proposal was transmitted so late in the year to the budget authority but this reflects the fact that we did not have anything good or clear enough before that .
I appreciate your determination in Parliament to make this process a success , despite these procedural hurdles .
I welcome the outcome of the discussions last week between the three institutions .
I note that Parliament has made further efforts to take account of Council 's wish for further changes in the recitals .
The Commission can accept the oral amendment proposed by the honourable MEPs here today and for which you will vote tomorrow , in order to obtain a timely agreement by Council .
As regards accounting , auditing and reporting , we want this to be totally transparent vis-à-vis Parliament .
I would however , for the sake of transparency , like to express some sort of warning because if the idea is to pool resources in a global fund , we must avoid becoming such a difficult partner in this work by insisting on our systems of reporting , our auditing and our accounting procedures .
This is the problem we have already with other international organisations and where the Commission is an inadequate partner in many cases .
Some adaptability is also needed if we are to be a well-functioning partner in this endeavour .
The Commission has no reservations as to the actual amendments presented here but we need to keep in mind that this is a collective effort and that is the whole core of the idea .
In reply to Mr Khanbhai 's remarks that not one euro has been given here , let me say that every day we are pumping money into the fight against AIDS , malaria , tuberculosis .
It would be a big mistake to think - and even worse to express - that the only thing we are doing is in relation to this fund .
Everybody knows that this is not the case but we hope this fund will add something to the other ways in which we are working .
That is what we are essentially trying to ensure in the negotiations taking place right now , to see if we can straighten out these contentious issues .
We are preparing a revised regulation for the B7-6211 budget line .
This longer-term legal basis will serve as the base for implementation of the Programme for Action on Communicable Diseases in the years 2003-2006 .
It is proposed that future support to global initiatives such as the global fund would be financed from this budget line .
We still have to discuss the level of funding .
In the first reading of the Budget for 2002 , Parliament proposed a new specific budget line for the fund from next year onwards but we have now agreed to regroup this specific budget line with the one for poverty diseases and use one integrated legal basis .
As I indicated before , the Commission wishes to continue exchanges with Parliament on the modalities and working methods of the fund over the coming period .
The fund is expected to be up and running from January 2002 and all members of the fund 's transitional working group are in discussion , trying to achieve consensus on a large number of outstanding and difficult issues .
The Commission is trying to play a constructive and active role in these discussions and I look forward to reporting to Parliament on this process .
I also look forward to working together with Parliament to make this new fund something which will actually increase the efficiency of our response to the struggle against these diseases .
Finally , let me reconfirm our proposal to allocate an addition EUR 60 million from the 9th EDF funds once the Cotonou Agreement is ratified and discussions have been finalised with the ACP Group .
These funds will be earmarked for activities in ACP countries .
I agree , this complicates , to some extent , the administrative function of a global fund , but I do not think we have any choice here .
This is a fact of life and it is not the biggest problem we are facing .
Thank you once again for the cooperative manner in which Parliament has handled this matter in spite of the difficulties that we have had .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 00.05 a.m. )
I want to draw attention to the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe .
We have seen President Mugabe 's wanton non-compliance with the undertakings given at the Abuja summit on September and only last weekend the snub he delivered to the visiting EU Troika .
It seems time now to introduce smart sanctions against Mugabe and his henchmen .
This is what we called for in Parliament 's resolution and I would ask you to use your best offices now to bring that about .
As you know , Mr Van Orden , the comment made at the end of the troika ' s visit was precisely that , if the undertakings were not complied with , the European Union would have no option but to take steps , including sanctions .
I believe we shall be obliged to be consistent if things do not go well , as seems likely .
Human genetics
The next item is the report ( A5-0391 / 2001 ) by Mr Fiori , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and Other New Technologies in Modern Medicine , on the ethical , legal , economic and social implications of human genetics [ 2001 / 2097 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in June last year , President Bill Clinton in the United States and Prime Minister Tony Blair in the United Kingdom presented to the world the map of the human genome , which had been arrived at simultaneously by their respective research groups .
A month later , Nature brought the discoveries to the attention of the world scientific community in more detail .
In the last few days , we have had news of the first experiment on the road towards human cloning in the United States .
As often happens with day-after prophecies , voices are now being raised in alarm , unanimously expressing the most indignant condemnation and concern .
The researchers themselves recognise that they have shown the way to those who might want to commit the folly of cloning a human being .
These are two historic moments : little more than a year has passed between one and the other but it almost seems as if we are talking about two different periods in history .
Beyond the concerns for the future , however , I think it is true to say that between these two historic moments a new approach to medicine emerged : curative medicine is giving way to a regenerative form of medicine oriented towards prediction .
In the not too distant future , we shall probably be in a position to predict the diseases we are likely to suffer from and , more importantly , we shall be able to find ways of preventing these diseases from actually developing .
Two opposing paths thus open up , as often happens in the history of human discoveries : on the one hand , there opens the wonderful road of therapeutic hope ; on the other , there lies the grim borderline with the ethical horror of human cloning .
We , therefore , have the paradoxical task of setting limits in the vast reaches of the unknown that lies before us .
This is the greatest project of the new century and involves the whole of human kind .
As people became aware of this , a need was felt to set up discussion groups to keep an eye on the ethical , social and legal implications of the new research programmes .
The extraordinary possibilities of scientific and medical progress , seen in the light of its inherent potential , have indeed suddenly made alarm bells ring .
It is this fear that drove Unesco to set up a bioethics committee to study the social implications of our knowledge of the genome , and that led , in 1997 , to the approval of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights .
Then the broad consensus reached by the Declaration led the United Nations General Assembly to commemorate the 50th anniversary of another vitally important document , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , by adopting the Unesco Declaration on the genome .
I have the feeling , however , that , when we get down to the details of the regulation , some of the principles that we have upheld so strongly dissolve away inexplicably .
Although I am aware that this is a vast subject , I shall try to sum up the effects of the project on human rights and the dignity of human beings , which , of course , underlie our report .
I shall summarise in four objectives the attempts and commitment to reconcile the longed-for progress of science with absolute respect for the sanctity of human life .
The first thing that stands out is the progress made in experimental genetics for the purpose of gaining therapeutic benefits .
Using our knowledge of the genome as a starting point , clinical experiments are then required .
Medicine itself shows that a moment always comes when such experiments have to be carried out on human beings , and so it is clearly necessary to take every step to ensure the safety of the patients experimented on , so that there is no risk to their health or , indeed , their life , and free and informed consent must always be obtained .
Secondly , from the little information we now have , it is true to say that our knowledge of the genome might enable us to mutate our genes .
It is therefore absolutely essential to indicate , as from now , which doors we must never open .
Here , I return to the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights , which bans interventions on the genome that affect the germ line .
The events of recent days seem to me not to have taken this direction .
Furthermore , knowledge is in a continuous state of flux and requires constant monitoring .
From the information we have , the only certainty we can hang on to is the fact that embryos are human , whatever their fate may be .
Thirdly , the doors opened by our knowledge of the genome lay us open to a serious risk that our privacy will be violated as a result of this very knowledge .
We must be able to ensure that information derived from the knowledge of our genetic make-up cannot reach operators other than those who will use it for our own good .
It is clear , indeed , that if it were possible to access information on the propensity of a particular person to a particular disease , we would be leaving ourselves open to a new source of discrimination , in the field of work , for instance , and elsewhere .
We must be aware of this risk and of the need to take steps to prevent it .
Lastly , another objective that comes into play for the future of human kind is the globalisation of research .
It is clear that research requires substantial investment and that financial incentives are indispensable for progress .
It is also true , however , that we cannot allow the need for the results of progress to become the undisputed heritage of all human kind , to be sidelined .
If we cannot globalise the benefits of our knowledge of the human genome , we can say , right now , we have failed .
Science , instead of being a means to create a fairer world , will have helped to widen the gap between rich and poor and will have become yet one more instrument of social division .
In this respect , we must not forget the importance , not to mention the difficulty , of establishing proper , well thought-out patent regulations , the aim being the fair distribution of the benefits among all human beings : here again we see the balance between encouraging initiative and safeguarding human dignity and the instrument for achieving it .
Concerned to safeguard human rights in the Member States , the Council of Europe gave precise indications at Oviedo : a ban on any form of discrimination based on genetic inheritance ; a ban on interventions on the human genome that go beyond therapeutic purposes ; an absolute ban on changing the hereditary genome ; and a ban on choosing a baby ' s sex .
I believe we should uphold these points .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a series of challenges facing scientists , legal experts , students of ethics , sociologists and those like us in the institutions who have to mark out the new path .
I approached the report - a daunting task , and I do not know if I have been up to the job you asked me to do - guided by a principle which , to me , is absolutely fundamental : I did not consider going beyond the point where progress came up against the sanctity of human life , where it started to conflict with respect for human dignity .
At this point , I considered it should be progress that should alter its course .
One of these alternative courses is now well known : it is a non-destructive alternative , as promising as embryo cell research but using adult cells .
I believe we should favour this option since , as well as being promising , it does not involve any kind of ethical or social conflict .
Respect for human dignity , in the context of biomedical research , implies that science should serve the people and not the other way round .
All human beings must be protected at all stages of their lives , from conception until natural death , particularly if they are vulnerable or disabled .
I am in favour of progress in scientific research , not least because it is a source of economic development , but I believe we have to ensure that it does not become a kind of death trap for human beings because due attention was not paid to the ethical principles that should underlie it .
Finally , I would like to thank all those who have collaborated on my report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Fiori , for his excellent work .
I believe he has presented an outstanding report , and the political message is clear : we are saying yes to research , yes to the treatment of serious diseases , but human dignity is the overriding principle and can set limits even to research .
This means , for example , that we reject the cloning of human beings at all stages of their development .
The news from the USA that ACT has cloned a human embryo has probably shocked us all .
People are right to be concerned .
I think being against the cloning of human embryos is neither right wing nor conservative .
Let me quote from a document produced by the French Communist Party .
It says that allowing therapeutic cloning by nuclear transfer gives rise to many ethical problems .
The first problem concerns the embryo .
The second concerns the woman as egg cell donor and the risk of actually creating a market .
The third problem concerns the precautions that must be taken with reproductive cloning .
Even if the two objectives of cloning are different , there is clearly a great danger of opening the door to a kind of automatism when we do not at present have the means to control this area .
There is nothing more to be said .
So-called therapeutic cloning of embryos leads to reproductive cloning and that is why it must be banned .
That is what the Fiori report says .
I am shocked at the amendments tabled by the social democrats and others who want to delete this passage from the Fiori report .
Neither are the arguments of those who want the deletion logical .
In the Caudron report we decided that we did not want to encourage the cloning of embryos .
I want to thank Commissioner Busquin because earlier this week the Commission again made quite clear that the Commission will not support this technology .
But if we then fail to prohibit it , that is an invitation to firms like ACT to come to Europe if it is banned in the USA .
I cannot imagine that the majority of Parliament wants that .
I therefore ask you to support the Fiori report and reject the deletions .
Mr President , the work of the temporary committee on human genetics has been complex and interesting .
The detailed and thorough report by Mr Fiori which accompanies the motion for a resolution is testimony to that .
The motion for a resolution , presented by the rapporteur in committee , was , in its turn , a balanced synthesis of the conclusions that could be drawn from our inquiries .
These dealt with the many ethical and political problems raised by the major scientific breakthroughs of recent years : the development of genetic tests which open up prospects of early identification and possible remedies for serious degenerative diseases , but also pose risks for the protection of personal data . In this field , such data concern not only the individual in question but all of his or her blood relatives as well .
Therefore , alongside the right to know , everybody ' s right to know the likelihood of being predisposed to diseases in the future , a new right now emerges : the right not to know , to deliberately face up to the fate that life holds in store for us , trusting in the future .
The committee addressed problems raised regarding the application of the patent system , the traditional instrument of industrial policy which favours the private funding of research , to those biotechnological and biomedical innovations that have to do with living organisms and therefore pose delicate questions of the limits between invention as a product of human activity and the discovery of living material , which cannot be appropriated .
Finally , the committee addressed the most far-reaching dilemmas of the new frontiers of research into stem cells , which offer extraordinary potential for possible applications .
They may be able to root out diseases that have hitherto been intractable , but they also pose radical questions of ethical principles which must be considered insurmountable .
We are not starting from scratch , thanks , partly , to the useful work of the European Ethics Group and the large number of instruments drawn up at Community and international levels , to the extent that , two weeks ago , Parliament was able to adopt by a large majority , cautious , common criteria on this subject on the occasion of the launch of the sixth research framework programme .
This programme prioritises the research needed in this field , funding especially those projects dealing with adult stem cells and embryonic cells from abortions or so-called supernumerary embryos , produced for the purposes of in-vitro fertilisation and no longer usable for those purposes , to the extent that the laws of the Member States permit .
Unfortunately , the original project became distorted in committee and an attitude prevailed that was inspired by fear rather than hope .
The spectre of monster-generating cloning was brandished , leading to the absurd conclusion that it is better to let supernumerary embryos die or be destroyed rather than to use them for the benefit of medical research that can save human kind , our children and future generations from the scourges that have afflicted us in the past and still threaten us .
We do not want women ' s bodies to be used to produce embryos for research , but it is immoral to prevent the use of those that already exist for the benefit of human kind .
Human dignity was invoked not in support of saving people from humiliating suffering but just to safeguard the first clusters of cells in the early stages of the embryo .
Never , but never in the history of human kind , has the human embryo had the kind of protection it has today .
Lawful , regulated and controlled research is being branded as about to open the door to dreadful speculation , almost as if we should ban organ transplants , which save lives , just because there may be a black market in organs .
Let us combat the black market , but do not let us sacrifice hopes of recovery !
Some invoke religious laws in order to get out of the responsibility , which strict secular ethics place on those who are democratically elected , of making choices for the common good .
What we need to do , instead , is to weigh up the values that are at stake and - proceeding with all due caution and prudence , keeping within all reasonable bounds and opposing all commercial arguments - still allow freedom of conscience , freedom of research and hope for new breakthroughs in the treatment of terrible diseases .
That is why my group hopes that the European Parliament will not go back on what it wisely decided only a fortnight ago .
Mr President , Commissioner , do we wish Europe to become a museum ?
This was the question put by one of my colleagues in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , having studied the report on human genetics .
This debate raises many ethical issues and possesses many ethical dimensions .
On the one hand , we have the important ethical dimension of respect for human dignity and for the individual and , on the other , an ethically motivated desire to relieve suffering .
It is the first of these dimensions , that of respect for the individual , which has dominated the committee ' s report .
Although we are not now debating legislation , we are sending important signals to those concerned with these issues , that is , the research community and people with illnesses .
Are we signalling to the research community that it is hardly worth trying to carry out promising stem cell research in Europe ?
Are we signalling to patients suffering illnesses that currently cannot be cured or treated that we do not wish to explore avenues of research which might lead to relief for them ?
As Liberals , we have the greatest respect for knowledge and research , including stem cell research .
At this stage , we do not know the exact implications for humans , but animal experiments have produced promising results .
We must not , therefore , rule out embryonic stem cell research .
Rather , it must be able to proceed in parallel with research into other stem cells , as parallel research will enable us to increase our knowledge base .
Each needs the other .
We believe that public support for research is vital in order to ensure that the results benefit as broad a range of people as possible and , indeed , the whole world .
We should have liked to have seen the sixth framework programme for research support therapeutic cloning .
A total ban on certain forms of research leads to greater risks of abuse and risk-taking .
There are certainly elements of the research which ought to be monitored by public bodies , and I believe that public support also increases the opportunities for such monitoring .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party thinks it is vital for discussions to continue and , above all , to be conducted in greater depth .
However , no one should have a monopoly on ethical issues .
Personally , I am highly sceptical of the way in which the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies , which advises the Commission , has been operating .
Its work has certainly not been conducted openly .
Nor do I believe that critical debate has been permitted within the group .
In Parliament too , we must consider the matter in much greater depth than we were able to do in the temporary committee , particularly in terms of issues such as insurance , genetics and working conditions .
However , the genetics debate should be conducted in all the committees in order to achieve a greater balance of views than is currently the case .
Finally , I should like , on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to state that we are unable to vote in favour of the report in its current form .
Only if certain amendments are adopted in the final report shall we be able to offer our support .
Mr President , the first human cloning experiments in the USA must be a warning to us to call a clear halt to all human cloning today .
The distinction between therapeutic and reproductive cloning is a semantic ploy .
In both cases , an embryo is produced , declared surplus , destroyed and used as a raw material .
We must therefore come out quite clearly against cloning because the deliberate creation of life for research purposes is a violation of human dignity .
Human beings must never be a means to an end .
Human life is not a consumable commodity .
It must not be reduced to a commodity and the production of human embryos for spare parts is incompatible with human dignity ; for us , and we must make that clear today , human dignity clearly takes precedence over research .
Therapeutic cloning paves the way for reproductive cloning and has a bandwagon effect .
We must impose a clear ban on therapeutic cloning , otherwise there will be no way of stopping the risk of escalation in the worldwide consumption of embryos .
Embryonic stem cell research also involves the destruction of embryos .
Here , too , the main purpose is therapeutic cloning .
We must , therefore , send a clear signal today that we do not want a society where women become suppliers of eggs and embryos become lucrative merchandise .
Adult stem cell research provides us with a clear alternative to embryonic stem cell research , making therapeutic cloning unnecessary .
When it comes to patenting , too , we must quite clearly expect the Commission to put a clear end to the current situation , where it is unclear what can be patented , and give the Member States clear guidance here , because we must not reinterpret the discovery of human life as an invention .
Human life is not created by third parties .
We , therefore , need a very clear signal .
Europe must not be an ethical minefield .
We need clear ethical boundaries .
We cannot have loopholes in the law and human dignity must clearly be our guiding principle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , encounters between politics and research are not always easy .
Research itself is impossible to imagine without risks .
At the present time , research on stem cells is just beginning , and we do not have time to wait for its results in ten or twelve years ' time .
That was the whole point of the committee that we created last year .
Last week , when we voted on the Sixth Research Framework Programme , we voted in favour of a hierarchical classification of priorities and funding for genetics research .
I agree with that restrained vote , which is in line with the opinion of the European Ethics Committee .
The risk identified by today ' s report is that medical research involves the desire to clone human beings .
The report proposes that any attempt in that direction should be prohibited , and , above all , penalised .
I welcome , in particular , the fact that we went further than simply declaring a prohibition , and I campaigned to make reproductive cloning criminal .
However , must we infer from this that the therapeutic aspect of research into stem cells , whether adult or embryonic , should be condemned and rejected ?
Who is attributing to today ' s scientists and researchers these projects that are bound to be diabolical ?
Is it the researchers themselves , or is it other people ?
We must avoid lumping together the two types of cloning , and here I disagree with the previous speaker , and perhaps we should regard the human race as being capable of producing guarantees and controls .
I would remind you of the story of Frankenstein ' s monster , which is one of the founding myths of our modern world .
The monster asked his creator to give him a female companion , if you remember .
Professor Frankenstein started to create the female equivalent of the monster .
He started , but then he refused to create a fiancée for him .
In doing so , he refused to give the monster the possibility of producing descendants , thereby condemning him to solitude and death .
So that was the end of the story of Frankenstein ' s monster .
In this myth , which is one of the founding myths of our era , the human race showed its capacity to exercise control over itself .
Now , if we assume that there will be cloning for therapeutic purposes , and remember that this will involve stem cells , there are two human issues involved here , and I should like to conclude by reminding you of what they are , namely the status of the embryo and the use of women ' s bodies .
These are complicated issues , and there are some people who do not know the difference between cells and embryos , and who do not want to see any research carried out , not even on the supernumerary embryos resulting from medically assisted reproductive procedures , or on embryos resulting from abortions .
Let us be quite clear about this , in expressing this view they are once again bringing up the question of whether abortion should be a criminal offence .
That is politics , not research .
Other people , including myself , point out that the production of stem cells requires the use of oocytes produced by women .
We must be careful , and here I agree with other female speakers , not to exploit women for research purposes , and I very much regret the fact that , at a recent meeting of the coordinators , which unfortunately I did not attend , it was decided to do away with recital AJ , which was one of my amendments , without there having been any collective consultation .
We have therefore re-tabled it .
That leads me , finally , to emphasise that there is concern on two fronts , firstly , concern on the part of those who want to re-launch the campaign against a woman ' s right to abortion , and , secondly , concern on the part of those who would be involved for the purpose of commercialising women ' s bodies .
It is complicated and it is difficult .
Having said that , there are some things in this report that I have set my heart on : the need to ensure that no payment is involved , the need for consent , and the requirement that there should be no discrimination , as regards employment and insurance , based on genetic tests .
Mr President , this is obviously an important debate and I share the concern of Members who are anxious to support research to enable the genuine and continual advance of medicine and the improvement of the quality of life for the individual and society , while at the same time , safeguarding the dignity of each individual from abuse , resulting from breaches of the ethical standards necessary for the implementation of these safeguards .
Scientists who deliberately ignore these safeguards are doing a disservice to science and are acting contrary to the common good .
Events of recent days clearly bring this possibility into focus and must surely alert Parliament to the need for quick and positive action .
While not wishing to dispute assurances given by researchers that the breakthrough is not aimed at creating a human being , the reality is that such a fundamental issue cannot now be entrusted to individuals who are free to operate outside existing legislation .
On behalf of my group , I fully support the provisions of paragraphs 54 and 55 of the motion for resolution which call for a ban on human cloning , regardless of the technique used , and on other activities which are intended to result in the modification of the human gene line .
For citizens , and indeed parliamentarians , this is a sensitive and complex issue and I do not consider myself qualified to deal with the many scientific arguments in this debate .
But of this I am certain : society will not tolerate , and must be protected from , any intrusion , deliberate or otherwise , that reduces the dignity and the sanctity of each human being to an object of scientific manipulation .
We , who share in the wonderment of our creation , must act now in the interests of mankind .
Mr President , it is disappointing that we are only now able to deal with the important report of the temporary committee on human genetics .
The Fiori report provides an ethical framework for genetic research , but , unfortunately , this is partly shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted , since the financing of this research is established in the sixth framework programme .
I appeal to the Council , where this subject has still to be dealt with , to use a well-considered ethical framework .
This would mean , at any rate , that research which is banned in one or more Member States , such as research with human embryos , would never be eligible for Community funding .
The Fiori report gives a good overview of the ethical and other dilemmas that this research on human genetics entails .
The temporary committee has put a year ' s hard work into it and , in general , I am satisfied with the report before us .
The report was radically modified by the rapporteur after revision .
That was certainly necessary , but I still find something lacking .
Not a particular topic , because all topics relating to human genetics are tackled in this report , but nevertheless ...
My Christian philosophy sees this world with all its plants , animals and human beings as God ' s creation .
A creation which God imbued with numerous possibilities .
As a result , man is able to find solutions to problems .
I believe that man must search for therapies and treatments for disease and that he is entitled to find them .
I refuse , however , to believe that research into the curing of diseases must involve the use of human embryos .
An embryo is a potential human being , contains all the ingredients necessary to become a person and is one of God ' s creatures and as such deserving of protection from the very beginning .
To repeat the words of the philosopher Immanuel Kant : " Act in such a way that you use man partly as an end and never as simply a means " .
And if human embryos are used for research and are destroyed in the process , that is precisely what is happening .
This applies both to embryos left over from in-vitro fertilisation and to embryos produced specially for research purposes .
We were astonished to hear reports that human embryos have been cloned in the United States .
This instrumentalisation of incipient human life is morally completely unacceptable .
Fortunately , Commissioner Busquin followed President Bush in condemning this experiment .
The Fiori report rightly calls for a ban on this therapeutic cloning .
Apart from that , I have serious misgivings about the exaggerated expectations aroused by some researchers and also by some of us , not only among healthy citizens , but worse , still , among patients .
If this type of research ever finds therapeutic application at all , it will not be for at least another one to two decades .
But what of the splendid therapies that can be developed with the aid of stem cells ? Should we not develop and use them ?
I believe so , but again , not at the expense of human embryos .
Hence it is a miracle , and I see it as a blessing from God , that adult stem cells have been discovered .
These stem cells , which are found in the umbilical cord , fat tissue and brain tissue , can be differentiated and also form a rich diversity of tissue types .
So let us put all our resources , expertise and not least funding into developing therapies with the aid of this promising adult stem cell research .
I congratulate rapporteur Fiori on the fruit of his labours presently before us , and hope that it emerges unscathed from this session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , seldom has Parliament come up against such a sensitive and , at the same time , such an important subject as that dealt with in the Fiori report .
This subject is utterly and completely political , a proper subject for the legislator , as we radicals have been trying in vain to make people understand in our country ; it is a subject for society , concerning , first and foremost , the millions and millions of people suffering from , so far , incurable diseases , who look to us for an answer which may bring them real hope of health and life .
Today we are potentially faced with one of those great changes in the story of human kind , comparable to the discovery of penicillin or vaccines .
We are faced with a decisive choice that it would be unrealistic and tragic to hold back from .
From this viewpoint , I regret to say , the excellent and instructive work by Mr Fiori has given way to a base text that is the result of the combined provisions of two fundamentalisms that are well rooted in this Parliament , which , like any fundamentalism , would like Europe to stand still while , all around it , the world is moving on .

The spirit of Galileo is with us today .
For us radicals , today ' s choice should be clear : ' no ' to the Fiori report as it stands ; ' yes ' to most of the amendments tabled , to achieve freedom of scientific research ; ' yes ' to all kinds of therapeutic research that can give life and not death to the life that really exists , not that which is only present in textbooks and now lies in laboratory freezers , waiting to be destroyed ; and so ' yes ' to research on stem cells , which are , in practical terms , more malleable ; ' yes ' to research on supernumerary embryos that have no chance of life ; ' yes ' to therapeutic cloning , which - as stated authoritatively by the Nobel Prize-winner , Professor Dulbecco , only yesterday and the former Italian health minister Mr Veronesi today - has nothing whatever to do with human cloning ; in short , ' yes ' to an adult , secular Europe that is responsible in the matter of research .
Mr President , I simply wish to inform you that the students reading for the Masters degree in political science of the Spanish Government ' s external and Latin American foundation are present in the guest ' s gallery .
They are a distinguished group of young politicians - local councillors , members of parliament , high-level officials of public administrations - from various Latin American countries who are visiting us and who have spent a fruitful working stay in Brussels this week . They are a good illustration , Mr President , of the increasingly close ties between Europe and Latin America .
Thank you , Mr Vidal-Quadras .
I agree with you .
Mr President , much attention has been given to the matter we are working on today .
We have interviewed many experts and made many visits .
We have conferred with parliamentary colleagues at home and abroad , from both Member States and candidate countries .
There have been many private conversations , and after all this input I have formed a completely personal opinion on this matter , which is both complex and ethically charged .
I should like to note that I certainly respect every judgment conscientiously arrived at .
A division into left or right , conservative or modern , is not relevant here .
Consequently I cannot permit my view or that of other colleagues to be branded as fundamentalist in this House , as has just happened .
Mr President , my view and voting behaviour are largely in accordance with what has been agreed in our group .
I differ on one point : I am in favour of the use of residual embryos from IVF , but wish to limit the deliberate creation of extra embryos .
I am opposed to the blocking off of avenues potentially offered by therapeutic cloning for one day curing such diseases as Parkinson ' s and Alzheimer ' s .
Reproductive cloning has never been at issue and an absolute international ban is called for .
I reject the production of embryos solely for research .
In my view , we are dealing with a problem of definitions in the case of therapeutic cloning .
Is it permissible for the nucleus of an ovum of mine , combined with a skin cell , to serve at some point in the future to make a heart cell for me ?
Finally , patent law is inadequate : the inviolability of the human body is established , but the legislation is ambiguous and as a result patents are granted that are not in the service of mankind or of possible cures .
I would therefore ask my D66 and VVD colleagues who voted differently in the discussion of the report , to support our group on this point too .
Mr President , after about a year of intensive investigation into human genetics and its effects on medicine , after countless hearings and conversations during on the spot fact-finding visits , I now have less hope than when I started .
I am thoroughly disappointed .
The Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and Other New Technologies in Modern Medicine did not reach the destination I expected .
The committee ' s report will not create the basis for coherent legislation on biotechnology in the Member States of the European Union that many , like myself , were looking for .
Instead , the chaos of opinions voiced in the amendments in plenum looks like leaving it in shreds .
In the end those shreds will no longer fit together properly .
I therefore ask you , honourable Members , at least to allow us to prevent the worst .
Let us vote only for what takes balanced account of the social , economic and legal aspects and not steamroller through narrow ethical boundaries .
The European Parliament must not fail here .
We must set standards here .
In a representative democracy , setting standards is the duty of the directly elected parliament and is not left to governments , let alone to forces that are not primarily dedicated to the common good .
At consultations last weekend in Nantes , the German and French governments pointed the way for a common position on the economic and ethical questions raised by biotechnology .
To quote from a German federal government document : " Such agreement between Germany and France could be the prelude to broader agreement at European level . "
The European Parliament can shorten the way and set out the markers today .
The Committee on Human Genetics , as we call it for short , has carefully compiled the necessary information and the spectrum of appraisals .
Now , Parliament as a whole , must show science , medicine and business in the Union ' s Member States the way forward for the biotechnological revolution .
But we must not fall into the trap of a wrong kind of belief in progress .
Not every step forward taken by human beings is , at the same time , also progress for humanity .
We must not submit to ideologies or dogmas either , however , let alone seek to establish new ones .
Many feel so uncertain in the ethical realm that they would rather forget it .
But there is a lot of clarity here .
Sometimes we simply do not see it .
For example , a fertilised human egg cell can only become a human being and nothing else .
So human dignity must be protected from the time the male sperm is united with the female egg .
This absolutely fundamental right has been put in writing again and again , most recently at the start of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
All we have to do is stick to it .
Given that , we cannot allow cloning , for whatever purpose , neither reproductive nor therapeutic .
It cannot be allowed .
Given that , too , we cannot allow embryos to be used , let alone created , for research .
The medical ethos of helping and healing at least stands in the way of deliberate interventions in the human germ line , but a look at the consequences , which are catastrophic in every respect , does so too .
I will leave the matter there .
When it comes to the vote at midday today , we shall have to respect a number of other limits .
But today we must also express our support for progress in the biological sciences .
With the right support , they may perhaps bring us closer to fulfilling the dream of conquering disease and suffering , and we should give much greater support than we have hitherto to the alternatives in the realm of adult stem cells , for example .
I think that is really where the future lies .
Mr President , today ' s debate is an extremely important one .
In fact , what we are discussing is nothing less than life itself . We are talking about scientific research with the potential to cure serious human diseases such as Parkinson ' s , Alzheimer ' s , MS , diabetes and perhaps even AIDS , to improve or prolong life .
It is definitely not a question we should treat lightly .
It therefore strikes me as a sorry state of affairs when this Parliament explicitly refuses to acknowledge the distinction between reproductive and therapeutic cloning : the former aims at the creation of new human beings , the latter at the creation of new tissue .
Directly or indirectly banning the latter means ruling out a host of scientific possibilities that might help human beings .
There is no trace of subsidiarity in this report .
Ethical and moral dilemmas especially should be solved as closely as possible to the people they affect , since they appeal directly to personal conscience .
For this reason , the call to the Commission to come up with legislation cannot command the approval of my group .
Finally , I am bound to say that I am offended by the monopoly that some right-wing and Green MEPs lay claim to in the ethical field .
Some fellow MEPs give the impression that the most restrictive view is automatically the ethically superior one .
Therefore , if we restrict or even ban promising research , which might bring the sick a cure or an alleviation of their suffering or even save their lives , that is a decision with profound ethical implications .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to support Mr Fiori 's report , which I think has struck the right balance .
My views have changed in the course of the past year as a result of the evidence we have heard on the temporary committee .
I have two basic concerns : firstly , much of the evidence suggests that developments on embryonic stem cell research may not deliver the results we all want in terms of progress on some of the most serious illnesses that afflict many members of our society and many of our own families ; secondly , in the course of this research , we will allow people , and in particular , women suffering from infertility to be exploited .
I am not against embryo research - as an infertility sufferer myself , I have benefited from it and I have donated surplus embryos for research purposes - but we need to be sure that to achieve the aims that we all want , we do not focus in one direction only , while neglecting other areas of research which hold equal if not more promise of success .
Mr President , many people still suffer from incurable degenerative diseases that affect the whole body , such as multiple sclerosis , Parkinson ' s , Alzheimer ' s , diabetes and leukaemia .
Others , in an otherwise healthy body , have poorly functioning or damaged vital organs , such as heart , kidneys , liver or lungs .
As human beings we have succeeded in changing all kinds of things in the world outside ourselves , but can still only solve our own physical defects to a very limited extent .
We find the repair and enhancement of our physical fabric quite simply horrific .
Is man about to act like his own creator and does that conflict with the purpose for which people were put on earth ?
Few people will be enthusiastic about creating invulnerable superhumans who will eventually oust normal human beings .
In addition , the sacrifice of human life in order to improve the quality of other lives , evokes feelings of cannibalism .
The discussion is sometimes about extremes .
One extreme position is the desire to ban all scientific research and imprison researchers , the other is the wish to allow every commercial use , such as those , for example , being developed by the American company Advanced Cell Technology , and hence making possible , at the individual level , everything that wealthy people can and are prepared to pay for .
I reject both extremes .
The use of stem cells from one ' s own body or if necessary from residual embryos , is defensible .
Any creation of separate life for this purpose should be preceded by investigation of alternatives , and with the trade in embryos we are definitely overstepping the bounds of acceptability .
That also applies to the valuing and modification of human life at the request of the insurers .
Weighing everything up , I feel closer to the line followed by Mr Caudron than to that of Mr Fiori .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for once the European Parliament is not lagging behind history .
Just as an American company succeeds in cloning a human embryo , the temporary committee on human genetics publishes its report , a report which is , incidentally , an excellent one .
In effect , it protects the human embryo by prohibiting cloning , whether for reproductive or for therapeutic purposes .
It prohibits European public funding for research on the human embryo , advising the use of supernumerary embryos for infertile couples , and , finally , making maximum use of work on adult stem cells .
Mankind is not the owner of life : it simply has the right to enjoy the use of that life .
Human beings cannot , therefore , appropriate for themselves even a part of this heritage , which is , by its very nature , inalienable .
Those who want to get rich by playing the sorcerer ' s apprentice will one day have to pay royalties to the Creator .
The human embryo should never be reduced to the status of mere laboratory material , or of a tool used for commercial purposes .
This is why the legislators must define , for the embryo , a status which fills the current loophole in the law , in particular by forbidding the patenting of living beings .
Given that the human genetic mechanism is so fragile and complex , and that it is also associated with the mysterious and the sacred , it would be flying in the face of humanity ' s evolution , its past and its future , to reap ephemeral gains under the pretext of carrying out research .
I , and my colleagues in the National Front , defend the integrity and the dignity of human life , from conception to natural death .
Those who are opposed to this view have already , unwittingly , entered the realms of barbarism .
To manipulate the mystery of life is to condemn the human race to catastrophes even more terrible than those caused by mad cow disease and Creutzfeld-Jakob disease .
Mr President , the scientific news which has broken over the last few days has created a dramatic backdrop to the presentation of the Fiori report .
More important for me , however , are the numerous letters which I have received from scientific academies , medical companies and patient associations begging us not to clamp down on such promising and hopeful research .
New knowledge about human genetics will help us understand at which points genetic dynamics are vulnerable and open to environmental factors and pressure and the way in which we live , thereby allowing us to develop new strategies for the prevention , diagnosis and treatment of illnesses .
Stem cell research may well have new applications in treating illnesses such as Parkinson 's disease , Alzheimer 's , leukaemia and many others .
However , the boundaries on research in these fields must be marked out if we are to avoid ethical , social and legal problems .
This was the point of the amendments which I tabled , together with other Members , as we did with the Caudron report , so as to allow the pioneering research , which I have described , to progress while striking the balance needed in order to avoid ethical problems .
So we can look forward at some point in the future to the beneficial medical applications which this research promises .
I trust that the European Parliament will support the line being marked out and strike the right balance between progress and ethical considerations .
Ôhe text being put to the vote must allow for research into new applications so that , where possible , we can liberate society from the misery caused by disease .
It should be informed not by confusion or fear or by reaction to something we do not fully understand , but by the courage to strive for new achievements which man has demonstrated ever since the time of Prometheus .
Mr President , this debate is concerned with questions that are essential to humanity , such as what is life and how can we halt that ineluctable march towards death which is a characteristic of any existence ?
To pass on life to another , surely that is the profound meaning of evolution , the only moral law , moreover , which is indifferent to our concepts of morality ?
Life is undoubtedly a process .
It is pointless to try to define the point at which life begins .
Some people believe that it begins with the fusion of a spermatozoon with an ovum , yet each spermatozoon is alive , even though billions of them move around in vain .
An ovum that is not fertilised ceases to live .
The embryo , as it divides into two , then four , eight and sixteen and more cells , is the process of the living being .
Until the fourth day , each cell is totipotent , and contains all the genetic information of a potential human being .
Yet in order to become that human being , the embryo has to become implanted in a uterus and develop there for several months .
However , an embryo is not just a type of material .
Therefore , there have to be very good reasons for sacrificing it .
Generally speaking , our societies accept abortion in order to preserve the physical or mental health of a mother .
Cannot this idea of the lesser of two evils also be applied to supernumerary embryos for which potential parenting no longer exists ?
Is it not better to use those embryos for serious research , rather than destroying them ?
No one in this House defends reproductive cloning , but the possibilities opened up by therapeutic cloning deserve to be the subject of in-depth and properly integrated research .
Our society accepts serious medical research carried out on foetuses , children , adults and corpses .
Why should there be special rules for embryos alone ?
I would argue in favour of science , in favour of the right to know more .
I argue in favour of public funding for this essential research .
It would be irresponsible to leave it to the market sector alone .
As with any research , there is no guarantee that it will be successful , but we must follow any serious leads .
This applies to research into adult stem cells as well as to research into any of the 216 types of cells that make up the human body .
Only a score of those have the power of pluripotency . Nor can we neglect research into embryonic stem cells .
They are pluripotent by nature , and may be of assistance in regenerating all the types of tissue that go to make up the human body .
I am convinced that genetic science will continue , with or without Europe , but I hope that Europe will not be left behind in this revolution .
I respect those Members who have doubts , who see the risks rather than the hopes , but I do not accept that we should use the essential defence of human dignity as a sort of bludgeon to silence those who do not wish to reduce the whole of human dignity to a collection of cells .
Where would that leave the dignity of those who suffer a thousand deaths before actually dying , or those who are sunk in the depths of disease or dementia ?
Can we really concentrate on the defence of burgeoning human life , when beings already alive are too often ignored , neglected and oppressed ?
Surely the search for new treatments for cruel diseases , for genetic predispositions or - even worse - predestinations , is the true defence of human dignity ?
Mr President , Mr Fiori ' s report on genetics marks an important stage in the European and international debate on a sensitive , far-reaching issue which demands close attention in the political world because of the responsibilities it involves .
Science must make progress and move forwards , and we only know a tiny fraction of what there is to know , not least about the cells we are talking about .
That does not , however , mean that anything goes : just as freedom is , in itself , an absolute value but is never absolute because of the way things are , so science and scientific research are vital assets because of the important discoveries that can be put at the service of human kind but they cannot be considered absolute , that is to say , removed from legal , ethical or moral constraints .
The position of the European Republicans , the Democrats and the Italy of values thus coincides with the position expressed in the vote on the Caudron report : it rejects human cloning and genetic manipulation but supports the priority funding of research on adult stem cells and embryo stem cells derived from spontaneous and therapeutic abortions , subject to strict public control .
Ladies and gentlemen , the great area of debate between bioethics and law has been opened up , but it should not be approached from moralistic positions because the distinction is not between progressive secular people and conservative Catholics , that is a black-and-white , simplistic view , but rather between those who believe that science should be allowed to do anything , even if it goes against the dignity of life , and those who believe that that should not be possible .
Our thanks , in any case , go to Mr Fiori : we believe that his is an important piece of work , especially if our major amendments are accepted ; it will be a good basis for reflection from now onwards and for preventing major discoveries from becoming patented property for the use and consumption of the powerful rather than being placed at the service of all human kind .
Mr President , we are unanimously opposed to reproductive cloning , which shows how dangerous it is .
However , why should we distinguish it , semantically , from therapeutic cloning , when it is actually the same thing ?
Does the addition of the word ' therapeutic ' change the act ?
Have we been able to separate civil nuclear energy from military nuclear energy ?
This is all the more important since these new techniques require the accelerated production of oocytes , and we know what that means in terms of the exploitation of women ' s bodies , the secondary effects on women , and the trafficking in human eggs .
Moreover , research on adult stem cells opens up the same prospects , though without the ethical problem .
I should just like to say a word about ' gene therapy ' .
More often than not , the genetic element is a predisposition to a disease , and it is external factors which trigger the onset of that disease .
Are we going to modify a gene merely on account of a predisposition , when we now know , following the discovery of the human genome , that a gene modifies other functions which are as yet unknown to us ?
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not on the basis of any religious conviction , but rather as an atheist , that I strongly urge caution .
Mr President , it is mankind 's misfortune , in my view , that recent discoveries in the field of biotechnology have come at a time when the capitalist system still prevails .
With the inhumane , exploitative regime under which we live today , where discoveries such as this come second to the quest for profit , it is pie in the sky to imagine they might be used for the benefit of mankind .
On the contrary , we must expect them to serve the interests of monopolies in this sector .
It will come as no surprise to us , for example , if a market in human ovaries , embryos and stem cells springs up or if new therapies are only available to those with plenty of hard cash .
In all events , ladies and gentlemen , we must proceed very cautiously with genetic engineering .
I for one cannot overlook the fact that life took a billion years to develop on our planet and evolved by natural selection .
Now we can intervene in the evolutionary process and we may perhaps see the immediate results , but we have no idea what will happen in one million year 's time .
And if you think that is a rather long time frame , may I assure you , as an astronomer , that the sun will be in the sky for another 4.5 billion years .
We also face the depraved phenomenon of applications for patents on living organisms and human genomes .
Our view is clear .
It should not be possible to patent any part of the human body , not one cell , not one atom .
We are also categorically opposed to the use of genetic codes by employers , insurance companies , secret services etc .
The Fiori report contains interesting and useful views on a number of questions .
In several articles it points to the risks inherent in commercialisation , especially for the less well off sections of the population .
However , in the final analysis , it remains , to a large degree , within the confines of competitiveness and takes an almost neutral stand on the legal issue .
Let the debate which we are bringing to a close today mark the beginning of a more general reflection on the problem and the starting point for a more responsible stand on these issues .
Mr President , bioethics , or the ethics of the living being , forces us to face certain basic questions , and it is an honour for this House that we should be discussing them today .
What is our conception of the human being ?
Is it a utilitarian or scientific conception , in which human beings , and , in particular , the weakest human beings , are placed in the service of science , or is it a humanist conception , which places science in the service of human beings ?
What constitutes the dignity of the human being ?
Are we to accept the view that dignity may vary according to age , ability , health , or the manner in which an embryo is created ?
No , at a time when laboratories are challenging the consciences of the whole world , I would like Parliament to insist that we all have the same dignity and the same humanity .
What is the point of scientific research ?
Are we going to allow research to become the mirage of a new financial Eldorado ?
No , research must retain the nobility of its purpose - to be at the service of human beings , and in particular to relieve suffering , to assist and care for the disabled , and to improve living conditions for everyone , including those in developing countries .
There must be no contradiction between the dignity of the embryo and that of the sick person .
Our position must therefore be consistent and well founded .
We must not be subject to the whims of the moment , but must base our position on respect for the dignity of the human being , which is the only guarantee of scientific progress .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Fiori ' s report is ambitious and balanced .
It is ambitious because it does not only deal with genome research , which is perhaps a fashionable topic , but it also discusses all the issues arising from and relating to that research : the uses of genetic information , the patentability of products and procedures derived from living matter , the conditions for genetic tests , cloning , research into mother cells and the research framework programme .
And it is balanced because it presents balanced solutions which are far-removed from any particular fundamentalist position .
Therefore , with regard to mother cells , a distinction is made between embryonic mother cells and so-called adult cells , priority is given to research into the latter - which is very promising - and it is considered that the conditions for producing and obtaining mother cells endanger the integrity of the woman ' s body in the case of therapeutic cloning , and this is therefore rejected , or surplus embryos , a practice which is also therefore rejected .
Some argue , in the name of freedom of research , that it should be possible to carry out unrestricted experiments as long as the final objective is therapeutic .
Ladies and gentlemen , research is essential and it must be a special priority , but , like all rights , it has its limits , and human dignity , in particular , provides us with an unassailable limit .
Those of us who believe in this dignity and who try to protect all living beings , cannot sacrifice our values on the altar of freedom of research as the supreme and unrestricted ethical standard , especially when that freedom actually becomes the freedom to carry out the research which is the most profitable for the big pharmaceutical groups .
Today they are presenting us with visions of the future as if they were already realities , when really they are still only promises .
Mr President , the rapporteur has had sufficient courage to avoid simplifications and to deal thoroughly with the issue in a serious and balanced way .
His report is based on an ethical position which is acceptable to everybody , rather than certain religious positions , which are worthy of respect but which are widely rejected , nor that lay ethic which has been referred to today as a supposed supreme standard , which is equally rejected .
I therefore believe that the report deserves our full support .
Mr President , when we decided , about a year ago , to set up the temporary parliamentary committee on human genetics and other new technologies in modern medicine , we did not for a minute imagine that the vote in question would coincide with statements by Heads of State , scientists , private companies and other interested parties .
The announcement about advance cell technology , which uses cloning to create human embryos , makes today 's vote even more crucial .
The debates which have been held have brought minor differences to light in important sectors , such as the protection of human rights , the inviolability of human dignity , the right to self-determination , the confidentiality of personal data , respect for people with disabilities and the ban on discriminatory treatment of employees on the basis of genetic criteria .
It was easy to reach a broad consensus on these issues .
The Commission also agreed that genetic information on living human beings could not be patented .
There was also almost unanimous agreement within the temporary committee on banning funding for research into reproductive cloning .
However , it was on the sensitive issue of therapeutic cloning that the debate and differences of opinion took up most of our time .
The lack of any international framework or regulations for applying this research and the risk of embryos being created in obscenely large or commercial numbers were behind some of the relatively strong reservations .
Clearly , it will not be feasible to reach a broad consensus in this sector for the time being and the work of the temporary committee must continue so that a more detailed investigation can be carried out .
I am positive that , if we can achieve international agreement and if private- and public-sector agencies operate in scientifically predetermined areas on the basis of agreed protocols , then the reservations which I mentioned will be put aside .
This is the only way to resolve chronic health problems without running the risk of abuse which infringes the charter of human rights on human dignity , which are principles and values which must take precedence over freedom of research .
Mr President , this debate is about much more than our view of human genetics : it also about the role we assign ourselves as European politicians in the assessment of ethics , science and the integrity of the European citizen .
I have no monopoly on truth and I believe that it behoves us to show humility .
Citizens are quite capable of taking their own decisions honourably and conscientiously .
Personally , I am in favour of scientific research that is as free as possible , with the possible prospect of a cure for hitherto incurable diseases like Parkinson ' s , diabetes and cardiovascular disease , although in the latter case you can , of course , simply stop smoking .
The work of our committee has shown that European science treats its responsibility conscientiously .
I cannot square with my conscience the fact that we do not support and in some cases even ban the types of research under discussion , including therapeutic cloning and stem cell research using residual embryos .
Of course , others reach different conclusions and I respect that , but we should take note of the fact that different Member States will arrive at different legislation .
Therefore I find myself unable to support the motion before us , if it remains unchanged .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report on a difficult subject .
I believe that Parliament must firmly reject human cloning .
Recent developments in the United States are alarming indeed , but we cannot allow experimentation with , or a market in , human life .
Technically speaking , there is no difference between therapeutic and reproductive cloning .
If we allow human cloning to proceed under the guise of therapeutic cloning , we risk abuses which I fear would result in the production of a handicapped or impaired child .
This is my greatest fear about this experimentation and I believe those fears are well-founded in some of the statements made , such as those of Dr Antinori .
Human embryos should not be created for research purposes , but this has indeed already happened in the US this summer .
Patent protection must be excluded from such experimentation .
Women are being used as the raw material for such research because there is an invasive procedure to extract eggs , the raw material for cloning .
There is already a commercial trade in this , which is very reprehensible .
Mr President , if Europe is to be the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world , as proudly stated at the Lisbon Council , then we must provide the conditions and the environment which will encourage our scientists to test the frontiers of knowledge .
We cannot hobble that search and yet we must also uphold the dignity of the human person .
What is human dignity ?
What is the dignity of someone with Parkinson 's disease , Alzheimer 's disease , cystic fibrosis or quadriplegia resulting from spinal injury ?
Yes , the embryo also is due dignity , but we have large numbers of supernumerary embryos resulting from in vitro fertilisation and these are usually frozen and ultimately destroyed .
Is it not better that these be made available for research purposes , with parental permission , rather than they be uselessly destroyed ?
It is vital that any such research in these sensitive areas be done under strict regulation and only in those countries where it is permitted and where there is adequate regulation .
To my friends I would say , the Good Samaritan crossed the road and helped his neighbour : your neighbour may have Parkinson 's disease , or Alzheimer 's disease or spinal injury , or diabetes .
With due respect , would you pass by on the other side ?
This report also touches on the issue of the patenting of biotechnological inventions , Directive 98 / 44 .
This Directive has passed through all the legislative processes necessary in the European Union to make it law , Commission , Council and Parliament .
Transposition , however , is years behind .
It is surely up to the Commission to insist with all the legal powers at its disposal on transposition in all the remaining countries .
Too often , in all these areas of advance , the Commission and the Member States use fine words and then dither and dally weakly while Europe falls yet further behind .
Commissioner , please be robust . Please stand up for the future of Europe .
Mr President , the ethical dimension of this debate is crucial , but we must not stop there : we must also discuss power .
Who has the final say over the human body ?
The bio-patent directive regulates that power . Unfortunately this directive is not completely transparent .
The opportunities for patents are formulated in overly broad terms and , as a result , power shifts one-sidedly to the big patent-holders .
We must provide a counterweight .
In the first place , we must subject the directive to a thorough evaluation of its socio-economic consequences , and , if necessary , propose an amendment .
Secondly , we must ensure that pharmaceutical companies communicate with the public .
There must be public influence on a research agenda .
What do we want to know , what can we know and who is allowed to know what we know ?
Thirdly , we must make sure that gene therapy remains accessible to all .
Gene therapy is so costly for the time being and that may threaten accessibility .
Fourthly , we must ask ourselves what the results of the medical revolution are : we are living longer , we are becoming more individual , we are banishing ailments , and all that has consequences for human relationships , for the labour market and for health care .
Finally , we must draw up a public research agenda , which we must not allow to be delimited by artificial , ethical boundaries .
We must move from a narrow ethics based on orthodox religion to a broadly based social ethics .
The sixth framework programme plays an essential part in this , but cooperation between national public institutions is at least as important .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of a substantial minority of my group that wishes to promote scientific research into embryonic stem cells and also supports therapeutic cloning : it is precisely with gene technology that medical breakthroughs can be achieved that would otherwise be impossible .
We firmly reject reproductive cloning , not only of human beings but also of animals .
We do not share the Christian and obscurantist motivation of the majority of the Fiori report .
The view that therapeutic cloning automatically leads to reproductive cloning is untenable .
This is what we do not support the Fiori report in its present form .
Mr President , at a time when our fellow citizens are asking , now that we have created the Europe of merchandise , to construct a Europe of human beings , the embryo has come to the heart of Europe .
At this point I should like to thank the President of the European Parliament for listening to the voices of some of us , following the British work last August authorising cloning for therapeutic purposes , and creating an ad hoc committee which , having held many hearings , gave rise to the Fiori report , which I welcome for its remarkable commitment to this subject .


Thus , contrary to other parliaments , such as the French Parliament , for example , we are meeting at the very moment when a private company announces that it has carried out human cloning , under cover of therapeutic purposes .
I understand the objective , but we must be aware of the fact that this objective is really , underneath , an alibi , if we remember that there is another objective underlying it , that of the lure of immeasurable profits and potential markets .
What is the real issue here ?
In defiance of the principle of the inalienability and non-patrimoniality of the human body from the moment of conception onwards , which is laid down in all international declarations , it has been proposed that we should become what we are fighting against , organisms genetically modified by the uncontrolled creation of embryos as a source of spare parts for human bodies , thereby making it possible to repair sick people .
We know that at any given moment in a decision-making process , there comes a time when it is necessary to look up from what we are doing and ask ourselves the question , ' Shall I go on or shall I stop ' .
We believe that the time has come to set a limit , because the line between reproductive cloning and therapeutic cloning is a very thin one , since therapeutic cloning is , in fact , nothing more than interrupted reproductive cloning .
I do not know whether I am on the side of ethics , but I am well aware , at any rate , that in expressing myself in this way I am not on the side of modernity .
Such archaic classifications are irrelevant , because I believe that the real shock to civilisation lies among the modernists , those neo-scientists who believe that the human being is a material , and those who regard the human being as an essential resource for technical purposes .
It was in that spirit that I tabled Amendment No 213 on the non-patentability of living beings , like Amendment No 212 , showing that there is no difference between therapeutic and non-therapeutic cloning .
It is also in that spirit that I appeal to the President of the European Parliament to allow our committee to become a permanent one , and I appeal to the President of the Commission to involve the parliaments of Europe in bioethics , so as not to deprive the public of this debate , and finally I appeal to the Heads of State and Government to commit to an international convention on bioethics .
Firstly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for the work that he and his staff did in producing what was a good report until we had that regrettable vote in committee which has unfortunately now produced a report which I personally cannot support .
This debate on that report comes at a very opportune moment after American research companies announced that they had successfully cloned human embryos .
It is quite clear that if we accept this report we will fall behind the rest of the world in the development of very important treatments for cancer , diabetes , Parkinson 's and Alzheimer 's disease .
This debate does not impose any legal requirements upon Member States but if the messages we send out today are heard strongly across Europe , they will have serious implications for vital areas of medical research in the future .
These proposals are restrictive and extreme .
They do not reflect a sensible and balanced approach .
If you look around Member States , for example the United Kingdom , we can see that a genuine lead has been taken to recognise the undoubted potential benefits of these technologies but also that there is the need for controls and proper licensing arrangements which reflect the very real ethical concerns .
We should not , in my view , adopt these proposals as they stand because they are unrealistic , potentially damaging and will seriously harm medical research across the whole of the European Union .
The announcement in the United States this week has quite clearly demonstrated the speed at which research is now moving and the need to move technology and regulation on at the same pace .
If these proposals become EU policy we will see the clock being turned back rather than being speeded up to keep pace with important technological developments .
Mr President , I am one of those opposed to cloning , including therapeutic cloning .
The distinction between it and reproductive cloning is mainly a semantic one and , in any case , therapeutic cloning opens the door to reproductive cloning .
Good intentions , such as the search for solutions to diseases , are not sufficient to prevent what you wish to avoid , such as , and there is unanimity on this point , reproductive cloning and eugenic research .
Those who suggest that there is no openness , that a morality is being imposed on the general public and an ethical supremacy is being claimed , are wrong : there has been a year of discussion , all points of view have been extensively aired , the testimony of scientists and experts has been heard , and in today ' s vote everyone has an equal voice .
In the Netherlands , particularly , it often strikes me that liberals , when others do not agree with them , suddenly start speaking about the imposition of a morality .
That fails to do justice to the facts and to the power of independent thought of their fellow MEPs .
The suggestion that therapeutic cloning is indispensable for the preservation of human health is misleading : there are alternative research methods that are also promising .
I am against cloning and against the use of embryos , also residual embryos , because I believe that one must not use people instrumentally , as in my view the consequences are dangerous .
Anyway , it will lead to the making of choices between various kinds of human life and there are alternatives .
Research is important , but the job of government is to set frameworks .
Those frameworks must not be solely designed , as the liberals would have it , to prevent medical and scientific research from being hampered .
Nor must they , in my opinion , be inspired only by the free market and individual interest .
We must also look to the general interest : the consequences for people in general , and not just the sick , the consequences for society and for generations to come .
It is impossible that we should create life and then destroy it .
I should like to convey my congratulations to the rapporteur and am exceptionally pleased with this report .
During this debate it has at times been difficult to distinguish heat from light .
As politicians we have a duty to inform ourselves before being dogmatic and proscriptive on matters of medical and scientific research , albeit with the regulatory tool of the precautionary principle for areas of scientific uncertainty available to us .
We must allow research to continue in order to relieve the suffering of the millions with serious diseases and spinal injuries , Alzheimer 's , Parkinson 's , motor neurone disease , diabetes , cancer , heart disease : the list is endless .
However , the proper regulation and licensing of research in the scientific community is a matter for all of us , at Member State , EU and international level , and the present state of that regulation is of some concern .
Let me be quite clear .
I draw the line under reproductive cloning , eugenics and the deliberate creation of embryos for research .
But even the Vatican does not ban all embryonic stem cell research : it accepts it on material from spontaneous abortions .
To those who would say that it is only a semantic distinction between therapeutic and reproductive cloning , I say : I have a butcher 's knife in my hand , I can cut up your steak with it quite legally , or I can cut your head off with it quite illegally - proper sanctions , proper penalties .
We have so many examples of that in life today .
To not allow public funding for research which is legal in a Member State is a curious sanction : nobody is forcing any Member State to make any type of research legal .
Either the research is acceptable and respectful of human life and the dignity of humankind or it is not .
How it is funded hardly makes it more or less ethical .
Let us regulate and license research in this most sensitive and important of areas with commensurate penalties for the exceptional rogue who would put self-glory above the common good and the destiny of humankind .
Wherever you find him or her , may God direct the hands , hearts and heads of the scientific , political and medical communities at this exciting but frightening and bewildering crossroads in time as we test the frontiers of knowledge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for a year now , we in this Parliament have had the opportunity to get to grips with the ethical , social , economic and legal issues raised by human genetics .
I want to thank Mr Fiori for his comprehensive report .
We are currently in a situation of conflict between the breathtaking progress of modern medicine and the ethical foundations of our society .
The decoding of the human genome , the discovery of the functions of the genes , new medical techniques and now stem cell therapy are opening up revolutionary new possibilities for curing quite specific diseases .
But this means that our political responsibility is also growing .
It is the task of politics to define clear boundaries and give a clear direction to values .
We simply cannot allow scientific progress and the potential treatments that result to erode ethical boundaries .
This week the firm ACT presented us with a fait accompli with the creation of a human embryo by nuclear transfer .
Ethical boundaries have clearly been crossed .
We therefore urgently need to send a clear signal from the European Parliament that human dignity must be protected from research that knows no boundaries and no taboos .
We must , therefore , speak out clearly against reproductive and therapeutic cloning of human embryos , against any interventions in the human germ line and against the production of human embryos solely for research purposes .
This ban must apply for both private and public research .
When it comes to stem cell research , I am , in principle , against research that consumes embryos .
I do , however , find the research into the 72 embryonic stem cell lines that were already in existence before 1 August 2001 acceptable in basic research .
Instead of putting life at everyone ' s disposal , special support must be given to alternative research using foetal and adult stem cells .
Every human being has the right to uniqueness .
As politicians , we must defend that right vehemently in future .
Mr President , I would like to join in the congratulations being expressed : our colleague , Mr Fiori , has done a tremendous job which has led to a mature and sound outcome .
We Christian Democrats have taken a reserved attitude to the creation of human embryos for cloning , for therapeutic as well as reproductive purposes .
On the other hand , we do not oppose the development of genetic technology ; rather , we say ' yes ' to research .
But we are anxious for this to take place in a way which respects human dignity .
A human life is of value in itself , right from its commencement , and therefore its dignity must be consciously protected .
During this past year , I have often heard it said that we cannot shackle science or call a halt to development .
This is an irritatingly inaccurate and careless statement .
We are all unanimous in agreeing that a certain type of development must be halted ; after all , nobody in this room wishes to permit reproductive cloning .
Here , at least , we remember the appalling lessons of history .
But it would seem that some have forgotten that the racial hygienists at the beginning of the century were , in their day , leading scientists , not demons .
They wished to help humanity within the framework of their own world of values , just like many people do today .
For this reason it is essential that politicians now take the ethical responsibility which properly belongs to them .
We must focus our attention on what kind of values are to form the direction in which we shall advance .
When discussing the ethics of genetic technology , people often raise the ogre of the threat of the superhuman ; however the true danger lies not in the idea of creating the superhuman , but in the control of the ' subhuman ' .
This takes concrete form in the shape of social hygiene , in which the aim is to isolate ' wrong ' forms of life from the more favoured , and to destroy the unfit .
A reminder of this has also been provided by the representatives of the disabled groups which have visited our committee : we must not create the type of society in which only the healthy are welcome .
In two senses at least , therapeutic and reproductive cloning are no different from one another . In the technical sense , these involve the same procedure ; and if we look at the case from the point of view of the embryo , in both cases this becomes a utility for someone or something other than its own , unique purpose .
How can we ensure that a subsequent step will not be towards human cloning , simply on the grounds that , technically speaking , we have already done this ?
There needs to be serious discussion of this now , so that we are aware of what we are really deciding .
Mr President , the debate we are conducting today touches on the fundamental questions of human existence .
Is there a right to life-long health ?
Is there a right to natural children or a right to healthy natural children or , ultimately , a right to eternal life , healthy of course ?
New techniques are available .
We are being promised cures to many diseases .
They are not proven as yet , at any rate not in the field of embryonic stem cell research .
Do we really want to be blinded by the interests of self-seeking researchers ?
Do we want to allow ourselves to be used by industry and its commercial interests ?
The term ' therapeutic clone ' is a form of misleading packaging .
It can also be used reproductively .
Is the production of clones or the scavenging of ' surplus ' embryos in order to use their stem cells ethically acceptable ?
No , it is not acceptable .
It is more like a modern form of cannibalism .
But this debate is in fact already out of date , overtaken by reality .
There are serious alternatives , adult stem cells , stem cells from umbilical cord blood .
These techniques are already showing great success in practical use , far greater than embryonic stem cell research .
There are no ethical objections to such alternatives .
It is up to politics to set boundaries .
Science is not able to do that , because it does not want to .
We must decide .
We must be courageous in the face of all challenges .
No use must be made of embryonic stem cells , regardless of whether they are cloned or surplus .
No human germ line intervention .
No selection , no choice between life that is valued and life that is not , but support for research in the quest for alternatives .
Let us be courageous and set tight limits .
It is high time we did .
I congratulate Mr Fiori .
The ethical guidelines in his report were agreed after a year of debate and discussion .
There was overwhelming support for ethical research but rejection of any form of human cloning , destruction of human embryos in research , or germ line intervention .
We were disappointed therefore when the Caudron report , voted recently , provided public funding for research in conflict with these guidelines against the constitutional position of my country and three other Member States .
Now some amendments to the Fiori report go further than the Caudron report .
Amendment No 238 would allow germ line intervention for therapeutic purposes and this amendment , combined with Amendment No 237 , would allow therapeutic cloning .
It is ethically wrong to harm or destroy some human lives for the potential benefit of others , and according to key international scientific leaders , research taking place in the United States is proving that using the embryo is unnecessary .
New embryology is proving that adult and other post-natal stem cells have vast biomedical potential , as great or greater than embryonic stem cell potential , which is already being described as old embryology .
So there are other successful , ethical and non-controversial alternatives .
Let us remember that some scientific breakthroughs turn out to be ethical breakdowns .

Mr President , I would like , firstly , to also congratulate Mr Fiori on his excellent report , which I fully agree with , because the very hopeful future possibilities offered to us by biotechnology must not lead us to forget that the human being cannot , under any circumstances , be used as an instrument at the service of science , and Mr Fiori ' s report clearly defines ethical limits for biotechnological research .
In fact , a supposedly civilised society such as ours , which flies the flag of human rights , cannot tolerate the manipulation of the human being , even in its embryonic state , however noble the objective may be .
Therefore , research using embryonic mother cells , even if they are surplus , human cloning - of whatever kind , because it is all the same , since it means the destruction of a human being or opens the door to that possible destruction - and the creation of embryos for research , are unacceptable practices because they attack the dignity of the human being and the supreme value of life which this Parliament , and the European Union , claims to defend so passionately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I say anything else I should like to congratulate most sincerely the members of the temporary committee on human genetics , chaired by Mr Goebbels , and the rapporteur , Mr Fiori , who has done a great deal of work .

Recent developments in human cloning in the United States have once again highlighted the need for , and the urgency of , in-depth political reflection in this area , including and especially at European level .
As you know , since this is an own-initiative report , the Commission is not obliged to adopt a formal position on it .
However , bearing in mind the political importance of the questions that it raises , I should nevertheless like to share with you my thoughts on the main points that it deals with and the positions expressed on them in the resolution .
I shall deal with them in the order in which they have been mentioned .
On the subject of the framework conditions for human genetics , the Commission can only fully subscribe to what has been said .
In matters involving human genetics it goes without saying that ethical considerations are of paramount importance .
As Article 13 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union states , research should be free but , on the other hand , technological progress may , of course , only be applied in an absolutely responsible manner .
The idea of responsible technological progress , moreover , is one of the main axes of the action plan on issues involving science and society which the Commission will shortly be announcing .
I now come to the major issues at stake .
On the subject of genetic testing , the resolution mentions , very opportunely , the question of genetic tests .
There is a real need to improve the consistency of quality standards in this field , by harmonisation or mutual recognition .
The Commission is to undertake a study of the various technical options that are possible in this area .
There is also an obvious need for genetic research into rare diseases to be better coordinated at European level .
I would also remind you that in the new framework research programme , support for creating a network of laboratories working in this field will be possible in the spirit of the resolution on rare diseases adopted in 1999 by the European Parliament and the Council .
On the subject of pharmacogenetics , the resolution also calls for the creation of a harmonised regulatory framework for the development of new genetically-based products .
As you know , there is already a harmonised framework for the developing , testing and authorising of biomedical products .
Community legislation on pharmaceutical products already applies to gene therapy and to the medicines used in cell therapy in terms of general principles .
However , in view of the constant advances being made in science and biotechnology , technical adaptations will have to be made in order to cover certain products specifically .
Thirdly , there is the issue of the use of personal data linked to genome analysis .
As far as the use of personal data is concerned , the right to the protection of one ' s private life and the requirement that there must be free and informed consent are obviously essential .
The Commission will be examining the question of whether and to what extent it is necessary to update and supplement existing Community legislation on the protection of private life .
Personally , I believe that one of the points that we shall be looking at closely , is the question of how such data are used by insurance companies , a question which is , moreover , explicitly mentioned in the resolution .
On the subject of patentability , you have also mentioned the problem of the patentability of products produced using biotechnology .
This is a particularly important question which affects fundamental concepts while , at the same time , having numerous highly technical aspects .
As you know , the directive finally adopted by the Community in this field was adopted after ten years of intense debate , particularly in the European Parliament , and as yet it has been transposed into national legislation in only a certain number of Member States .
Against a background of very stiff international competition , this directive gives European researchers and industrialists an indispensable framework of common reference .
However , in view of its importance as regards innovation , the most urgent task is to establish conditions that will allow it to be applied effectively .
At this stage it is not a question of amending the directive or of reviewing its contents , but there is no doubt that certain aspects of it need to be clarified .
This directive , and the discussions to which it has given rise , illustrate the sort of relationships which it will be absolutely essential to establish between society in the broad sense and science , between the scientific community and the legislature .
Science moves rapidly , and the speed at which knowledge is acquired is accelerating , and yet it is still necessary to legislate .
It is up to the political decision-makers and the authorised public representatives to do this , and to do it responsibly .
However , the decisions taken must be subject to constant scrutiny in the light of the progress made in acquiring knowledge , in the form of an open dialogue between researchers , lawyers , policy-makers and citizens .
There is no doubt that case law will develop .
It can no more do so in a ' scientific void ' than science can develop in a ' legal void ' .
In order to clarify certain aspects of this question of the patentability of products resulting from biotechnology , and the application of the directive , the high-level working party on life sciences , which I set up and which is chaired by Professor Axel Kahn , was invited to deliver an opinion on this subject .
It recently announced an important declaration , which will be included in the Annual Report to the Parliament and the Council , as provided for in the directive .
This working party points out that the protection of genes by patent does not apply to those elements as they exist in their natural environment , but rather to molecules which have been isolated from the human body and are used in the context of a well-defined technical application .
It therefore emphasises the inaccurate and misleading nature of the expression ' patenting life ' .
In the same spirit , the working party points out that it is , in no way , the function and consequence of the patent to make its holder the ' owner ' of the protected object , but to confer on the holder the exclusive right to use the product of his or her invention for a certain period of time .
It also warns against the potential negative repercussions of strategies to take out patents that are too wide-ranging in connection with research and its medical applications .
Finally , the working party draws attention to the need to develop a real culture of intellectual property among researchers , who are often not very familiar with such realities .
It also suggests engaging in a process of collective apprenticeship and the sharing of experience in this field , bringing together the scientific community , the legal world , the political decision-makers , industry , the media and the public .
In this spirit , and in order to prepare the Annual Report to the Parliament and the Council on the implementation of the European directive on the patentability of biotechnological inventions , the Commission is planning to set up a working party of scientific and legal experts who will be able to clarify some of the aspects involved .
When the directive was being prepared , the therapeutic possibilities linked to the use of stem cells were not as clearly identified as they are today .
At the same time , therefore , the Commission has also asked the European Ethics Group for its opinion on the specific question of the patentability of products resulting from this technology .
This opinion is expected to be given by the end of this year .
I now come to the last point mentioned : stem cells and research on embryos and cloning .
This question of how stem cells should be used is a particularly delicate subject , as this debate has demonstrated .
The announcement at the beginning of this week of the results obtained from therapeutic cloning by researchers of an American company has once again raised the questions to which such technology gives rise .
It has led me to remind you that the Commission is opposed to any form of research implying the creation of human embryos solely for research purposes or for the production of stem cells .
However , before anything else , I would just like to remind you of a point of procedure : when it comes to bioethics , the Community does not have any normative powers .
For reasons connected , amongst other things , with respecting the diversity and sensibilities of cultures at national level , it now falls to the Member States to establish rules and regulations in this area .
Basically , the questions raised are currently the subject of intense debate in Member States , here in the European Parliament and , I am glad to say , in the Council of Europe , with which the Commission is cooperating closely , and also at international level .
On certain fundamental principles there is unanimous agreement .
Thus human reproductive cloning is universally condemned . For example , it is specifically condemned in the Charter of fundamental rights of the European Union .
In that spirit , the Commission totally supports the Franco-German initiative seeking to establish an international convention prohibiting human reproductive cloning .
Going beyond that issue , the problems concerning the use of stem cells of embryonic origin and the use of human embryos for research are , as you know , the subject of assessments which vary considerably according to people ' s sensibilities and convictions .
The ethical questions associated with them are complex , because we have to weigh certain fundamental principles and the risks of abuse , against the interests of patients and the possibilities of considerably reducing their suffering and that of their loved ones .
It is never easy , therefore , to set limits , and we must try to achieve a balanced position which will be the position most widely acceptable .
In my opinion , the position whereby the creation of human embryos is prohibited but the use , particularly for the production of stem cells , of already existing , so-called supernumerary embryos is authorised , subject to strictly controlled ethical conditions and within national law , achieves such a balance .
This position reflects the opinion of the European Group on Ethics , which believes that the creation of human embryos by transferring the nuclei of somatic cells for research requirements would be premature , given the vast field of research that remains to be explored with the aid of other sources of human stem cells , in particular , so-called supernumerary human embryos that already exist .
Can we definitively rule out certain research opportunities and thereby risk depriving ourselves of the means of relieving great suffering and compromising Europe ' s chances of remaining at the forefront of human knowledge ?
In our present state of knowledge , many questions still remain open , even in purely scientific terms .
This is why the Commission will be organising a conference on 18 and 19 December here in Brussels - and here I should like to repeat my invitation to any MEPs who may be interested - on the subject of ' Stem cells : treatments for the future ? '
The discussions are likely to cover the prospective benefits and the priorities of research using stem cells , but also the difficulties of all kinds which such research will have to confront .
I shall end by mentioning one last point , which is that of governance and public debate .
With this in mind , I can only support the report .
I can tell you that the action plan on ' science and society ' which we are preparing follows this approach .
It seeks to encourage public debate on these issues .
It is absolutely essential that the debate should be as wide-ranging and as public as possible .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on issues which will broadly affect the future of European society , I am really very happy to discover that this House has played the role of an essential forum for high-quality debate .
In a Europe whose citizens share the same fundamental values , but may have differences of opinion on certain subjects , it is specifically via the excellence of the European Parliament that the democratic confrontation between opinions should operate .
The Commission intends to continue to associate itself with your efforts in this field , and will continue , in close collaboration with you and with the Member States , to make the essential effort to inform , to reflect and to exchange information which is implicit in responsible scientific and technological progress .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.55 and resumed at 11.05 )

Vote
( Parliament adopted the Commission proposal )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0382 / 2001 ) by Mr Nisticò , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the twentieth time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( short-chain chlorinated paraffins ) [ 9461 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0301 / 2001 - 2000 / 0104 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Nisticò )
Busquin , Commission .
( FR ) Madam President , the Commission is not in favour of Amendment Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
Amendment Nos 1 and 3 could extend the scope that has been proposed and such a move would not be justified on the basis of our current knowledge .
It could also undermine the scientific bases of the directive that has been proposed .
We cannot accept Amendment No 2 because it deals with substances that are not covered by the directive proposed .
Furthermore , this Amendment runs counter to the Commission ' s right of initiative .
Therefore , the Commission cannot support Amendment Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
Madam President , I share the position expressed by Commissioner Busquin , but it is Parliament ' s wish to reduce the marketing of these substances , which are potentially dangerous to the environment and to human beings .
Amendment Nos 1 and 2 , to the recitals , represent a desire and an instruction by Parliament .
As for Amendment No 3 , we are against it .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0404 / 2001 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council regulation applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences for the period 1 January 2002 to 31 December 2004 [ COM ( 2001 ) 293 - C5-0374 / 2001 - 2001 / 0131 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0176 / 2001 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council regulation ( EC , ECSC , Euratom ) on the financial regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities [ COM ( 2000 ) 461 - C5-0627 / 2000 - 2000 / 0203 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0424 / 2001 ) by Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the supplementary estimates of revenue and expenditure of the European Parliament for the financial year 2001 [ 2001 / 2243 ( BUD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0348 / 2001 ) by Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on amending Council Directive 80 / 987 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer [ COM ( 2000 ) 832 - C5-0017 / 2001 - 2001 / 0008 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0415 / 2001 ) by Mrs Foster , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation security [ COM ( 2001 ) 575 - C5-0481 / 2001 - 2001 / 0234 ( COD ) ]
Regarding Amendment No 6
Mr President , what we are proposing is that in the amendment the words ' develops a mechanism ' should be replaced by ' will take place ' and that the words ' together with the ICAO and ECAC ' , that is , the international aviation organisations , should be added .
( The President established that there was no opposition to voting on this oral amendment ) Regarding Paragraph 3 of the legislative resolution
There is an oral amendment which reads : " Reserves the right to amend in second reading any annex to this regulation adopted by Council in its common position if that annex , as submitted to Council , has not been included in the Commission proposal to the European Parliament . "
( The President established that there was no opposition to voting on this oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Rapport ( A5-0390 / 2001 ) by Mrs Theato , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the criminal-law protection of the Communities ' financial interests [ COM ( 2001 ) 272 - C5-0225 / 2001 - 2001 / 0115 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , now that we have made all these changes , I am sure your services will tell you that the text has become rather incoherent in terms of the text and its intention . Given the preparation of the Commission green paper on the European public prosecutor , the run-up to the IGC in 2004 and the fact that several committees of this House were not consulted , I would ask that this report be referred back to committee .
Mr President , I can support Mr Heaton-Harris ' arguments .
This a controversial report .
It is important that there should be as wide a consensus on this subject as possible and I should therefore like to propose that the report be referred back to the Budgetary Committee .
Madam President , what Mr Heaton-Harris has just said is to some extent correct .
Mr Heaton-Harris was referring to a section about the interim solution of an internal public prosecutor , whereas the other amendments to the proposal for a directive have gone through .
I do not think that this referral back is necessarily the way to solve the problem created by the vote .
I cannot say , and in the light of the voting in committee , I cannot see how this report should be further amended .
Madam President , following the result of the vote there are certain inconsistencies , but they are minor .
We are at first reading , and if every time there are inconsistencies of this type we returned the report to committee , we would have to return a huge number of first readings .
It is therefore completely wrong to return the report to committee .
I can only repeat my arguments yet again , Mr President : this is a very controversial subject and it is important that Parliament should , as far as possible , speak with one voice .
I should therefore like on behalf of my group to plead for referral , to allow us to reconsider the whole matter thoroughly .
( Parliament rejected the request to refer the report back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0389 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Directive 98 / 70 / EC 98 / 70 / CE [ COM ( 2001 ) 241 - C5-0197 / 2001 - 2001 / 0107 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Proposal drafted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the contributions of the European Community to the ' Global Fund to fight HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria ' [ COM ( 2001 ) 612 - C5-0520 / 2001 - 2001 / 0251 ( COD ) ]
Regarding Amendment No 4
Madam President , we could vote for the seven amendments en bloc , but I would like to propose an oral amendment in relation to Amendment No 4 .
According to the Spanish version , the proposed oral amendment only changes three words : in the first line , where it says ' the Community will establish a legal basis for future contributions ' , it should say , ' the Commission should propose a legal basis for future contributions ' , and so on until the end .
According to the Spanish version , no greater modifications are necessary , but the problem is that the compromise text we negotiated with the Council was in English and in that version it would be necessary to make two modifications : in the first line , it would be the same modification which I mentioned for the Spanish , that is : ' The Commission should propose ' , instead of ' The Community will establish ' , and in the last line it should say ' on the three communicable diseases , including any further contributions to the Global Fund ' .
Those are the two modifications I would propose to the English version .
Madam President , in agreement with the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Watson , I would like to present an oral amendment to this compromise amendment , which would add a first sentence .
In English , it is worded as follows :
" ...
Calls on the Council to do its utmost to implement the mandate from the European Council of 21 September and 19 October to unanimously adopt this proposal . Failing that , apply Article 40 ... "
( Because more than 12 Members were opposed to voting on this oral amendment , it was not taken into account )
Madam President , I really do not understand the rejection which has been expressed in this House , but I fear that we are going to see the same thing again and I am therefore not presenting this oral amendment .
We are going to try to make it clear through our explanations of vote that the recourse to Article 40 is just a way of saying that those who do not wish to be involved in the commitment made by the Council on 21 September and 19 October are going to be isolated .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
Of course , Mrs Terrón i Cusí .
I fully understand what you are saying .
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
Report ( A5-0398 / 2001 ) by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council decision setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight against serious organised crime [ 12727 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0514 / 2001 - 2000 / 0817 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0386 / 2001 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2666 / 2000 on assistance for Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1628 / 96 and amending Regulations ( EEC ) No 3906 / 89 and ( EEC ) No 1360 / 90 and Decisions 97 / 256 / EEC and 1999 / 311 / EC , and Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2667 / 2000 on the European Agency for Reconstruction [ COM ( 2001 ) 551 - C5-0477 / 2001 - 2001 / 0223 ( CNS ) ]




( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0385 / 2001 ) by Mrs Färm , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal and on the amended proposal for a Council decision amending Council Decision 1999 / 733 / EC providing supplementary macro-financial assistance to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia [ COM ( 2001 ) 519 - C5-0486 / 2001 + COM ( 2001 ) 613 - 2001 / 0213 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0410 / 2001 ) by Mrs Färm , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council decision on amending Decision 2001 / 549 / EC of 16 July 2001 providing macro financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [ COM ( 2001 ) 618 - C5-0559 / 2001 - 2001 / 0258 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0411 / 2001 ) by Mrs Färm , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council decision on amending Council Decision 1999 / 325 / EC providing macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina [ COM ( 2001 ) 610 - C5-0558 / 2001 - 2001 / 0250 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Proposal for a joint resolution on preparations for the Laeken European Council
Regarding Paragraph 19
Mr President , the oral amendment that I wish to propose is actually something on which agreement was reached in the negotiations on the compromise resolution , but which was dropped in the final text and should therefore be restored .
We propose inserting the words ' and the Copenhagen criteria ' after the words ' Helsinki European Council ' .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendment ) Regarding Paragraph 20
Mr President , my apologies , but in this case it is current events that require us to submit an oral amendment .
We should like the following to be added to this section : " welcomes in this respect the future meeting between the president of Cyprus and the leader of the Turkish community " .
I believe that this accords completely with positions consistently adopted by this House .
I trust that honourable Members will have no objection .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendment ) Regarding Paragraph 30
Mr President , this really will be the last time that I disturb you , in order to ask you whether my fellow-MEPs would object if we added " supports the establishment of the International Criminal Court and invites all States to ratify its statute " to the text .
I believe that this would be a gain for this House to which there will hopefully be no objection .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0368 / 2001 ) by Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Laeken European Council and the future of the Union [ 2001 / 2180 ( INI ) ]
Regarding Amendment Nos 10 and 23
Madam President , may I ask why the most radical amendment , No 23 , is not being put to the vote first ?
The amendments are indeed compatible and we will be voting on No 23 in a moment .
Both amendments will be put to the vote .
We have given serious consideration to the issue and have concluded that the amendments are compatible .
Madam President , I would query your ruling that the two amendments are compatible .
They are clearly addressing exactly the same issue using deliberately different language and I would have thought now that we have adopted Amendment No 10 , which I welcome , Amendment No 23 is no longer necessary .
I do not share your analysis of the matter , Mr Corbett .
Madam President , there is really no need for me to speak now .
I spoke before the vote .
This amendment was , in fact , dealt with when Amendment No 10 was accepted .
I agree with Mr Corbett there because we have asked for adequate representation of both sexes .
That can , of course , also be fifty-fifty , it need not be two thirds one gender and only one third the other .
So the amendment we accepted goes further .
In that respect we have decided correctly .
In its wisdom , the House has reached the same conclusion .
Regarding Amendment No 2
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteurs we propose that the words ' concluding summit in December 2003 ' be deleted and replaced by ' opening summit ' .
Then continue as in the text .
There is a practical reason for this .
The Convention will very probably end in June 2003 and if we do not want to have more than three months ' break before the Intergovernmental Conference starts , it cannot be in December , but must be after the summer recess .
It must , therefore , be amended here as requested by the proposer , to read ' There must be no more than three months ' break between the end of the Convention and the opening summit of the Intergovernmental Conference . '
That is the oral amendment .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0399 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kaufmann , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Commission White Paper on European Governance [ COM ( 2001 ) 428 - C5-0454 / 2001 - 2001 / 2181 ( COS ) ]
Madam President , number 18 is only a reordering .
It is followed by Amendment No 9 and I would like to say a brief word about that .
Firstly , this amendment is tabled not by the group but by myself , as rapporteur .
The purpose of the amendment is to make the text more logical and also to make the content of what it says about regulatory agencies coherent .
I discussed it with the various groups yesterday and obtained their agreement .
That therefore means that Amendment No 9 refers to item 19 , and , in particular , to the deletion of the second part of the paragraph .
At the same time , the shortened paragraph is to be inserted before item 16 , immediately after the heading ' Autonomous regulatory authorities ' .
The word ' only ' must then be inserted in the fifth line of item 16 so that it then reads ' ... only be approved if ... ' .
As I have the floor now , there is a translation error in the Swedish version of Paragraph 27 .
It should read ' Committee of the Regions ' and not ' Economic and Social Committee ' .
We are aware of this , Mrs Kaufmann , and have already made the necessary corrections .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0739 / 2001 ) , by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on a European strategy to encourage quality employment and social policy
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I have just been informed that the French gendarme who was shot yesterday , probably by ETA terrorists , has just died .
On behalf of my group , and I believe on behalf of the whole House , I would like to express my condolences and sympathy in relation to this latest victim of the fight against terrorism in Europe .
Thank you very much , Mr Barón Crespo .
Mr Bayrou has just informed me of this terrible news and I now give him the floor .
Madam President , the police officer we are referring to was murdered yesterday evening in my region , in the town that I represent , and , naturally , emotions are running high .
This is the second time in a week that French police officers have been hit by the bullets of terrorists driving through police roadblocks .
I simply wish to say that we , in this House , have known for a long time that terrorism recognises no borders .
We have also known that what happens to some people will also happen to others and I think that if the European Parliament could , by observing a minute ' s silence , express its solidarity with this officer ' s family and loved ones , with the gendarmerie and with all French and European citizens affected by this evil , it would be sending out a very important signal .
Madam President , after the motion for a resolution on Egypt had been prepared , we received a letter from the speaker of the Egyptian parliament which we would rather not have received .
For this reason I would like to table an oral amendment that the following be inserted after recital E :
" expressing its regrets concerning certain paragraphs of the letter from the President of the People 's Assembly of the Arab Republic of Egypt on this resolution " .
I have spoken with the rapporteur about it and he has agreed to our tabling this amendment .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendment )
Madam President , we would all be very happy to see the letter referred to by Mr Sakellariou , and we would be very grateful if the competent services could distribute it .
Of course this can be done . The letter is by no means confidential .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0391 / 2001 ) by Mr Fiori , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and Other New Technologies in Modern Medicine , on the ethical , legal , economic and social implications of human genetics [ 2001 / 2097 ( INI ) ]
Regarding Amendment No 126
Madam President , I simply wish to point out that Parliament ' s staff should be asked to check the French version of this amendment .
Not only does it not match the original version , but it is also almost incomprehensible .
This is extremely serious , Mrs Flesch .
We shall devote our full attention to resolving the matter .
Regarding Amendment No 51
I join Mrs Flesch in complaining about the quality of translation .
The English version of this amendment is completely different to the French original and largely incomprehensible .
I do not want English-speaking people who look at this amendment to think for one second that I voted for that .
I am prepared to vote for the French version and could I ask that you investigate the quality of translation on this report .
Mrs McNally , I fully understand what you are asking .
I believe we all share your concern and we shall devote all our attention to resolving the matter .
Regarding Paragraph 95
Madam President , I propose inserting an oral amendment in the text before us because , otherwise , it does not make sense for the parts removed include the introduction .
The oral amendment is as follows : ' believes that the setting-up of such a forum ... ' , and the text then goes on in the manner with which everyone is familiar .
( The President declared that there was no opposition to voting on the oral amendments )
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Madam President , I have discovered , from the social briefing , that the Chilean police have stormed offices belonging to the Chilean Communist Party , arresting several workers and wounding the Secretary-General herself .
This has taken place a few days before the elections , which will be held on 16 December , and , according to the social briefing , the Chilean government itself has been shocked by this event .
I would ask you , Madam President , to attempt to get to the bottom of this matter , and should this information prove to be true , to convey the objection of this Parliament .
I find it so unacceptable that this should have happened that I should personally like to express my disapproval .
We shall certainly investigate this information , Mrs Figueiredo .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Dell 'Alba report ( A5-0176 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted against the Commission proposal because the Commission is using the reform of its financial management , which I also believe to be urgently necessary , as a pretext to weaken the European Parliament ' s powers of control .
The EC Treaty provides that the Commission shall present the Parliament with all necessary information on request .
The Commission is now seeking to make that right to information subject to provisos in the Financial Regulation .
For example , in future , the Commission wants to check whether passing information to Parliament would be against the Union ' s interests .
That creates the absurd situation where the party under scrutiny , the Commission , decides what information to put before the one who is to scrutinise it , Parliament , and what not .
That not only weakens Parliament , but it weakens the Commission itself .
In future , it will have to listen to the criticism that it has learned nothing from the past and is continuing to escape effective control .
Bouwman report ( A5-0348 / 2001 )
. ( FR ) The text that we have just been considering is intended to revise a 1980 directive guaranteeing the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer and particularly the payment of salaries that have not been paid for a minimum of three months .
This directive needed an update , which we approved , to clarify , for example , the procedure for cases in which companies have bases in several European countries , or to better protect part time and home workers .
Nevertheless , we cannot accept the surfeit of amendments that the European Parliament has accepted , which has led , with the best intentions in the world , to a huge increase in the detailed requirements imposed on all Member States .
It is probably worthwhile considering all the cases of labour relations that are likely to tie an individual to a company , to enumerate every type of salary , allowance or related payment or to list all cases of formal or informal insolvency , but we feel that these provisions must be referred to the legislation of the Member States .
Similarly , it might be useful to extend the period of time during which salaries are guaranteed , but it is up to the Member States to consider , in the context of their social relations and of their own budgets , whether this extension is useful and feasible .
What we have here is a tangible example of how a directive , which , in theory , should be limited to setting broad objectives , runs the risk of being corrupted by pressure from various sources , leading to a restrictive and overly-detailed text , which might be inappropriate to the situation in some Member States .
. UK Conservative MEPs are sympathetic to the thrust of the Bouwman Report but have voted against Amendment Nos 13 and 14 , as well as some other amendments .
These amendments go well beyond the Commission 's original objectives in bringing forward this proposal , and there are no grounds for suggesting that the levels of protection in the original Directive are inadequate .
The removal of Member States ' ability to set an upper level on the amount of outstanding pay claims to be guaranteed would go well beyond the aim of providing a minimum standard of protection to safeguard the vulnerable .
The extension to six months of the minimum period of outstanding pay claims to be guaranteed would also significantly increase public expenditure and go well beyond the social aims of the Directive .
We note that the UK Government also supports the Conservative position , and we are hopeful that on this occasion Labour MEPs might also accept the instructions of their home government .
I asked for roll-call votes to make sure .
. ( NL ) Because labour is a significant cost factor in the production of goods and even more in the supply of services , one sees , time and time again , that employers try to reduce their obligations .
It is increasingly common for dishonest employers and those in difficulties not to settle the wage bill when the work has been carried out .
Employees then do not receive their due or can only obtain it after having recourse to the courts .
The European Commission ' s proposal omits to lay down in what cases one can speak of an employer , an employee , or wages owing .
Rapporteur Bouwman quite rightly proposes also bringing small independent sub-contractors , homeworkers and domestic staff within the scope of this regulation , so that there are no loopholes if a malicious employer stops paying wages .
The setting up of national guarantee funds will be compulsory , and they must be kept separate from employers ' operating capital .
All wage claims by employees , including overtime pay , holiday bonuses and severance payments , must be covered and there must be no ceiling on payments .
This is one of the better proposals , which would mean that the European Union would finally be doing something to help employees .
In recent years most proposals have served mainly employers ' interests .
Foster report ( A5-0415 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted for Mrs Foster ' s report on airport security .
I am pleased to highlight the fact that this document calls for surprise , unannounced inspections .
This seems a logical course of action which , until now , has very rarely been taken , hence my appreciation .
I notice , however , that only EUR 1.215 million is being appropriated for these inspections .
This is an extremely modest sum and simply not enough .
Whyever did Mrs Foster not ask for more money for these inspections ?
One might almost say that she wanted to economise on the European Parliament budget .
This seems rather stingy , Mrs Foster , an attitude perhaps more suited to the Scots or Genoese .
I am Genoese and I suggest and believe it would be better to use more money for these airport inspections .
. ( FR ) No one is against stepping up security in airports and on aeroplanes .
The problem , however , and concern about this is expressed in the justification for an amendment , is that the events " of 11 September in the United States have proven that the liberalisation of airport services ( ... ) made the strict implementation of security measures more difficult " .
The privatisation of these services and its implications for the quest for profit , for high returns and for the exploitation of a work force with precarious contracts , does not make for effective security .
Forcing civil aviation operators and the largest among them , the companies running airports and the airlines , not only to comply with long-standing security measures but also to bear the costs of these themselves would be a straightforward matter .
Instead , the rapporteur concludes that it is up to the States to bear these costs and that even if private interests prove to be irresponsible , incapable of providing security worthy of its name , they nonetheless have the right to make profit and as a bonus , to be subsidised by States , in other words , by the general public .
This shows utter disregard for everyone .
This is why , by voting for further security in the aviation sector , we are condemning this new excuse to subsidise private interests from private funds .
We have , therefore , voted against this report .
. ( EL ) The proposal on civil aviation security does not address so-called terrorism .
The fight against terrorism is simply being used as an excuse to create a climate of mass fear in order to smooth the way for the anti-democratic , anti-grass roots policies being promoted .
At the same time , and with the same excuse , a first class opportunity for speculation has arisen as a result of the ' safety ' measures being recommended or imposed in the form of exorbitantly expensive equipment or services , the cost of which is being passed on to users / passengers .
In addition , an attempt at ' internationalisation ' is being made by forcing ' anti-democratic measures ' on all countries , which will be subject to inspection by ' inspectors ' whose mission has deliberately been left vague rather than being clearly defined .
It is no accident that the proposal lays claim to global validity - on the pretext of transnational agreements between Member States of the European Union and other countries - given that its purpose is to make controls as broad as possible and cut grass-roots freedoms as far back as possible .
A typical example is the new law on air traffic safety signed by President Bush on 19 November , requiring foreign airlines to submit full details of passengers bound for the USA to the relevant American authorities directly .
The USA are asking the airlines of numerous countries to submit advance lists of all passengers detailing their full name , date and place of birth , passport number and place of issue , visa or green card number and any other information deemed necessary to identify possible terrorists .
At the same time , they warn that , if they fail to comply , as of Thursday 29 November , passengers arriving on these airlines will undergo exceptionally stringent checks by the American authorities and their luggage will be searched thoroughly , all of which may take several hours .
This is a bitter taste of the ' big brother ' policy and of the restriction and abolition of the freedom of movement and rights of citizens in a climate of ' mass fear ' , the aims of which have nothing to do with safety .
In our view , the measures already taken more than suffice and no further measures are required .
Terrorism has social roots and therefore needs a social response .
Adopting more and more suppressive and , basically , ineffectual measures , which have nothing to do with combating terrorism , is mere cunning .
I congratulate Mrs Foster on her excellent report , which I fully support .
This is a piece of work that demonstrates considerable technical understanding in addressing an issue of crucial importance for the future of civil aviation and in respect of which I should like to emphasise the following points :
the need for the Member States to commit themselves to drawing up a comprehensive policy for financing security in air travel , which must be entirely under government control , because security threats against aviation are a manifestation of threats against the state ;
the need to pass a number of common laws in the field of civil aviation under the terms of the agreements concluded at the European Civil Aviation Conference , as a means of increasing airport security in the European Union .
. ( NL ) The growth in air traffic was already stalling before aeroplanes full of unsuspecting passengers were used by terrorists as rockets to destroy great buildings .
As a result of years of fierce competition between familiar traditional national airlines and adventurous newcomers , overcapacity was created , so that they are no longer able to withstand setbacks and must beg for state support in order to survive .
The choice now seems to be between ruthless rationalisation , with a number of airlines going bankrupt and mass dismissals taking place , and government-subsidised price competition designed to maintain overcapacity .
If Mrs Foster has her way , taxpayers will have the privilege of paying for the losses of privatised companies and private companies will have control of government policy .
I would argue for a completely different solution from either ruthless rationalisation or the granting of subsidies .
Pointless and wasteful competition must be replaced by cooperation and decision making on a basic network of connections to other continents and , if necessary , also to peripheral areas within Europe .
Costs of insurance , security , advertising campaigns and fuel tax must be included in full in the ticket prices , so that flying loses its competitive advantage over the train .
Then the retraining and the job security of staff can be paid for , in the short term , from new tax income , without granting further subsidies to companies .
Theato report ( A5-0390 / 2001 )
Madam President , as you know , I am the representative of the Pensioners ' Party and I got to this Parliament on the votes of Italian pensioners .
Well then , with regard to the report by Mrs Theato on the financial interests of the European Community , I am sorry but when I read the word ' interest ' I think of the interest that should be paid to pensioners for the late payment of their pensions .
I therefore voted automatically for this document , of course , but I also thought , ' I wonder if one day we shall manage to protect pensioners ' interests by getting interest paid when pensions are paid out late , which happens all over Europe ! '
I disagree with Mr Fatuzzo on the Theato report because , as the European Democratic wing of the EPP , as the British Conservatives are , we were completely against the Theato report from start to finish .
We felt that the initial proposal was amended out of sight by the rapporteur and she put in her proposal that the European public prosecutor would lead to Corpus Juris .
It was mentioned many times that initially the European public prosecutor would be the first stage only to protect the Community 's financial interest which would then lead on to much greater things .
Madam President , even though you asked me to group together my roll-call votes - I was surprised you asked me in this particular report and not someone else in the Fiori report .
You will have noticed that the British Conservatives actually managed to persuade a number of different delegations in this House to get a majority against some of the proposals .
However , the whole report as it stood is still unacceptable .
Firstly , I would like to say that even though I was here for the Theato report I did not participate for exactly the same reasons as Mr Heaton-Harris .
It is totally incorrect and wrong that we participate in those kind of votes .
Turning to the Watson report , we all agree on the need for cooperation and coordination in combating terrorism .
However , I would like to speak with particular reference to the European arrest warrant .
This represents a major interference and alteration of the national judicial systems and the criminal-law procedures within the Member States .
As well as overturning the civil rights protections which have been built up by precedent and , particularly in Britain and Ireland , under the common law system , it takes no account of the different legal systems within the Member States .
Nor is any account taken of guaranteeing the right of appeal and right to judicial review at both the executing and issuing stage , nor any account of the rights of the individual concerned .
It also fails to set up a mechanism to sort out difficulties and problems arising from a Member State 's refusal to enforce the arrest warrant outside the specific areas that it excludes .
Finally , if this law or proposal was brought into any Member State or non-member country , Parliament would be the first to object and complain .
Yet when a EU Member State re-introduces internment without trial and abolishes the right to judicial review , we remain silent and condone the kind of treatment that undermines civil liberties and totally ignores the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is incorrect and it is wrong .
Even though I voted in favour , I voted with grave and serious reservations .
Today , we have elected to abstain in the vote on the report on the criminal-law protection of the Community ' s financial interests .
We do not oppose the appointment of a European Public Prosecutor for financial concerns , but the report goes too far and into such detail as is irrelevant at this stage .
The rapporteur is also seeking to convert the Commission directive into a regulation , which is something that we oppose .
- ( DA ) Although we fully support initiatives for combating fraud , we have chosen to vote against the report , since we do not believe that introducing a European public prosecutor for financial matters is an appropriate solution to the problem .
Hautala report ( A5-0389 / 2001 )
I should like to give an explanation of vote on behalf of the British Conservative Group , the European Democrat wing of the EPP , and say why we oppose the regulation being extended to agricultural tractors .
The primary reason for this directive is not to control atmospheric pollution itself as we inhale it but to actually reduce the effect that sulphur dioxide has on advanced catalytic systems .
Tractors are not fitted with these systems so it would be pointless to extend this regulation to tractors .
It would result in more carbon dioxide being produced in the refineries and also a 10 % increase in the price of fuel for farmers .
So although we welcome this report as tabled we could not support the amendments on tractors and , therefore , as those amendments went through we voted against the report as a whole .
I hope that the rapporteur , Commission and Council will take note of the fact that they were at least 70 votes short of a qualified majority for second reading .
. ( FR ) We are , of course , in favour of improving the quality of petrol and diesel fuels in order to protect the environment .
Once again , however , subsidies are being proposed , not for consumers , but for producers .
Since we are against any form of subsidy to employers and , in particular , to the extremely wealthy automobile and oil corporations , we have not voted in favour of this report .
- ( FR ) In order to improve air quality , especially in urban areas , three different , but convergent , methods may be used : legislative provisions relating to air quality , standards relating to vehicle emissions and standards applicable to fuels .
It is in this third area that successive directives have been introduced , providing for the progressive phase-out of leaded petrol and giving the Member States the option of recourse to fiscal incentives in favour of cleaner fuels .
However , one issue was left to one side , and that was the specifications for sulphur-free fuels .
That is what is tackled by this proposal for a directive , which is very late arriving .
Just as we are opposed to a standard European regulation governing air quality , which is a local problem , so we think it worth harmonising fuel specifications , since the refiners ' markets extend way beyond national borders .
Tackling the subject of fuel standards should provide the opportunity for being much more vigorous in introducing specifications in favour of bio-fuels .
Indeed , the fuels we manufacture from agricultural produce cannot be faulted in terms of the greenhouse effect , make a major contribution to Europe ' s self-sufficiency in energy and constitute a very important outlet for a number of our agricultural products .
We need to move much more vigorously in the direction of legislation that encourages the replacement of growing quantities of fossil hydrocarbons in motor fuels .
Hugues Martin recommendation ( A5-0387 / 2001 )
I voted against the report by Mr Hugues Martin on relations between the European Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt , Madam President .
Why did I vote against it ?
Because there are civil rights that are not respected enough in Egypt .
They concern all Egyptian citizens , of course , and before we grant any money we should demand that the basic standards of protection of Egyptian citizens of any age - young people , workers or pensioners - be respected and check that they are .
. ( EL ) When it signs the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement with Egypt , the Council must emphasise the need to protect Community nationals who fall victim to the lack of freedom in this country .
In particular , the Council needs to intervene in the case of the remaining survivor of the three Greek seamen sentenced for drug smuggling about ten years ago .
Although only young , two of them have already died in the intolerable conditions which prevail in Egyptian jails .
The Council should intervene to save the life of the last surviving Greek seaman in jail in Egypt , who should be allowed to serve out his sentence in a Greek jail .
This human rights issue has quite rightly caused concern in Greece and , with this in mind , I abstained from voting for the Martin Hugues motion .
. ( ES ) I have voted against the report in order to protest at the violations of human rights in Egypt suffered by various groups for reasons of belief , political persuasion , cultural origin and sexual orientation , as demonstrated recently by the judgment against dozens of people in Cairo .
. I voted against the report because of the ongoing human rights abuses against homosexuals , intellectuals and religious minorities .
The Egyptian government must take measures to improve the situation of the 8-10 million Coptic Christians in Egypt , who are discriminated against in legislation and in professional and social life , as well as in the practice of their religion .
The Coptic Christians are currently treated as second-class citizens in the state policy on public appointments .
There is no absolute religious freedom in Egypt , as legislation restricts the ability of Christians to repair churches or build new ones .
It is also vital that the Christian minority perceive the judiciary as impartial .
. ( NL ) The human rights issue in Egypt , notably the recent witch-hunt against homosexuals and the curtailing of the freedom of women , necessitates us to look at this issue carefully in the relationship between Egypt and the EU .
The Council and the Commission are not doing enough , if anything at all . That is why I will vote against this report .
- ( FR ) The discussion on the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the EC and Egypt is a tragic illustration of the European Union ' s conception of foreign policy .
In this type of agreement , what takes precedence over everything else is establishing a free-trade area in the Mediterranean and giving priority to liberalisation and the dismantling of public services .
The Member States have no reason to be proud of the fact that they are pursuing trade relations with the Egyptian state , which scorns human rights and freedom of expression and of conscience , which practises the death penalty and which has no time for political pluralism .
Today , the imprisonment of 52 Egyptians for homosexuality should be the time radically to re-think our relations both with Egypt and also with other countries with totalitarian tendencies .
What is now a matter of urgency for us is to demand of President Mubarak and his government that they free these 52 detainees immediately and unconditionally .
It is a question of penalising the Egyptian State and its policies by not contributing to the financial enrichment of a minority that despises human rights .
I have voted in favour of this report because it strongly emphasises this requirement .
Watson report ( A5-0397 / 2001 )
Madam President , I personally voted for the Watson report introducing the European arrest warrant , although I am very concerned at the fact that this report allows those prosecutors that are entitled to use the arrest warrant to do so even for crimes punishable by four months ' imprisonment .
After the terrible attack on the Twin Towers , which led us , at last , to move towards bringing in the European arrest warrant , after this , seeing it being used for chicken thieves does make me rather sad .
I feel we should use this arrest warrant for really serious crimes and not just for much smaller crimes , where national law should prevail .
Madam President , the European Parliament should also take action to adapt not only the individual legislations of Member States but also the functions of the investigative bodies .
The efficacy and efficiency of action to prevent and combat terrorism depend substantially , in fact , on the coordination of these bodies and their modernisation .
In consideration of this , we are proposing the creation of a European intelligence school .
Currently , there are not even liaison offices between the various bodies .
We recently had a glaring example , with serious consequences , of this lack of liaison in communication , intelligence and information activities between the bodies operating in the countries of Europe .
It is the case - for which , in this sense , we Europeans also bear responsibility - of the barbarous murder of Commander Massoud by illegal immigrants of Tunisian nationality , who were able to travel around Europe without any difficulty on false passports stolen in Belgium and the Netherlands .
Madam President , I want to say that there is a large discrepancy between what the European Parliament normally champions , namely democracy , human rights and the rule of law , and what has happened today , when we have adopted this report by Mr Watson on combating terrorism at a speed completely out of keeping with the analysis that ought to have been carried out and the public debate that ought to have preceded such a report .
Adopting the report will have incalculable consequences for the rule of law in the Member States , and there are quite a few NGOs which had warned us against adopting it and called upon us to set a thorough debate in motion and undertake a detailed analysis before doing so .
I believe that , in this connection , many of us have taken decisions contrary to our national constitutions in areas such as freedom of expression , freedom of association , democracy and the rule of law .
. ( EL ) My group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left , does not support the report by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedom and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the European arrest warrant .
Obviously , if we want to promote unification and deal with increasingly international challenges such as terrorism and drugs , we need to create a single area of justice , but this needs to be based on safeguarding and broadening democratic rights .
However , the European arrest warrant , especially in the hasty and thoughtless manner in which it is being pushed forward :
a ) reflects pressure from the USA rather than the maturity of endogenous procedures in the European Union ;
b ) is being extended to a broad range of offences unconnected with terrorism , rather than being confined to the urgent challenges caused by terrorism ;
c ) is being imposed arbitrarily , rather than through consultation with civil society ;
d ) suffocates and restricts the area of justice of the Member States .
This being the case , we are concerned that an arbitrary European structure may be created with serious democratic shortcomings .
. ( EL ) For some time now , and especially recently , the European Union has been no more than a factory churning out legislation which undermines democratic freedoms ( Schengen Information System , extended powers for EUROPOL , European public prosecutor , restrictions on the entry and movement of immigrants ) .
A typical example is the report on initiatives to combat terrorism adopted just a few days before 11 September .
Now the European Parliament is being asked to give its opinion - an opinion which is in no way binding on the Council or the Commission - on two framework decisions on so-called terrorism and the European arrest warrant .
It is perfectly clear that the horrendous events of 11 September have been used as a pretext to speed up the application of political decisions taken a long time ago .
The perpetrators of , and accessories to , these attacks have played straight into the hands of the American and European imperialists , giving them an excuse to settle both international and domestic accounts .
The Communist Party of Greece , with its sense of responsibility for grass-roots freedoms and rights and bitter experience of the laws which sent thousands of members of the Greek resistance into jail , exile or to the firing squad and which are nightmarishly similar to a number of the provisions being proposed , has a duty to divulge the real intentions of the rulers of the European Union .
We should point out that all so-called ' terrorist crimes ' are already punished under current criminal legislation in all the Member States .
The real aim here is to terrorise any civil resistance or disobedience movements and the parties proactively opposing and reacting to political and capitalist globalisation as a whole or certain aspects of it .
Standard forms of resistance , such as sit-ins , or the effects of resistance , such as interruptions to electricity or water supplies when the sectors in question go on strike , can easily be classified as terrorist crimes .
The cotton farmers reduced to desperation by union policy who have taken to the national roads in their tractors are in danger of being classified as terrorists and thrown into prison for at least 5 to 10 years .
We have reached the point where expressing an opinion is punished as a terrorist crime .
The framework decision on the European arrest warrant , the legality of which is open to question , undermines the sovereign rights of the Member States and contradicts Articles 5 ( 2 ) , 6 and 7 of the Greek constitution .
The abolition of double indemnity , the facility to extradite a national to another state , the facility for the state to which the accused has been extradited to extradite him ( without the permission of the state which extradited him in the first place ) to a third country which is not a Member State of the European Union ( for example , a Kurd is extradited by Greece to Germany , which then extradites him to Turkey without asking Greece ) contradict basic principles of criminal law .
They also contradict fundamental procedural rights and freedoms which are vital to the defence of those facing prosecution .
The terrorist law and European arrest warrant are the last bricks in the edifice of a nightmarishly suppressive mechanism .
It is obvious that the people building this edifice know full well that their anti-grass roots policy at both European Union and global level will provoke a grass-roots reaction .
They expect this reaction to swell and fear the deluge of grass-roots anger .
What they do not know , or perhaps refuse to accept , is that no force on earth can stop this deluge .
At best , the proposed amendments attempt to improve certain offensive positions or shortcomings in the text , although they do nothing to change their nature .
We cannot be party to this sort of approach .
The only honest stand which respects collective and individual democratic rights is to reject the two proposals outright .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
- ( FR ) The Commission proposals designed to harmonise the definition of terrorism , to define a minimum platform of penalties and to put in place a European arrest warrant to replace the old system of extradition leaves us feeling very unsatisfied .
Indeed , these are old federalist projects which are being dusted off under the pretext of the attacks of 11 September but which , in reality , do not contribute any particularly crucial practical element to the fight against terrorism .
The first proposal , relating to the definition of terrorism and the sanctions used to combat it , has been much trumpeted , as if the lack of a harmonised definition in the countries of the European Union , at present , constituted a dreadful weakness which terrorists would exploit .
It does nothing of the kind .
The definitions and penalties may vary from one State to another , but there is no State which leaves terrorists at liberty .
Everyone is agreed on the matter , even if the names vary .
The proposed text therefore satisfies the federalists ' obsession with standardisation but is not going to change very much on the ground .
The same applies to the second proposal , relating to the European arrest warrant .
At present , extradition is , without any doubt , a fairly long procedure , but one which protects individual rights .
The European arrest warrant might be faster , but it is not even reliable , because precautions have to be taken all the same .
We ask , in particular , that the judicial authority of the executing Member State not be restricted to the role of formally recording the extradition request but , rather , that safeguards be established to guarantee the protection of freedoms .
This clause is all the more necessary in view of the fact that , given the pace at which new countries are acceding to the European Union , we no longer know which countries will be members of the European Union in ten or twenty years ' time .
The procedure should be still more restrictive when the executing Member State is asked to hand over one of its own nationals to another country .
We think that , in such cases , the normal procedure should be extradition in its traditional form , and not the European arrest warrant .
. ( NL ) I endorse the present report and the proposal on a framework decision to combat terrorism .
Since terrorism is invariably cross-border in nature , the European countries will need to join forces .
However , the European arrest warrant goes too far in one area .
It concerns the negative list and the abolition of dual criminality , as proposed by the Commission .
Since Member States are not very keen on surrendering criminals as it is , a general arrest warrant and hence the abolition of dual criminality will meet with major problems .
Various Member States , including the Netherlands , will indeed make every effort to prevent surrender for euthanasia or abortion , for example .
That is why I have supported the amendments tabled by fellow MEPs Niall Andrews and Brian Crowley .
They call for a positive list .
This is also in line with the Council ' s current view .
The European arrest warrant would then only apply to crimes which feature on this list .
This is , for example , true for an arrest warrant that applies to punishable offences whose criminality has already been harmonised at European level , such as terrorism .
If this appears to be working well , the number of crimes on the positive list can always be extended .
Drafting a negative list may indeed be an option in future , but it is still too early for this .
One should not forget that Member State criminal law largely reflects their national culture .
The discrepancies between the Member States are simply too vast at the moment .

Since the amendments tabled by Mr Andrews and Mr Crowley have not been adopted , we are unable to support the second part of the Watson report with regard to the European arrest warrant .
It seems to make little sense to us to vote for a negative list while the Council has decided on a positive list .
- ( DA ) We support the fight against terrorism , and we will defend the principle that the political struggle must be conducted by democratic means in democratic states .
If we are voting against the Watson report on combating terrorism and on the common European arrest warrant , it is for the following reasons :
1 .
An attempt is being made to force the proposals through Parliament and the Council by means of an accelerated procedure that excludes the possibility of a public debate on the subject and that does not provide the opportunity to obtain a thorough analysis of the consequences for democratic rights and the rule of law .
2 .
The common European arrest warrant will entail harmonisation of maximum and minimum penalties by the back door .
That is extremely problematic because there are widely different juridico-political traditions in the Member States .
Likewise , harmonisation and the introduction of a common definition of terrorism will be at odds with the very different political realities in the Member States .
3 .
Because it is a principle that can all too easily lead to false information being given or to serious crimes going unpunished , we oppose introducing the option of reduced penalties for anonymous cooperation in the work of detection .
4 .
An attempt is being made to force through the proposals before us at high speed and under pressure of the events of 11 September .
However , the proposals are not concerned with the type of events that are already prohibited and in relation to which legal proceedings can be taken in all the Member States .
Instead , the proposals are concerned with so-called European terrorism which , in terms of the very loose definition contained in the proposals , can cover everything from ETA 's killing of civilians to actions and statements by individuals and legal political organisations .
Europe must cooperate more effectively in the fight against terrorism , both within its borders and internationally .
In our view , terrorism is one of the greatest threats to democracy , to the free exercise of human rights and to economic and social development .
Terrorism is not a recent phenomenon , but in recent years , we have seen an increase in terrorist activities , with a profound change in the nature of terrorist offences , with new threats arising , and with the use of new and much more sophisticated instruments , which has led to the real or potential effects of these attacks becoming increasingly devastating and deadly .
The terrible events of 11 September have made the reality of this situation painfully clear and have shown how crucial it is that we find an effective response to this scourge ; it is , therefore , of vital importance that our Member States have effective criminal legislation to combat terrorism and that measures are adopted with a view to improving police and judicial cooperation , and cooperation at international level .
The first of these initiatives proposes the adoption of a common definition of terrorist acts and a definition of levels of sanctions and penalties - which must be effective , proportionate and act as a deterrent - which must , in all Member States , reflect the gravity of these acts .
There are currently considerable differences between Member States , inasmuch as only six Member States have specific legislation on terrorism ( one of them being Portugal ) .
Harmonisation is , therefore , crucial , at this level , so as to prevent terrorists being able to take advantage of these differences in the Member States ' legal processes or exploit any legal loopholes arising from the geographical limitations of investigations .
The second initiative is based on the principle of mutual recognition of final decisions .
Its aim is to replace traditional extradition procedures with a straightforward system of surrendering criminals on the basis of a European arrest warrant because , since extradition is a procedural , cumbersome and complex process , it is no longer appropriate to an area without borders .
Under this new system , the European arrest warrant , on being issued in one Member State , must be executed throughout the territory of the Union , but must always , in all circumstances , respond to the concerns of Europe ' s citizens in safeguarding individual rights .
Adopting these proposals will , therefore , provide unequivocal evidence of the Member States ' willingness to improve cooperation , at all levels , in the fight against terrorism .
It is difficult , in such a short explanation of vote , to sum up all that needs to be emphasised about the dangerous negative aspects of these Commission proposals for a framework decision which , incomprehensibly , the Portuguese government supports .
On the pretext of fighting against terrorism , the European Commission is going ahead with proposals that it has already been working on , led by Commissioner Vitorino , who , far exceeding the necessary cooperation between States , is seeking to go ahead with the supranationalisation of fundamental aspects of justice .
The concept of ' terrorism ' put forward by the Commission allows the action of those fighting for national liberation and social transformation , the battles and actions of workers and common people to be criminalised , with obvious consequences for the proper safeguard of democratic rights and fundamental freedoms .
The proposal for a ' European arrest warrant ' , which is designed to eliminate the principle of double jeopardy , even if this ends up simply being limited , is a real Trojan horse in a strategy that will have to go further and further , basing its justification on the ' needs ' for the aforementioned instruments .
Despite amending some of the negative aspects of the Commission ' s proposals , the report adopts the same approach .
Hence my vote against it .
. I have voted against this report because it does not refer to all forms of terrorism .
It ignores totally all of the different expressions of State terrorism .
We all are aware of the various types of terrorism that have been used by Spanish governments since 1975 .
This failure to mention State terrorism , even in its general considerations , is most regrettable .
We all know perfectly well too , that anti-terrorist legislation such as proposed by these means do not guarantee a fair trial all over the EU .
We are aware that in the Kingdom of Spain this very year of 2001 , the Spanish government has pardoned torturers , released high officials already condemned on grounds of waging a ' dirty war ' and tolerates torture in the most despicable ways , until this very moment .
The European Parliament has closed its eyes .
We all will regret it , because that reality is no longer the internal affair of one Member State .
. ( DE ) We non-attached Members were unable to vote in favour of Amendment No 34 because the direct reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which does not yet have force of law , is not legally tenable .
As regards the ' European arrest warrant ' , we prefer a positive list to the negative list contained in the report because that preserves the principle of legality as a pillar of criminal law .
The British Conservatives voted in favour of the Watson report in order to underline our continued ongoing support for the war against terrorism , and to confirm our determination to ensure that the European Union presents a united front against those who seek to undermine our values and our way of life .
However , we do have some reservations about some of the details in this measure .
In particular , we are concerned that by including some 22 offences in the scope of the Arrest Warrant , this measures goes further than is necessary in tackling the immediate terrorist threat .
.
( NL ) Our groups are not very happy with the proposal by European Commissioner Vitorino on a European arrest warrant , although the amendments adopted by the European Parliament ( Watson report ) do constitute a major improvement on the Commission proposal .
However , our main concern , to protect liberal , Dutch criminal law by applying the European arrest warrant only to a limited list of so-called euro crimes , has not yet been accommodated .
We are in favour of a European arrest warrant in order to combat terrorism and organised crime more effectively , but only under the following conditions : firstly , that European arrests are only carried out on the basis of a positive list of euro crimes , and secondly , that the list of euro crimes is limited to serious offences which are punishable in all European countries , such as murder , for example .
Under no circumstances must the European arrest warrant jeopardise Dutch practice on abortion , euthanasia and drugs .
Insofar as we can make out from the little information that is available to us from the Council of Ministers , the latter is already discussing a positive list , and this list appears to contain no less than 27 broadly-defined euro crimes so far .
Consequently , the Council is now discussing a substantially different proposal from that of the Commission .
By studying the original Commission proposal , Parliament is lagging behind .
Furthermore , it very much looks as if the Dutch government is able to remove more of our objections via the Council than we are via the European Parliament .
This issue once again exposes the EU ' s democratic loophole .
Inspection by the Lower Chamber is theoretically possible because the Council takes unanimous decisions .
However , this is difficult to realise in practice on account of the Council ' s reluctance to embrace openness and due to the late availability of the documents .
The pace at which this sensitive issue is being discussed only exacerbates the problem .
For all these reasons , our groups will vote in favour of the amendments of the Watson report , because these are a considerable improvement on the Commission proposal , but we will abstain in the vote on the legislative resolution .
The war against terrorism is , and will remain , a high priority within the EU , but must not be fought at the cost of the rule of law .
We are concerned that EU governments are currently rushing to coordinate the legislation of the Member States in the war against terrorism and to amalgamate various legal traditions in a very short space of time .
There is a risk of undermining the rule of law , particularly with the Commission ' s proposed definition of the term ' terrorism ' .
In our opinion , this definition is far too broad and allows room for too many interpretations .
It is quite possible that people who , for political reasons , protest against prevailing social structures and use illegal means to do so , will fall within the parameters of the definition now being proposed .
It is clearly inappropriate to go so far as to view those who protest against what they consider to be an unjust social order as terrorists .
There is a need for terrorism to be defined more clearly than has so far been the case .
In this respect , we therefore welcome the European Parliament ' s more specific amendments .
The European Parliament and the national parliaments must also be allowed to exercise real influence before final decisions are taken by the Council of Ministers .
. ( NL ) Madam President , I have voted against the Watson report for the following reasons .
I fully support the measures against terrorism and in my view , it is possible and necessary for the EU Member States to work closely together in this field .
The European arrest warrant can make a major contribution towards the efficiency of the fight against terrorism within European territory .
I am of the opinion that the European arrest warrant is desirable .
However , this should be thought through and considered more carefully , so that it is not implemented at the expense of other important matters .
The present draft offers too little in the way of guarantees and may sound the death knell of Dutch liberal criminal policy .
In order to strike a compromise , I have tried to table an amendment via the rapporteur which prescribes the following condition for the European arrest warrant : a European arrest warrant may only be issued for offences committed on the territory of the requesting State .
However , this amendment has been vetoed by the Socialists in the working party .
I have also voted against the report because the Council is expected to adopt a different draft .
I am therefore in favour of anti-terrorist measures as well as the European arrest warrant , but not at the expense of the liberal criminal policy in the Netherlands .
. ( NL ) There is a great deal of confusion about the phenomenon of terrorism .
Most terrorists do not become terrorists out of choice , but are forced to resort to extreme and unacceptable measures due to the lack of understanding shown by leading politicians for their oppositional role and their conflicting viewpoints .
Some latterly well-respected leaders , such as those of Israel , Palestine , South Africa and many former colonies , started their political careers as terrorists .
Terrorism is fought effectively not by creating an even greater lack of understanding and trust , but by ensuring that the problems to which terrorists want to draw attention are resolved swiftly and peacefully .
Politicians who see the risk of terrorism in anything and everything , run the risk of ending up in a police state which lacks essential rights of freedom and democracy .
This , in turn , leads to a tougher political climate , which creates a new breeding ground for terrorism .
Respect for the law weakens when people notice that they are no longer protected from random arrests , lengthy custody and controversial surrender .
This also applies if oppositional non-terrorists are bullied or if people are imprisoned for actions which are not punishable in their own countries .
As long as there are insufficient guarantees to prevent these phenomena , a European regulation is counterproductive in the real fight against terrorism , in my view .
This House has approved a compromise amendment on the legislative resolutions regarding the Watson report on combating terrorism and the European arrest warrant .
Both amendments call upon the Council to apply Article 40 of the Treaty on European Union in cases where unanimity cannot be reached , or in cases when unanimity involves a substantial weakening of the proposal .
Unfortunately , a small number of Members - including the Italian Alleanza Nazionale members - have prevented an oral amendment supported by the rapporteur himself from being voted upon ; if approved , this amendment would have made Parliament ' s political will clearer .
In fact , calling upon the Council to vote under Article 40 is to be considered a last resort .
We all hope that the Council will be able to achieve unanimity along the lines of the commitments adopted jointly in Ghent and upheld so clearly by Parliament in today ' s vote .
For our part , as Italian Members , we shall still make every effort to persuade our government to change its position and agree to extend the European arrest procedure to all the crimes included in the European Commission ' s proposal and to give up the extradition procedure , which would be a patent violation of the spirit and letter of the commitments unanimously and formally adopted in Ghent and Brussels in the emotional aftermath of the tragic attack on the Twin Towers .
I therefore hope that no country will now falter in its commitment to fight terrorism , and I hope that mine , which has always contributed to the progress of the Union , will not find itself isolated .
These decisions are all in the hands of the Italian government , because it would also not be acceptable for its veto to jeopardise a whole policy .
Hence the timely reference to Article 40 of the Treaty .
- ( FR ) By means of this vote , we are now being asked to describe as acts of terrorism what , for us , are acts of solidarity and of justice .
For example , ' interfering with or disrupting the supply of water , power , or other fundamental resource ' .
Such actions are generally those of salaried employees - of workers , not Bin Ladens - who , threatened by privatisation , organise themselves to defend their conditions of work , their jobs and , indeed , the tools with which they work .
The basis of the proposal is to punish as an act of terrorism anything aimed at threatening ' and seriously altering or destroying the political , economic , or social structures of a country ' , that is to say any questioning of injustice and the established order such as the occupation by the homeless of empty housing or by the unemployed of job centres or of organisations managing unemployment insurance payments or , indeed , European demonstrations against organisations such as the IMF , WTO or the World Bank .
Basically , a measure of this kind would tend to criminalise social activism by bringing fundamental rights into question .
That is why I have not voted in favour of this report , which makes terrorists out of us .
.
( NL ) After 11 September , Commissioner Vitorino rightly prioritised previous agreements from Tampere in order to reach more effective cooperation in the fight against terrorism , police and judicial cooperation .
That is why we give our unqualified support to the proposal on combating terrorism .
We also support a European arrest warrant .
However , we do not endorse the present proposal when it comes to a negative list . We consider this position to be already out-of-date since the Council is working on a positive list , rightly so .
We are in favour of this , and we expect a decision by the Council before the end of this year .
Indeed , the events of 11 September have forced us to take prompt action .
That is why , despite our objections to a negative list , we will not vote against the proposal , but will abstain instead , in anticipation of the European Commission and the Council producing a concrete positive list by the end of the year , which will give the European arrest warrant in 2001 a tangible dimension .
That is why we expect improvements which have been proposed by the Dutch Labour Party delegation , among others , to be incorporated in the work of the Council , including those pertaining to evidence , right to assistance , more scope for hearing the defendant and the principle of ne bis in idem .
. ( NL ) The Belgian members of the PSE Group have abstained from the final vote on the European arrest warrant .
They support the efforts by the European Parliament to help develop the legislative framework in the fight against terrorism .
The European arrest warrant is a useful instrument , but the Belgian members of the PSE Group oppose the generally applicable European arrest warrant for crimes which incur a sentence of more than one year .
They are in favour of the Council ' s approach with a positive list on the basis of the Europol mandate .
Gebhardt report ( A5-0398 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted for Mrs Gebhardt ' s report .
I am , naturally , in favour of any fight against injustice , and the effects of organised crime constitute a serious injustice .
Citizens should be protected by European judges , and let us hope that soon there really will be European judges .
For this to happen , however , there has to be a European criminal code , Madam President , which I have often called for .
Once again , then , I insist that there should be a criminal code and a European code of criminal procedure , otherwise there is no point in having European judges .
. ( EL ) This is the second time a report on setting up Eurojust has been tabled for debate in plenary in the last six months .
This time it has been scheduled on the same day as the debate on the European terrorism law and the European arrest warrant .
Eurojust is an institution consisting of one representative from each Member State ( public prosecutor , judge or police officer ) and will have the widest , unaccountable powers to investigate and prosecute .
It will basically have the power to order the authorities of any Member State to start an investigation or institute proceedings and even to take part itself in investigations by setting up joint investigation teams .
The Member State will have to comply with its recommendations ; if it does not , it must specifically justify its refusal .
During the previous debate , the argument cited for setting up Eurojust was to fight cross-border crime , that is , to combat crime where there might be a clash between the jurisdiction of at least two countries .
Now it would appear that the rulers of the European Union feel that they do not need any excuses .
Under the new text , this new superpower will be able to intervene even if the crime only affects one country .
Of course , so-called terrorism is one of the crimes for which Eurojust will have jurisdiction .
Eurojust will be assisted in carrying out its virtuous remit by four different databases containing sensitive personal data : the criminal records kept by each Member State on their citizens , the Schengen Information System , the European judicial network and Europol 's files .
The long-winded list of personal data includes information on " racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs , trade union membership , and data concerning health or sex life " .
All this means is that personal records are to be legalised through a quasi-judicial European body .
This is , without doubt , an overly centralised and arbitrary institution which does away with any sense of national sovereignty .
It is also an insult to the famous operational independence of the judiciary of which bourgeois democracies are so proud .
We must not delude ourselves that the objective of this whole legal arsenal is , primarily , to stamp out common crime .
Together with the terrorist law , the European arrest warrant and the future European public prosecutor , this is an attempt to create a suppressive supranational mechanism which will be turned against democratic freedoms and , more importantly , against the grass-roots movement when it rises up against the dominant political and economic choices being made .
This is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
. ( NL ) I welcome the establishment of Eurojust and , with it , the possible cooperation between public prosecutors from the various Member States .
Although the brief , at first sight , remains limited to coordination and assistance , Eurojust can also request inquiries or institute proceedings .
Consequently , I am concerned that in the long term , Eurojust might develop into a European Public Prosecution Office with a general brief .
Indeed , a European public prosecutor with responsibility for financial matters could be very useful , for he could sufficiently protect the Community ' s financial interests .
This would then be a European Public Prosecution Office with a limited brief .
A criminal law system at EU level is , certainly at the moment , both undesirable and unrealistic .
National criminal law is closely linked to the national sovereignty of the Member States and must be embedded in a democratic legal system with sufficient scope for supervision .
I am , therefore , not in favour of a general European Public Prosecution Office .
Furthermore , only a national Public Prosecution Office can take sufficient account of the cultural aspects of national criminal law .
The decision to prosecute must , therefore , be taken at the level of the individual Member States .
The Dutch Minister for Justice , Mr Korthals , has assured the Dutch Parliament that Eurojust will not develop into a European Public Prosecution Office .
If the ambition was ever to set up a European Public Prosecution Office , then Eurojust would not be the right route to take .
With this reservation , we , as the Christian Union - Calvinist Political Party Group , have decided to vote in favour of the present proposal .
I voted for this proposal because it forms part of a coherent set of measures that can and must contribute to Europe being able to cooperate more efficiently in the fight against terrorism , both within its borders and internationally .
In this very part-session we have welcomed the initiatives on adopting a common definition of terrorist acts and levels of sanctions , and on replacing traditional extradition procedures with a simple system of surrendering criminals , on the basis of a European arrest warrant .
The purpose of the proposal on Eurojust is to effectively improve cooperation between the judicial authorities of the Member States , whilst ensuring that fundamental rights are safeguarded , because the fight against terrorism , and against other forms of crime , can only be effective through improved cooperation between judicial authorities and police forces , with particular emphasis on the role to be played by Europol .
This is an important and ambitious project , because crime does not recognise borders .
It is , therefore , important to promote this judicial cooperation , and the exchange of information between Member States .
The European Union ' s citizens have the right to demand that the Union effectively addresses the problem of ever more frequent threats of crime against their freedom and rights .
In order to do this , a new strategy must be adopted , one that consists of coordinating all our efforts in the aim of combating and preventing crime throughout the territory of the Member States .
Lagendijk report ( A5-0386 / 2001 )
Madam President , with his report , Mr Lagendijk has presented a request for assistance for FYROM .
It is certainly a positive step for the European Union to give a helping hand to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in its current stricken situation , especially since it has been tormented by internal fighting within its borders .
I ask , however , and insist and will be pleased if this assistance can be given to all the states of Central and Eastern Europe , which are in need of financial assistance after 50 years of communist dictatorship .
Färm report ( A5-0385 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) I have noticed that recent events have initially borne out what I predicted on 15 March and 3 May .
I would invite you to read up on the Minutes .
At the time , I stated that granting premature support to the Macedonian government , proclaiming desperate Albanians as extremists and distributing funds would not lead to answers , peace and reconciliation , but would fan the flames of violence .
A proportion of the Macedonian population and of the Macedonian government dreamed of a Macedonia without Albanians , or only with completely unrecognisable and adapted residents of Albanian origin .
That proportion wanted to buy arms with EU subsidies intended for peace .
Hopefully , the change in the Constitution will put an end to the idea that within the borders of that country , there is only room for one language and one nation , and that all problems would be solved if the large Albanian minority were ignored , or even driven away .
If , in future , the roles were reversed because the Albanians had become the largest nation , they will hopefully sympathise more with the ambitions of the Macedonian minority than is now the case in respect of the Albanians .
If future aid is now employed for peace , reconciliation and reconstruction , then I can fully support the initiative .
Färm report ( A5-0410 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) The three regions which , following the collapse of former Yugoslavia , have carried on under the old name on the map of Europe , no longer even function as an informal federation .
Even the surrender of the former President to the Tribunal in The Hague appeared to have become a matter solely for the government of the federal state where he lived .
Montenegro has not functioned under Yugoslav customs control for a number of years now , and the deutschmark which was introduced there as currency is soon to be replaced by the euro .
Kosovo has been cut off from the outside world by violence , and the large majority of the population wishes to keep it that way .
They will never resign to returning to a state which they have not recognised at all for eight years .
Today ' s reality is that Yugoslavia continues to exist only in the minds of politicians and officials outside that country .
I regret this as a friend and expert of the former federation of Yugoslavia , but I accept the reality which people have chosen at grassroots level .
Since the third state of that name has now also disappeared , I am not opposed to financial aid for reconstruction and for the fight against poverty to the three separate regions , nor to the wish of each separately to accede to the EU .
Färm report ( A5-0411 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) The former Turkish Province of Bosnia-Herzegovina does not form an ethnic unit .
Its boundaries were even completely wiped off the map by the provincial reorganisations of the old Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929 , the division into a Serbian and Croatian region following the ' Sporazum ' Treaty in 1939 and the annexation to the nazi-satellite state Croatia in 1941 .
The main reason why the freedom movement under Tito chose to set up a federal state of Bosnia-Herzegovina between Serbia and Croatia in 1945 , was that it saw this region as a melting pot for creating one Serbo-Croat nation .
Some time in the future , Serbia , Croatia , Bosnia and Montenegro would fuse into one big Serbo-Croat federal state , adopting the same dominating position within the federal Yugoslavia as Russia within the Soviet Union .
This role of melting pot proved unsuccessful .
As in the old Yugoslavia , the majority of the population is made up of Serbs and Croats , and their loyalties lie with the new neighbouring states , Serbia or Croatia , from which they wrongly feel cut off .
I have the impression that we are still taking too little account of this , despite the federalisation of Bosnia , as agreed in Dayton .
Financial aid is needed , but without the proviso that joint administrative bodies must be strengthened .
If the EU were to subsidise the transfer of powers by Flanders and Wallonia in Belgium to the federation , this would also be met with horror .
Lagendijk report ( A5-0386 / 2001 ) and
Färm reports ( A5-0385 , 0410 , 0411 / 2001 )
We voted against these reports , which are nothing more than a financial statement of the policy of the major Imperialist powers in this area of the world .
The so-called ' aid ' to the Balkans is , in fact , intended to ' support the balance of payments and help ease ... the external financial constraints ' of these countries , as stated in one of the Färm reports ( Macedonia ) .
The major powers bear a huge part of the responsibility for the break-up of the former Yugoslavia .
They are guilty of bombings which affected not only the targeted regions but neighbouring regions as well , if only because they forced a part of the population of Kosovo into exile .
Their variable geometric diplomacy , which involves them supporting one side and then another , playing on ethnic differences and thus reviving them , is not bringing peace to the region , but encouraging war .
In voting against these reports , we are expressing our opposition to the Imperialist powers ' overall policy on the Balkans and to their interventions .
I am not happy with the document on the future of the European Union with regard to the Laeken Council , Madam President , even though I voted for it , because it does not say that the European Union should , in future , have the competence to legislate on European pension systems .
All 15 Member States , plus the other 12 that have applied to join the European Union , have pension systems in deficit .
The national governments have been unable to administer their funds .
What better evidence could there be that only the European Union can solve the problem of those workers who hand their money over to the State and then do not get it back when they reach old age ?
Perhaps - I hope , I am sure - the European Union will be better at administering the European citizens ' pension funds .
With regard to this report on the future of the European Union , in particular the Laeken Council , there are a number of items which I could be in favour of as we want to chart out a new and more dynamic future for the European Union .
However , putting and accepting proposals which quasi agree with a constitution for the future of Europe , working on the assumption that this is going to happen no matter what without taking consideration or consultation with the people , is unacceptable .
Mention has been made also of the democratic deficit and of the need to draw all strands of society together .
With a Convention we end up with a select few non-governmental organisations supposedly representing the majority of the people in the European Union .
However , when it comes to an implementation of what will come out of that Convention , how many countries will offer a referendum to allow for a full democratic endorsement of the future it wants to see .
That is why I abstained on the final vote on this particular report .
As far as the resolution on the future of the Union is concerned , there are many reasons why I could not vote in favour , and here are just two of them .
First of all , Parliament should stop trying to avoid tackling issues that are crucial for the future of European integration , and should stop restricting itself to providing information - that is , in fact , very superficial - to those who will actually be performing our tasks .
Furthermore , Parliament is harming its own interests by favouring the parliamentary experience of the future Chair of the Convention over an executive body , whereas the Commission , and Commissioner Barnier in particular , rightly reiterate at every opportunity that the confidence of governments in the Chair of the Convention will be a determining factor in the Convention ' s hoped-for success .
In order to issue its opinion on the preparation of the next Intergovernmental Conference , the European Parliament has recently adopted a very strange resolution .
It does not even bother to mention the four themes which , according to the Nice Council , are to serve as a basis for our future debates ( division of competences , simplification , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the role of the national parliaments ) . Instead , it gives a long list of the traditional federalist demands in all areas .
To cap it all , it demands a Constitution for the European Union - a phrase that was not used in the Nice conclusions but which , nonetheless , the resolution says should be the IGC ' s ' objective ' .
The European Parliament would have done better to closely examine the analysis of Declaration 23 of the Nice European Council , which includes as an objective not a European Constitution but the improvement of the ' democratic legitimacy and transparency of the Union ' , which , in our view , seems very different , even the opposite .
The Constitution would involve establishing a higher supra-national power , on fundamental issues as well , which would further distance Europe from its people , and would further weaken its democratic legitimacy .
Was the Nice Council not aiming for a different objective when it mentioned ' the role of national parliaments in the European system ' as one of the four themes to be included on the agenda of the next IGC ?
The ' in ' shows that the current priority should be to involve the national parliaments in the European decision-making processes , so that it can reforge links with the citizens .
However , the European Parliament is still a long way off this crucial debate , as there is no mention of it in its resolution .
Admittedly , the Laeken Council can always , if it wishes , head off towards the federalist clouds , but if it wants to address Europe ' s real problems we would advise it to take the new direction carved out by the Nice Council .
- ( FR ) We are told that this summit must ' assess the results of recent months and prepare for the future ' .
For the workers of the European Union , the results are tens of thousands of redundancies at Moulinex , Sabena , AOM , Danone , in companies involved in IT and in your intended new economy , in which there is more redundancy than recruitment .
The results , for working people , are an unbearable level of unemployment , an increase in insecurity and unemployment , illiteracy and a lack of healthcare .
When the rapporteurs express their desire that ' political , economic and social progress , security and well-being for Europe ' s citizens ' should be achieved by means of ' the establishment of a well-balanced economic and monetary system resulting from the consolidation of economic and social cohesion policy , the strengthening of employment policy ... ' , they are simply repeating the hollow words used by all of those people who do not understand what it is like to fear unemployment and be insecure about the future .
As for the creation of a Convention responsible for preparing for Europe ' s future and the revision of the Treaties , the very name of the person who , in France , has been sounded out to preside over it , Giscard d 'Estaing , indicates how far-removed it will be from the interests of the workers and the working population of Europe .
We have voted against it .
This report falls in line with the strategy of those who are relying on the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference to provide a further qualitative and meaningful leap in the federalist integration of the EU , under the control of the great powers which will , out of necessity , undermine the sovereignty of countries such as Portugal .
It insists on speeding up preparations for a new Treaty , which will extend federalist integration , ' forgetting ' the lessons and the political consequences of the Irish people ' s rejection of the Treaty of Nice .
Among countless other aspects of which I am critical , the report advocates the creation of a ' convention ' - that some people envisage as a form of ' constituent assembly ' that it sees as an instrument for imposing conditions on the exercise of the exclusive competence of national governments and parliaments with regard to revising the Treaties , which in terms of its membership , only guarantees the participation of the largest national parties , thereby diminishing the participation of parties with different political positions on Europe , and thereby undermining the pluralism and the genuinely independent and democratic participation of national parliaments .
I therefore voted against the report .
. I wish to put it on record that I voted against a number of proposals put forward in the Leinen and Mendez de Vigo report on the Laeken Summit .
I would like to highlight the fact that I voted against Paragraph 4 ( d ) which calls for " The removal of the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure " .
This is yet again , an outlandish attack on the CAP which has served us well .
I do not believe such a move is in the best interests of the future of the Union .
The CAP forms the bedrock on which the Community was formed .
It still represents certainty in a difficult economic climate .
As a result of the adoption of this text and other proposals , I abstained on the final vote .
I deeply regret that 430 Members of the House voted against this fundamental policy of the CAP , as I outlined earlier .
The European Union has been a bulwark against recession in the past .
It has been of immense advantage to my own country , Ireland and I know it will continue to be , in the future , a powerhouse for the citizens of Europe .
But we should not pull down the good structures and leave our farmers and their families on their own .
. ( EL ) Clearly the plans for the future of the EU are predicated on the intention of serving the interests of big business even better and consolidating the new imperialist order .
Unbridled neo-liberalist policies are being pushed forward , with all that this implies for the people .
We therefore need greater , more widespread and more proactive reaction on the part of our workers and society in general in order to put a halt to this policy and bring about a radical change of direction .
Prospects for militarising Europe , curtailing national independence and grass-roots sovereignty , restricting the fundamental social and democratic rights of our citizens and launching an all-out attack on the workers ' movement and standard of living , are still the core objectives of the arrangements which will be pursued by the European Council in Laeken and then later by the Intergovernmental Conference .
The broad involvement of national and European agencies being proposed does nothing to reverse or overturn this policy ; on the contrary , it ensures that they will be on board to aid and abet its implementation .
The involvement of all these agencies does nothing to change the substance of the debate , nor does it provide any basic opportunity to intervene , in that , apart from anything else , it will have merely advisory rather than decision-making powers .
On the other hand , it gives the sovereign powers the chance to proceed with the implementation of their plans with some semblance of legal and democratic authority .
An attempt is being made to head off the expected mass demonstrations which accompanied previous revisions of the Treaties in Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice , which is why the method used for the so-called ' Charter of Rights ' is being used here again .
However , the results of this method have been tested in practice and proved that broader involvement did not help to consolidate or widen individual and social rights in line with modern-day requirements ; on the contrary , these rights were curtailed in line with the dictat of big business , giving rise to serious grass-roots reaction .
The workers are fighting and will continue to fight to limit the adverse impact of these plans and decisions and every possible means will be used for this fight .
However , they will not be duped or misled , their fight is getting stronger and stronger and their counter-attack for a different Europe , for different , grass-roots institutions which serve their interests and bring about peace and collaboration based on mutual benefits and real rather than sham respect for all their individual and collective rights is becoming more and more substantial and dynamic .
. ( NL ) If we considered the EU as one superstate instead of a collaborative association of free nations that want to solve their cross-border problems jointly , we have to note that this state is showing countless democratic shortcomings .
A great deal is discussed behind closed doors between the governments of the Member States that form part of it .
If these take part in decisions which contravene the wishes of their national parliaments , they can always blame the other Member States for the choices made .
The superstate does boast a directly elected parliament that can discuss everything , but unlike the national parliaments , this parliament has no right of initiative , nor does it have the last word in legislation , budget and the formation of coalition .
It can only oppose legislative documents of the European Commission if there are more voters in favour than stay-at-home voters , including those abstaining and those voting against .
Thanks to this lack of democracy , large companies have much more , and the individual citizens or their organisations much less , influence than in a normal democracy .
Both rapporteurs are right to opt for more democracy .
At the same time , they also choose in favour of continued development towards more harmonisation and centralisation , a trend which has been in motion for years .
The people of the EU stand to gain nothing from more power for a large-scale level of administration that is difficult to influence .
This is why my party , the Dutch Socialist Party , rejects that part of the proposals .
. ( FR ) It is quite right that the Leinen / Méndez de Vigo report has received huge support in this House .
By proposing a more democratic , transparent and efficient method for reforming the Treaty , the European Parliament ' s resolution effectively attempts to provide a remedy for something which has been confirmed by all the opinion polls : the indifference of the citizens to European construction .
It is to be hoped that the Laeken Summit will manage to create the essential conditions for a more logical and balanced institutional project , by means of the mandate of the Convention .
The public will , once again , identify with the European project if the participants in the summit manage to present them with political objectives for which it is useful and necessary to strive .
In order to implement them , it is not necessary to create new institutions .
It will be sufficient to improve and increase the efficiency of the institutions we already have .
. ( DE ) I welcome the good work done by the rapporteurs and I therefore also voted in favour of the report .
But I do object that a problem with the terms ' constitution ' and ' constitutional treaty ' has arisen for a second time in connection with this subject .
When the vote was taken in plenum on the Méndez de Vigo / Seguro Report on the Treaty of Nice and the future of the Union on 31 May 2001 , an official corrigendum to the protocol had to be submitted with the correct text ' constitutional treaty ' .
The same problem arose in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs when voting on the Leinen / Méndez de Vigo Report on the Laeken European Council and the future of the European Union on 22 October 2001 in Strasbourg because of differences between the voting documents - the compromise amendments were only available in English and French - and despite my intervention it was not subsequently resolved by a linguistic correction .
I ask Parliament 's Bureau to look into this .
Kaufmann report ( A5-0399 / 2001 )
Madam President , I also voted for Mrs Kaufmann ' s report on European governance , which , on page 12 , last line , item 21 , calls for the explanations of vote of the members of the European Council , when they vote on their decisions , to be published , as these explanations of vote are currently not published .
I am pleased to point out that , in contrast , the European Parliament not only provides for this and permits it but makes a point of allowing the Members themselves to express their explanations of vote .
Since I am one of these Members , I agree that the reasons why the European Ministers voted one way or the other should be made known in the European Council too .
With regard to the White Paper on European governance , I had no hesitation in voting in favour of the report by Mrs Kaufmann , since it usefully corrects some of the errors and inconsistencies of the Commission ' s document .
But it is still regrettable that Parliament has not shown more will with regard to certain points which were badly dealt with in that report , particularly on our role in the process of consulting civil society , and the need to deal directly and separately with regional powers , on the one hand , and local powers on the other .
- ( FR ) On 4 September , I had the opportunity in this House , in the presence of President Prodi , to offer an initial reaction to the Commission ' s White Paper on European governance .
On that occasion I said that concern for deepening democracy , within the orderly framework of representative democracy , seemed to me to be absent from the text .
There was confirmation of that criticism from all quarters during the subsequent debates .
It should be pointed out that the title of the report , European ' governance ' , a word which has no clear meaning in practically any language of the European Union , has simply increased the misunderstanding .
But perhaps that was deliberate and intended to cloud the issue .
Because the more one thinks about it , the less innocent this White Paper appears .
I see one inconsistency , one omission and one fallacy in it .
The inconsistency lies in the principle which , according to the White Paper ( title IV , page 37 ) , inspired the authors : " to integrate the peoples of Europe through scrupulous respect for national identities " .
This is as contradictory as the ' federation of nation-States ' of Jacques Delors , of whom the principal author of the White Paper is a close associate .
In the confusion resulting from it , the linchpin of the European decision-making process , the national State , is abandoned .
The report ' s proposals are aimed at ( page 38 ) " providing a structure for the relationship between the European Union and civil society " , developing interaction with " regional and local actors " , strengthening public confidence in the use of experts , etc ...
All these actions have the effect of bypassing the national States , which disappear from the scope of the report , when they should be the key element .
Finally , as I said on 4 September , the White Paper seems to believe that ' governance ' can function while disregarding representative democracy .
The Kaufmann report , voted for by our House , vigorously corrects this fallacy , and we are pleased about that , but it fails to point out that representative democracy is , in turn , disturbed , even distorted , if national democracy is not at centre stage .
- ( DA ) The June Movement and the People ' s Movement Against the EU have abstained from voting on the Kaufmann report .
That is because , even if the report contains quite a few very positive features , the June Movement is unable to vote in favour of a report proposing measures as federalist as this .
Bösch report ( A5-0393 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted for the Bösch report on the protection of the Community ' s financial interests and the fight against fraud .
As you know , Madam President , the elderly and pensioners are victims of fraud more than anyone else .
Since , in the European Union , in administering the money of Europe , so much money goes missing - I am sad to say that EUR 2 028 million was lost through fraud in 2000 - those who suffer most are surely the vulnerable people of the European Union .
I therefore call upon the Commission to submit proposals for more money to be used to expose fraud before it takes place .
I should like to agree with Mr Crowley 's last couple of comments .
The British Conservatives , who form the European Democratic wing of the PPE-DE Group , voted against the Bösch report in total because , yet again , there is mention of the European public prosecutor and explicit comments to confer more extensive powers on it when set up , thus leading to Corpus Juris .
It is quite amazing that this House , which is keen to see the European project go forward , is very casual about the way it looks at the legal system it is trying to create for the people of the European Union .
The European public prosecutor has many problems , not least those previously mentioned by Mr Crowley in another speech , because Britain and Ireland have completely different legal systems to the European continent .
Yet again the British Conservatives voted with great pleasure against another report .
. ( NL ) On account of its largescale , the EU is far removed from its residents .
This makes it into the ideal breeding ground for favouritism and blurring of moral standard by a small powerful elite and its environment .
This elite deems itself above the law that applies to others .
It appears wise for shady and parasitic enterprises to maintain good relations with members of the European Commission and top officials .
In 1999 , the Commission official , Paul van Buitenen , gave us an insight into this practice in his book ' Strijd voor Europa ' [ The Fight for Europe ] .
Additionally , the unnecessary circulation of large sums of money in the form of funds invites abuse and confusion .
Every government and every interested group will , time and again , try to attract the largest possible subsidies , and to gain maximum freedom in the spending thereof .
We cannot change this attitude by thinking up ever more bureaucratic procedures and rules .
Funds must be intended for solidarity with those who are economically the weakest and for re-distribution to the poorest regions , rather than for patronising conduct or prestige projects .
Anything which fails to meet this standard should remain fully within the money circuit of the national government , without any interference from Brussels .
I share the criticism by rapporteur Bösch on the European Commission , the stagnation of inquiries into fraud and nepotism , and OLAF ' s powers that are too restricted .
The fight against the fraud that damages the Community ' s financial interests should , for obvious reasons , be one of the European Commission ' s main priorities for action .
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group can only be delighted at the good results achieved by OLAF during 2000 and , moreover , hopes that such actions can bear even more fruit in the coming years .
The citizens of Europe , the Member States themselves and , of course , all the Members of the European Parliament , it is fair to assume , are demanding this .
The UEN Group and the Italian delegation , in particular , however , finds it impossible to vote in favour of the Bösch resolution , although it obviously agrees with that part of its content that shows the political will to fight fraud more effectively .
In particular , we very strongly oppose the inclusion in the resolution of Paragraphs 32 and 35 , which constitute unacceptable interference in the domestic affairs of one of the Member States .
Indeed , ' points to recent changes in the law in Italy ' - Paragraph 32 - and ' calls on the Italian government to stop blocking leave of absence for Italian public prosecutors to take up executive functions with OLAF ' - Paragraph 35 - are in both form and substance unacceptable criticisms of the exercise of sovereign powers by a Member State , performed in full compliance with all democratic rules .
We therefore strongly deplore the inclusion of the two paragraphs in the resolution , for that sets a dangerous precedent in the relations between the European Parliament and the Member States ; these relations must always be characterised by mutual respect for the other ' s positions , even when the positions differ .
Agreement with Egypt ( B5-0740 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) Egypt is a country that is very parsimonious when it comes to guaranteeing the protection of human rights .
The arrest and imprisonment of 52 homosexual men on account of their sexual orientation is once again a poignant example of this .
Despite our parliamentary questions , the European Commission failed to add the topic to the agenda at the recent summit meeting with Mr Mubarak .
It appears that human rights issues fade into the background if military or economic interests are at stake .
In our view , it is not right to reward Egypt for its misconduct under these circumstances , and we have therefore voted against the proposal .
Fiori report ( A5-0391 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted against Mr Fiori ' s report .
Why did I vote against it ?
I am in favour of scientific research , but I am worried .
Why am I worried ?
I am worried that if we change the genes of human beings , tomorrow there will be something very important missing on the human face and in people ' s lives .
What is more important than anything else in people ' s lives ?
Love , Madam President !
What if , tomorrow , we have human beings who are not capable of loving , of expressing love in all its forms ?
What future life will our children and our children ' s children have ?
That is why I am against any kind of manipulation of the origins of human life .
Mr President , the surprising result of the vote on the Fiori report can be interpreted in various ways .
One thing is certain : it shows that Parliament believes that we still need to think very carefully about this extremely sensitive issue .
I will take this opportunity to reiterate the clear position of the Northern League-Padania : we are , and always shall be , against any idea of human cloning .
Our basic premise is the conviction that the embryo that is created is human life from conception onwards and that any intervention on the embryo means its death .
There are alternatives for research which are ethically acceptable as well as scientifically valid , such as research on stem cells , which are also present in the individual after birth .
Therefore , on this occasion , we call for investment in research and experimentation on stem cells taken from individuals after birth .
Mr President , today the House has shown itself unworthy of an excellent report by a committee on human genetics .
A majority of this House , duped by an unholy alliance of socialists and liberals , has distorted a report , so that nearly all of us ended up having to vote against it in order to leave that outstanding product of the Committee on Human Genetics , the original text of the Fiori Report , standing as a beacon of Europe 's protection of life .
I am proud that this Committee , in one year , drafted this magnificent report , which will stand as the product of a committee of real experts .
This House has yet to learn how to handle this report in a manner worthy of it .
I appeal to the citizens of the European Union and to the organisations in it defending human life , which are at last becoming as active as the animal protection organisations , to take a close look at how Members here voted and to enter into dialogue with us , so that this House may keep to the course it has taken since the Gergo report at the beginning of the 1980s , that is , to stand up for life - human life for human beings .
From conception to natural death , human beings deserve all the protection we can give , and without equivocation .
Mr President , on the Fiori report , Parliament has relinquished its responsibilities as a legislative assembly , because it has taken a wide majority decision to take on the responsibilities of an authority on ethics and morals .
This is the reason , the root cause of the failure of this Committee on Genetics .
Fortunately , we still have the Caudron report , which , at least , tells us that the European Union will be able to fund projects on stem cells from supernumerary embryos .
At least we shall have the assurance that we will not be forced by the European Union or European Union instructions to throw away cells that might give life and health to millions of people .
As for the rest , it is now a matter for national laws .
We hope that some people will be wiser than others , less willing to bow to the religious bureaucracies that try to impose their own morals and ethics on all citizens , not just the people who follow those religious practices .
Mr President , in my view , it is extremely unfortunate and a missed opportunity for this Parliament that this report has not been adopted .
What can this be attributed to ?
To the fact that everything that was connected to the report was badly managed : in the first two phases , we had a rather liberal report , in fact , too liberal in my view , and we have ended up with a very restrictive final vote .
Why is it unfortunate not to have a report ?
It is unfortunate because at the moment , we are allowing industry to carry on unmonitored : we have not concluded any agreements on the absolutely crucial change in patent law which restricts people in their chances of being cured .
Neither have we made any agreements on genetic tests .
We have not reached agreement on whether , in European countries , something similar can be demanded when taking out insurance cover .
It is a missed opportunity , we have managed it badly and I think that we have done ourselves , but certainly also the citizens of Europe , a disservice by what has happened now after eleven months .
With regard to Mr Fiori ' s report and the resolution resulting from the report , but also very largely from the work of the temporary committee on the problems of human genetics , I was compelled to vote against it because of the significant contradictions included or left in the resolution , but I must say that this vote does not do justice to the work of the committee which has been extremely well chaired by Mr Goebbels .

I agree with the feeling which has just been expressed very rightly by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and I must point out that the broadly negative vote of Parliament , even though it might ease everybody ' s consciences , nevertheless leaves intact the considerable problems which have led to the creation of the committee and which have , furthermore , only increased since it was created , as the events of last weekend have shown once again .
. ( FR ) The Fiori report on the ethical , legal , economic and social aspects of human genetics is a good report , on which Mrs Montfort had also done a lot of work .
Unfortunately , it has been distorted by amendments mainly presented by the Left , aimed at removing all the moral obstacles to genetic research .
We are therefore opposed to this distorted text , and in the end , following a last minute u-turn , the European Parliament rejected it , to our great satisfaction .
It is interesting to ask ourselves what conclusions should be drawn from this , particularly with regard to the vote at our last part-session on Article 3 of the research framework programme 2002-2006 , presented by means of the Caudron report , which was to decide the conditions under which the European Union would subsidise genetic research .
A rather obscure and unsatisfactory amendment was then voted on , in anticipation of the Fiori report , which seemed to authorise the funding of research into therapeutic cloning and research into the stem cells of embryos .
That same amendment , which was introduced today into the Fiori report in order to distort it , has in the end also been broadly rejected by this House .
Given that the same text was adopted at the last part-session and then rejected during this one , the least we can say is that the situation is unclear .
We believe that we should preserve the European Parliament ' s traditional position of rejecting therapeutic cloning and research into embryos in the name of respecting human dignity .
. ( FR ) We have voted against this report which , even amended , is unacceptable .
The fact that it contains huge scientific errors is not the most serious thing .
It is above all steeped , from beginning to end , in an obscurantist attitude to science and its applications .
Some research may lead to excesses ? No doubt .
Especially in a society where the application will be carried out by private companies whose objective is profit .
But why prohibit certain of them which are connected to genetic research , why refuse public funding for researchers whose work , the future will tell , may be decisive in terms of improving the lives of countless human beings ?
We voted for some of the good intentions of the text where they were not restricted to being purely platonic , particularly in relation to the protection of workers , the disabled and people suffering rare diseases .
But we refute all its reasoning , the basis of which is clerical , reactionary and misogynist .
We reject anything that goes against the right of women to control their own bodies and to choose whether or not to terminate a pregnancy .
With regard to patents , not only are we completely against any idea of patenting living beings , but we are against the equally horrendous patents on medical products which cannot be used for the care of millions of human beings too poor to pay .
More generally , we are against all forms of patent on inventions which are not aimed at protecting the inventor but at safeguarding monopoly profits for the capitalist groups which market them .
It is not research which must be restrained , but , rather , we must put an end to this economy based on profit .
Since we trust in the ability of humanity to , one day , govern its economy and social life , freeing itself from the hindrances of private property , we confirm our trust in the work of the researchers and in what science can contribute to a society liberated from exploitation , the rule of capital and obscurantism .
. ( FR ) The discussion of the Fiori report and its resolution has been characterised by a brutal confrontation between promoters of the exploitation of life and embryos and defenders of their humanity and therefore their integrity .
This stormy debate has largely taken place on the basis of a confusion of values , confirming the historical fragility of the foundations of our humanist and Christian civilisation when faced with the combined attacks of scientism and materialism .
This confusion of values in Europe and within the Member States has prevented any possibility of defining the status of the embryo , and I regret this .
Although science shows that the use of adult stem cells renders the use of embryonic cells pointless , scientific thinking is determined to violate the ' sanctity of life ' by promoting the exploitation of the human embryo .
This demonstrates that the defenders of the humanity of life at all its stages of development are confronted with a real ideology which is not only dehumanising , but which is cloaked in a false humanism and realism .
. ( FR ) I have voted in favour of this report .
I very much regret the fact that the Fiori report on the ' ethical , legal , economic and social implications of human genetics ' has been rejected in plenary session .
The problems relating to human genetics should not be dealt with in emotional and simplistic terms .
Nevertheless , that seems to be the approach taken by the majority of the MEPs who have voted against this balanced text .
This vote represents an unprecedented halt for European research .
This will therefore put the Union considerably behind its international partners , and leave many investigations in the air .
With regard to the great fundamental principles and universal values which we defend , the European Parliament had the opportunity to totally exclude the risks of eugenics , as well as reproductive cloning , while implementing solid legal safeguards to provide a framework for what is possible and acceptable in genetic research .
The European Parliament , by not taking a position on this very topical subject , has shown a lack of courage .
This is all the more deplorable when we consider that numerous patients are awaiting the development of new therapies which may offer possibilities to many of them .
I voted in favour of the 1998 directive on legal protection for biotechnological inventions , which I considered to be in order , although , like most of the texts we vote on , it certainly leaves room for improvement .
It is , however , necessary , as we cannot allow there to be a legal vacuum on this subject in the European Union if we want to stay competitive in international research , which we certainly will not if we do not give legal protection to inventions in the field of biotechnology and freedom to research .
Such freedom , however , must not lead to the erosion of ethical boundaries .
The hope of sufferers that there will be treatment for their as yet incurable diseases leads me to believe that even the Church must be open-minded about putting in place , and making use of , new methods of treating chronically sick people .
Research using existing stem cells , and the promotion of it ( also favoured by President Bush of the USA ) should be permitted in basic research throughout Europe .
Research on adult and foetal stem cells should , however , be given priority .
The use of stem cells for therapeutic purposes is marching on as a potentially revolutionary new method for treating diseases and injuries .
The therapeutic objective is to develop differentiated cells or permanent tissues for transplantation into patients with diabetes , Alzheimer 's and Parkinson 's diseases , heart attacks etc . , conditions for which there are , at present , no effective therapies or treatments .
It is , in any case , clear to me that this should involve only stem cell lines which have already been produced and which can be suspended in a culture in which they can proliferate .
For me , erosion of the ethical boundary begins with the deliberate breeding of embryos for research purposes .
That must not be permitted .
. The Fiori report , even in its amended form , is a muddled and unhelpful contribution to the public discussion on stem cell research and other issues arising from developments in medical research .
Decisions of this nature are largely a matter for Member States and the European Parliament must respect subsidiarity .
The UK , for example , has quite rightly conducted its own debate on stem cell research and come to the conclusion that a tightly regulated research programme can eventually bring benefits to sufferers of highly disabling and painful conditions .
The UK has successfully transposed the patenting directive , as all Member States should have done , and the distinction between inventions and discoveries is quite clearly understood .
No review or attempt to change the directive is appropriate .
For these reasons Members of the EPLP have voted against the Fiori report .
. ( FR ) The Fiori report has represented an historic attempt by the European Union to impose the adoption of a common position with regard to something which forms the very basis of civilisations : the definition of the human being and its dignity .
We have witnessed a ferocious battle between the defenders of the integral and nonnegotiable dignity of the human being , of which I am one , and the promoters of an ideology which is a combination of scientism with materialism .
By rejecting the report by 400 votes to 37 , Parliament has clearly and irrefutably demonstrated the limits of European parliamentarianism .
Together , the Members have refused any compromise solution , which is a victory for philosophy over political logic , and I am delighted about that .
It proves that the European Parliament , which is supposed to be the ' democratic organ ' of the EU , has neither the institutional legitimacy nor the political capacity to impose a common position on the basis of the ' nature of the human being ' , and its dignity .
By means of this vote , the European Parliament has proved that only the States can create the appropriate framework for dealing with these fundamental issues , respecting the cultural and spiritual traditions on which our civilisation is based .
I am calling for a ban , at European level , on the creation of human embryos for both therapeutic and reproductive purposes , for the following two reasons :
1 ) We cannot give up the struggle to develop techniques that bring the advantages of being able to manipulate human embryos without the ethical difficulties that this poses .
It would be a mistake for the legislator , out of the desire to give the green light to this technique , to abdicate his responsibility to pass tough legislation , for many years to come , which , in a field that develops at such speed , is all the more necessary . This would send the message to scientists and to industry that they should opt for the development of techniques that are not highly developed today and which are extremely costly , such as adult cell manipulation , but which still have a broad scope for use .
2 ) The creation of human embryos by means of nuclear transfer would facilitate cloning for reproductive purposes , which is generally considered to be an aberration .
As a matter of fact , this is the reason why the United Kingdom ' s House of Lords this week rejected legislation authorising therapeutic cloning .
This ban must allow for three exceptions , however , which would have to be tightly controlled and regulated :
research must be allowed on supernumary embryos , which are produced for the purpose of IVF but whose implantation is no longer possible for the genetic parents and are , consequently , frozen , eventually to be destroyed ;
research must be allowed on the 64 cell lines that already exist ;
research must be allowed on embryonic or foetal stem cells resulting from spontaneous or therapeutic abortions .
. ( FR ) I have voted against the resolution of this report as amended , as have my colleagues in the French Socialist Delegation and the Parliamentary Group of the European Socialist Party , because I have noted that the European Parliament has not managed to achieve a consensus and a reasonable position on the fundamental ethical and legal issues relating to human genetics , which I deplore .
I therefore believe that the text obtained is inconsistent and contradictory on certain points , such as the funding of research into embryonic stem cells or into the use of surplus embryos .
The negative vote demonstrates the inability of the rapporteur and the temporary committee to bring this difficult debate to a conclusion .
The lack of a European Parliament opinion is all the more harmful given that we are at a point where certain Member States are going to have to transpose the directive on the patentability of living matter into their national legislation , thereby modifying their legislation in this field .
I wanted to offer my support for research freedom , particularly for genetic research , into surplus embryonic stem cells , and although this type of research involves uncertainties and risks , it is very important that there be Community regulation and funding so that private research does not have a monopoly in this field .
- ( SV ) Mr Fiori ' s report adopts positions on many difficult issu