Resumption of the session
Before I start , I should like to pass on the President 's apologies for his absence .
He is in Ireland on personal business .
The final draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 19 September 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following change has been proposed :
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European Left / Nordic Green Left to bring forward the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East .
Mr President , my group agrees with the modification of the agenda proposed by the GUE / NGL Group .
However , given the seriousness of the events taking place , I would firstly like to add that we support the statement of the High Representative for the CFSP , Mr Solana , of 20 September ; secondly , I would ask you - since no specific resolution on this issue is scheduled - to communicate , on behalf of Parliament , the resolution approved in April ; and , thirdly , in the current circumstances , my group believes that the two hopeful amendments to the Brok report on the situation in the Middle East should be withdrawn .
I note your point about the resolution of April .
Mr President , I simply wish to say , on behalf of my group , that we are happy with this change to the agenda , since we believe that , furthermore , this change will allow the Danish Foreign Minister to be present at the debate , meaning that there will be participation on the part of the Council .
With regard to the resolution , I agree with the concern expressed by Mr Barón , I support the comments of the High Representative for the CFSP and I would like to point out that the Brok report contains several paragraphs which express the position of this Parliament on the situation in the Near East .
If you pass the document on to the relevant services it will be forwarded to Parliament 's security services for investigation .
Mr President , I have passed to the Sittings Services a report from the Commission about its Investigation and Disciplinary Office .
The report represents a staggering indictment of the Commission 's ability to handle its own affairs , let alone those of the people of Europe .
Over the last five years there have been 40 actions taken against individuals found to be guilty of a total of 48 infringements .
Despite reported cases documented in this report of rape , fraud , paedophile pornography , misuse of funds , harassment , theft , forgery , striking and wounding , depraved behaviour , aggression , corruption and conflict of interest , only one individual has been dismissed in the last five years .
The Commission 's own disciplinary process is clearly unable to take the appropriate action against employees who commit hideous and , in some cases , criminal offences .
This Parliament needs to know that those responsible for this failure have themselves been removed from their posts .
What new immediate measures are being put in place to improve the process and what police action has resulted from any of these infringements over the last five years ?
I ask you to refer this matter to President Prodi as a matter of urgency .
( Applause from the right )
Your comments have been noted , we have your document and we will pass it on to Mr Prodi .
Mr President , on a point of order , Mr Heaton-Harris ' speech was printed in The Times this morning , which is helpful because this means that I can respond to it now .
I have checked his information with the Commission .
In an administrative note dated 29 July 2002 the Commission reports that since 1998 there have been 49 - not 50 - disciplinary cases .
Of these , nine resulted in dismissal - not one .
One was for professional incompetence , eight for serious disciplinary offences and 32 other cases attracted a range of penalties .
Only eight out of 49 cases did not lead to a conviction .
Therefore Mr Heaton-Harris got his facts wrong .
I know we have a difference on certain issues relating to Commission reform but we should be able to conduct a discussion based on facts not fiction .
( Applause from the left )
Europe and its citizens are a much-debated topic .
Recently , I received a complaint from Dutch citizens in Bellingwolde , a village situated on the Dutch-German border .
The complaint was about the windmills which the German Government had installed very near the border , allowing green electricity to flow into Germany , while the Dutch village is landed with the pollution .
This is what the Dutch wanted to lodge a complaint about to the European Commission .
According to the Commission 's website , any citizen can have recourse to Eurojust , a system which offers help and advice to people with a problem of a legal nature in connection with the application of Community law .
On its website , the Commission pledges that a network of legal advisers is on standby in the different Member States to give legal advice free of charge .
This is an excellent pledge , but unfortunately , it does not apply to the Netherlands .
There is nobody on standby in the Netherlands .
In fact , the Commission 's representation in The Hague has been waiting for a legal expert to be appointed for years .
Until such time , the Dutch cannot gain any legal advice about complaints , and are sent from pillar to post .
Mr President , we urge you to broach this subject with the Commission as a matter of urgency .
This is about a practical and specific problem faced by EU citizens who want to uphold their rights .
It is unacceptable for a Dutch village that wants to fight the pollution generated by German windmills to have no rights in practice .
We will draw your remarks to the attention of the Commission .
There will be a debate on the Middle East on Wednesday .
Mr President , on a point of order .
As you know , Rule 2 states that Members of the European Parliament shall exercise their mandate independently , they shall not be bound by any instructions and shall not receive a binding mandate .
I have heard on good authority that there was a meeting of the Pesca Group of Fisheries Ministers in Portugal on or around 15 September 2002 , that is to say the Fisheries Ministers of Spain , France , Greece , Ireland , Italy and Portugal .
I have further heard that at that meeting there was some discussion of three draft European Parliamentary reports , one by Mr Jové Peres and two by Mr Varela .
If this is the case then that seems to me to be a most scandalous attempt to violate the independence of Members of this House in carrying out their functions as rapporteurs .
I would ask you to draw it to the attention of the presidency of the Council that such behaviour by sections of the Council is unacceptable , and to ask the Chairman of our own Fisheries Committee that he should ask his rapporteurs to ensure that they act with independence as rapporteurs for this House .
It is rather flattering that the Council takes our reports so seriously and wants to discuss them in such a manner .
I take your point , but none of the political groups has asked for a debate despite the fact that they are free to do so .
Another way of looking at it could be that we in this House are so impressed by the work of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee that we have full confidence in it .

Mr President , as Mr Heaton-Harris has obviously got hold of the wrong figures , I would just like to briefly repeat what Mr van Hulten has just said , namely that nine dismissals were requested .

Let me point out to Mr Heaton-Harris that , for technical reasons , eight of these were described as ' removals ' and one only as a dismissal , so I would ask you to look at these matters carefully .
I wish Mr Heaton-Harris and other Members would put a stop to their smear campaign against the Commission and stick to the relevant facts when carrying on their dispute with the Commission and with Commissioner Kinnock .
Mr President , I can add to what Mr van Hulten and Mr Swoboda have said , having had the opportunity last week to read the Commission 's report on disciplinary measures because a British journalist wanted to interview me about it .
Some Members may find it of interest that this lady had once been Mr Heaton-Harris 's personal assistant .
I have just one point to add to what Mr Swoboda and Mr van Hulten had to say .
Mr Heaton-Harris has just asked what the Commission is considering doing about informing the law-enforcement services .
The lady journalist asked me the same question , to which I responded by asking whether it was not the case in all European countries , as it is at any rate in my own homeland , that disciplinary proceedings are set in motion only after the law-enforcement services and the relevant tribunals have decided on the prosecution of offences .
This leads me to wonder whether Mr Heaton-Harris has got the sequence of events right .
I hope so .
Mr President , while fully acknowledging the right of all the Members to speak , I would like , once again , to call upon the House to avoid antagonistic statements , confusing tragic situations such as those just mentioned - immigration tragedies taking place in Italy - with situations and decisions made by the Italian Government relating to matters of infrastructure .
I believe that , with due regard for Parliament 's role , when we choose to engage in controversial debate just for the sake of it , we are not helping either ourselves or the people afflicted by these tragedies .
Mr President , we have been following the statements issued by the American administration over the last few days with mounting anger and anguish ; basically , come what may , even if Saddam 's dictatorship agrees to allow weapons inspectors in , Iraq is going to be attacked .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece - and I believe the people of Greece as a whole - are opposed to any such eventuality .
With or without the blessing of the UN .
We consider it absolutely absurd that the UN , which was founded in order to resolve differences peacefully , should be used to rubber stamp this sort of crime .
But what incenses us most is that the American leadership has no compunction about advertising its highly dangerous position on a pre-emptive strike .
Do you realise that what we have here is the worst kind of terrorism , targeting anyone who refuses to accept the hegemony of the United States , which has granted itself the right to attack anyone it considers represents or might represent a threat ?
The question , Mr President , is this : faced with this situation , is the European Parliament going to confine itself to playing Pontius Pilate and giving in ?
Whatever happens , we believe that our nations urgently need to join forces against this neo-Nazi policy and stop the paranoid criminals governing the United States of America .
Mr President , in connection with the Sixth Framework Programme , we have , in this House , had in-depth discussions on the protection of embryos .
At the time , enormous pressure was brought to bear on the defenders of ethical principles , who were told that , important as the issue was , it must be not be allowed to lead to the blocking of this important research programme , of which the protection of embryos formed only a very small part .
We are now in a situation in which the very same people who said that then are trying to block the whole Framework Programme because of an attempt by a qualified majority in the Council - that is , by quite legal means - to implement ethical principles that we should actually have laid down at an early stage .
I would like to know what , if anything , makes it legitimate for Mr Westendorp to go around claiming to speak for Parliament and declaring that we want a Budget reserve for all or part of the programme .
I do not recall us ever coming to such a decision in plenary .
So I ask that tomorrow 's trilogue with the Council should not address issues on which this House has never voted !
Mr President , on a point of order , from the reply you gave me you have misunderstood the point I wanted to make .
I totally agree with you that this House should always be delighted when the Council as such pays attention to our reports .
However , the point to which I was drawing attention is that a subset of Council , the Pesca Group , is said to have held a meeting in which it discussed drafts of reports to this Parliament which have not yet been seen by the committee ; in other words , that they have been " cooking up " reports ahead of their being seen by the committee .
If true , that would be a grave infringement of the rights and privileges of this House and a breach , in effect , of Rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure .
I wish to lodge a protest about that and suggest that it be taken up with the Presidency of the Council and with the chairman of our own Committee on Fisheries .
You are quite right , I did misunderstand your original remarks .
That concludes this item .
The next item is the report ( A5-0276 / 2002 ) by Evelyne Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the initiative by the French Republic with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision setting up a European Judicial Training Network ( 13348 / 2000 - C5-0757 / 2000 - 2000 / 0829 ( CNS ) ) .
Thank you , Mr President , for allowing me to speak on behalf of Mrs Gebhardt , who has at the last moment been prevented from being here , and has asked me to deliver the statement that follows .
Making Europe an area of freedom , security and justice is a very ambitious objective for the EU as a whole , but primarily a very central one , promising protection to almost 380 million people in fifteen countries .
This area of freedom and justice is intended , at the same time , to allay fears .
If this area is to be created , we need legislation on it at European level to be very well constructed , and on this we are , step by step , making good progress , but we also have to create an infrastructure to build on if we are not to end up with a ruin and give our citizens good cause for disappointment .
The resolution before us is concerned with an important element in this infrastructure , dealing as it does with the training of lawyers at European level .
Widely divergent systems and legal traditions mean that there are difficult issues to be resolved in this context .
The French Government came up with an interesting proposal , which Mrs Gebhardt improved by making corrections , adding to the proposal at a number of points .
It is thanks to the good cooperation of all involved that a good outcome has been achieved , one which the committee was able to adopt with only one abstention .

One of these amendments has to do with the legal basis ; whereas the French proposal takes as its basis Articles 31 and 34 of the Treaty on the European Union , ours is founded on Article 42 , firstly in order to keep bureaucracy within limits , and secondly , in order to facilitate flexible extension of the network .
The French proposal refers only to judges in the criminal law field who wish to receive such training .
That is not enough .
Civil law is a natural part of the area of freedom , security and justice , which is not created only by judges .
There is room for all professions concerned with the law and the administration of justice - such as lawyers , public prosecutors and police officers in the United Kingdom - to play their appropriate parts .
An understanding and acceptance of the different legal systems needs to be promoted in all these professions , or else there will be a lack of trust leading to them resisting judicial measures originating from a different legal system , even though they have to be accepted and implemented as if they were rulings originating from their own national legal system with which they are familiar .
Smooth and speedy completion of procedures promotes public confidence in the area of freedom , security and justice that they are promised .
What is self-evident in the business world must also become the rule in the judiciary , namely that success comes from learning more .
It is that success that is made certain by the Judicial Training Network , which also makes life easier for those who work with the law .
That is urgently needed .
What is evident from the report on Pro Eurojust 's activities in 2000 is that those who work with the law in the different Member States do not always find it easy to work together efficiently , whether this be because of differences in the legislation or insufficient language knowledge in their specialised field .
A strong training network would make it possible to remove such obstacles , so let us get one connected up !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Evelyne Gebhardt , on her report and express my agreement with the principle that judicial cooperation at European level can work more effectively if the main practitioners concerned , in other words judges and magistrates , are given ongoing training .
The need for this was acknowledged and reaffirmed by the Heads of State or Government at the Laeken European Council , who gave a new boost to the project of creating a training network .
In the debate following up the initiative of the French Government , the Commission raised a series of questions of a legal and technical nature about the creation of a judicial training network .
The Commission 's concerns were specifically the following : first , the independence of magistrates , which must be safeguarded .
Rather than imposing rigid training schemes , judges and magistrates should be given the necessary means to design and undertake this training in a flexible way .
Secondly , account must be taken of already existing structures and available awareness-raising instruments , such as the European judicial network and the European civil and commercial network , must be fully exploited .
Lastly , consideration must be given to the broad problem of the division of judicial cooperation issues between the first and the third pillar of the Treaty , which , in our view , requires the adoption of two identical acts , a problem which is aggravated by specific features of the opt-out protocols pertaining to Denmark , the United Kingdom and Ireland .
By supporting this initiative , the European Parliament has sought to respond to these questions , specifically this last issue of the dual legal basis .
The Commission fully acknowledges the rapporteur 's efforts but does not subscribe to the ' bridge ' formula laid down in Article 42 of the EU Treaty , which we consider to be disproportionate and somewhat unrealistic .
We share the idea that the division of judicial issues between two pillars creates difficulties .
We take the view , however , that the most effective way of overcoming these difficulties would be to abolish the pillar structure in the Convention on the Future of Europe .
In the working paper that the Commission presented on the ' European Judicial Training Network ? we advocated three possible options : one is to create a training network by means of a Council act , another is to create a Community agency for this purpose and the third option is to keep the existing network operational and at the same time increase the support given to it by the Union .
The Coreper of 27 June of this year reached broad agreement in principle on the third option , emphasising the importance that it attaches to the actions of the existing network and to strengthening its activities .
The Commission considers that , at the current juncture , this is the formula that best matches needs and which is most likely to achieve positive results .
The network has , in fact , already started to work along these lines .
The Council has adopted the Framework Programme on Police and Judicial Cooperation in Criminal Matters ; the AGIS programme based on the Community framework model of activities designed to facilitate judicial cooperation in civil matters .
The Commission is of the view , therefore , that we already have programmes that are able to support activities to develop judicial training in Europe , in both the civil and criminal fields , which is a particularly important objective in light of the impending enlargement .
Mr President , as has just been said this initiative was limited originally to the training of criminal law judges , but it was recognised that a second phase would be developed to address the training of civil and commercial law judges .
There is a tradition in certain Member States that judicial independence should not be encroached upon .
Indeed , this is enshrined in the Irish Constitution .
Therefore , an appropriate solution needs to be found as to how to carry the work forward .
I am sure we can find one .
We already have an independent judicial training network .
This particular initiative has been overtaken .
I suggest that we now need to make immediate use of the existing network and to ensure , at the same time , that there is improved support for it .
We really need to concentrate on the fight against terrorism which is , as we all know , national , European and global , and it is a priority for the European Union .
I welcome the Council 's determination , together with the Member States , to play a full role under the aegis of the United Nations in a global coalition against terrorism .
Terrorist attacks are an attack on the most fundamental human right - the right to life .
They are attacks under the cloak of night , human bombs in crowded streets and on buses ; there are always victims of terrorism , as there are victims of crime , victims of man-induced famine .
There is state-sponsored terrorism and terrorism of war and retribution , as we are witnessing in the Middle East .
The form of terrorism that now threatens the world has no boundaries , no identifiable location .
It moves money as well as infiltrating business , politics and worldwide legal and police systems with impunity .
Ireland has had 30 years of terror , which effectively ended in stalemate .
We should draw some lessons from that .
Nations , cities , towns and most of all people are the victims of terrorism .
The victims are the real prisoners of terrorism ; the perpetrators all too often walk free .
I would like to pay tribute again to the rapporteur .
Mr President , it is thanks to the reform of the Rules of Procedure that we are here today discussing a text which - as has happened on many , too many occasions in Parliament - will be adopted by the Council in a different form from that in which it was submitted , while we are denied the chance to debate the European Union 's proposals on terrorism , which are much more important in terms of the rights and freedoms of the European citizens than the document we are now compelled to debate .
I refer , in particular , to Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report , which examines two proposals made by the Kingdom of Spain .
We are going to vote on this report tomorrow without even having the chance to debate it .
I am talking about texts on which the Commission itself , which is usually slow to adopt positions , has expressed convincing reservations of a legal and political nature , which are , moreover , appended to our report .
I am sad to say that the major Parliamentary political groups , clearly concerned to conceal the contents of the measures from public opinion , have decided to deprive the House even of the usual semblance of a debate .
This is deplorable .
Thus , we are not going to talk about the Kingdom of Spain 's proposal on police and judicial cooperation to combat terrorism , a proposal which we could certainly endorse .
However , the proposal to use joint investigation teams , as well as Europol and Eurojust , to facilitate such exchanges raises problems which Parliament has mentioned on several occasions : the absence of democratic and judicial control over Europol and Eurojust and their essential lack of connection to the Community ; the lack of specific guarantees concerning the action of members of the joint investigation teams .
Such aspects , relating to investigations and criminal procedure , are in many cases codified in detail at national level as part of the Member States ' legal codes or even their constitutions so as to be able to determine the rights and duties of the parties involved .
All this is lacking at European level
The second proposal of the Kingdom of Spain is also being concealed from the citizens . This relates to the mechanism for evaluating the legal systems and their implementation at national level in the fight against terrorism , which , as explained by the European Commission , is still unacceptable because it is incomplete and unspecific and its legal basis is misapplied .
In other words , once again , the fight against terrorism is being used as a pretext for riding roughshod over principles and rules .
Indeed , the initiative goes beyond what is authorised under the proposed legal basis and the evaluation comes on top of that already provided for under the Framework Decision on the fight against terrorism .
We must ensure that the Council hears what we have to say , rejecting a text which will never be approved and rejecting texts which are based on the intention to combat terrorism even at the cost of undermining the fundamental freedoms and rights which are at the heart of democracy itself .
The major political groups have decided not to discuss these issues , whereas a debate is necessary and would have yielded useful results .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be at noon tomorrow .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0257 / 2002 ) by Robert Evans on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on Common asylum procedure and internal security ( COM ( 2001 ) 743-C5-0129 / 2002 - 2002 / 2053 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , as you said , this report - on an ' open-coordination-method ' common asylum policy and internal security - covers two methods .
It is really two reports in one .
It should have been two separate reports but owing to Parliament 's Rules , and also to time restraints and organisational factors , it is a single report .
The whole approach of the common asylum policy is integral to the work of our committee and we are very much committed to it .
Regarding the open coordination method , we stress that this must not be a substitute for Parliament 's involvement in the whole process of working towards a common asylum policy and indeed a common immigration policy : we are committed to the full communitarisation of these topics .
It is very important that Parliament has a full role in the legislative process in this area .
We welcome the open coordination method .
The sharing of statistics and everything else it involves must not be seen as a substitute for moving towards the full communitarisation of a common asylum policy with full involvement for Parliament .
We must also ensure that using the open coordination method does not reduce asylum policy to the lowest common denominator of Member States ' current policies .
We want high standards .
We want best practice to be followed .
Accordingly , the open coordination method must be used as a transition period towards a second stage where asylum is a full legislative agenda item .
Furthermore , best practice in the open coordination method should not be seen as a substitute for the Geneva Convention and the relevant Protocol thereto .
We must put pressure on all Member State governments to integrate asylum policy , and indeed immigration considerations , into all policy areas as a horizontal policy objective .
The second part of the communication is on internal security . This has clearly been moved up the agenda since the events of 11 September last year .
We must ensure that Member States ' provisions already existing under the Geneva Convention exclude persons who have been involved in terrorist activities , crimes against humanity or other similar offences which are already clearly defined .
We must make certain that these provisions are presented in such a way as to ensure that terrorists do not enter EU territory via the asylum procedure .
There is no evidence at the moment that would-be terrorists are entering the European Union or any Member States and seeking asylum , but the report seeks to make absolutely clear that there are safeguards and procedures to cover that eventuality .
It is crucial that the measures that are introduced to deal with the threat to internal security are proportionate , that they are effective and above all that they safeguard human rights .
I welcome the Commission 's commitment to using only the Geneva Convention exclusion clauses as a basis for rejecting individuals ' claims for asylum , but I urge the exclusion clauses to be used carefully .
I reiterate that the EU must have a consistent approach and should not extradite individuals to countries where they may be at risk of incurring the death penalty .
We need to be absolutely clear on the status and treatment of people who are excluded from international procedure , but who are non-removable from EU territory owing to any of the different reasons which may lead to this status .
In general , with certain reservations that I have outlined , we welcome the Commission 's commitment in this report to ensuring that access to asylum procedure is guaranteed .
I ask that the exclusion clauses should not be routinely considered for practical as well as humanitarian reasons .
I have tabled some amendments to this report either to correct minor errors or owing to setbacks in committee , but these do not detract from the importance and significance of the report .
I commend the work that Commissioner Vitorino has been doing in moving towards a common European policy on asylum .
There is no way forward other than for all 15 Member States to have a similar policy with guidelines that are not just similar but the same , and which are recognised and enforced by all Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Seville European Council marked a major commitment in the field of asylum .
It set the end of 2003 as the deadline for the adoption of all the legislative instruments of the first generation of acts concerning European asylum policy .
In my view , this commitment by the Heads of State or Government is important for gauging the credibility of European policy in a field as sensitive as asylum policy .
I shall not hide the fact from Parliament - and never have done - that negotiations are currently giving some cause for concern . To be precise , I do not believe that the solution lies in a form of harmonisation that is tied to the lowest common denominator .
This is clearly not where the added value of a European asylum policy lies .
In parallel with these negotiations , however , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , Mr Ruud Lubbers , attended the informal Justice and Home Affairs Council in Copenhagen last week , and alerted us to the important decisions that will be taken at the next meeting of the executive committee of the High Commission : the approval of an agenda for international protection that will contribute , I am certain , to the debate on the major issues of asylum policy at world level and , consequently , also at European level .
With regard to today 's report , I thank and congratulate the rapporteur for the content of his report .
The Commission is certainly proposing to introduce the open method of coordination into the field of asylum and immigration policies . I wish once again to make it clear , however , that we do not consider there to be any incompatibility between the open method of coordination and the adoption of legislative measures on asylum at European level .
In fact , adopting legislation is an important part of creating a common asylum policy ; the management of asylum policy can benefit from the open method of coordination , from convergence and from the harmonisation of the practices , measures and guidelines implemented by national administrations in the field of asylum .
I shall not hide the fact that not all the Member States are in agreement on applying the open method of coordination to the asylum policy .
The fact is , however , that the Council itself recently followed the guidelines proposed by the Commission to request the creation of a network of actors in the field of asylum with a view to exchanging information and to studying current practices .
The Commission , for its part , intends to use these instruments to identify new fields of action in relation to asylum - not only a comparison of policies , but also the idea of sharing best practice .
There is , therefore , no contradiction between the open method of coordination and communitarisation , as generated by the Treaty of Amsterdam , and we even think that in the European Convention on the Future of Europe and in the context of the future Intergovernmental Conference , this compatibility between these two types of instruments must be demonstrated and emphasised .
With regard to the second dimension of the report : we will deal with the issue of the balance between internal security and the obligations of protection .
The Commission maintains , in the document that we forwarded to Parliament on the relationship between safeguarding internal security and complying with the obligations and instruments of international protection , that it is possible to achieve an equitable balance between improving internal security in Europe , especially following the events of 11 September 2001 , and ensuring that the rights of refugees and other values that are crucial to Europe 's democracies are protected .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the report we are debating here today shares this basic approach and recommends that genuine refugees and asylum seekers must not be victims of the events of the last year , but also that no opportunity must be given to those who support or commit terrorists acts to gain access to the territory of the Member States of the European Union .
For this reason , the Commission fully supports the guideline adopted and reiterated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , that the appropriate approach to follow must not be based on major changes to the refugee protection system but must be based instead on the application of the exceptions to the protection conferred by the Convention on refugees in the form of exclusion clauses .
We share the opinion that these clauses must be used in accordance with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ' own interpretation of them .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to emphasise that the Commission subscribes to the European Parliament 's explicit call to reaffirm the Union 's policy that individuals cannot be extradited to countries where they could face the death penalty for their crimes and where there are no acceptable guarantees that can be legally enforced within the framework of a fair and equitable trial .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , negotiations on a common European asylum policy are proving to be tough and difficult .
It often appears as if we are stuck on a road going nowhere .
However tendentious this House 's debates on the subject may have been , MEPs are not at fault in this .
Although we have done prompt work in this area , we have a right to be consulted and nothing more .
As we are all aware , the Council has to reach a decision unanimously .
This does of course mean that the Commission deserves all praise for trying to find new ways ahead , but I tell you that the open coordination method is not a solution - at any rate , not in Parliament 's eyes .
Unlike the rapporteur , the PPE group is firmly opposed to the introduction of an open coordination method in the area of asylum policy .
We see an open coordination method as leading to the Community decision-making procedure being bypassed and to Parliament being left on the sidelines .
That would be the first step towards returning asylum policy to the intergovernmental level and towards asylum policy ceasing to be one of the European Community 's responsibilities .
Quite apart from the fact that a majority in the Convention are convinced that asylum should continue to be governed by Community rules , we cannot and must not allow Parliament , which is the only European institution with any democratic legitimacy , to be shut out from the process of shaping a common asylum policy .
That being the case , we in the PPE Group reject Mr Evans 's report .
Our group has other reasons for rejecting the report .
The first is the call for a restrictive interpretation of the exclusion clauses of the Geneva Convention on Refugees .
The second is the demand that it be ensured that applications are first examined by reference to the inclusion clauses of the Geneva Convention on Refugees , before any grounds for exclusion are taken into consideration - a deviation from current legal practice - and that accelerated procedures or admission procedures should not be used in such cases as a matter of routine .
Thirdly , we reject the demand that routine checking for grounds for exclusion be prevented in the course of the processing of asylum applications .
Nor will we in any way approve any attempt at nullifying Eurodac .
We simply cannot have a situation in which biometric data - even fingerprints - taken from asylum seekers cannot be used for the purpose of investigating criminal offences .
Security is of great value to the citizens of the European Union , just as it is to those who come here seeking protection and safety .
To sum up , the PPE Group can approve Mr Evans 's report only if a plenary vote adopts extensive changes which we , the European People 's Party , have submitted in the form of amendments .
Parliament must , though , firmly reject the open coordination method .
Mr President , we would like to congratulate the rapporteur for having brought together two sensitive issues which many of us would prefer not to see linked since the question of security often provides a questionable alibi , feeding the prejudices of those who prefer to restrict asylum and develop a policy of deterrence towards those needing to exercise their individual and fundamental rights .
We are pleased that we can concur with the rapporteur on his statements on the need to uphold human rights and civil liberties .
We believe that civil liberties are not secondary to security ; we are told that a key value of the European Union is the protection of freedom , justice and civil liberties , and we agree with the last speaker that we need to be vigilant on this .
We also fully support the view that the governing principle must be that of international obligations , fairly and humanely applied .
So for example , we can agree with paragraph 12 , that immediate and general detention should be avoided .
We also fully support conclusion 5 of the report , which stresses the need for an holistic approach towards asylum and immigration looking at this as a horizontal policy objective and considering all policy areas , particularly those with an external dimension , such as trade , development , environment and agriculture .
We have long argued that we need to look at the effect of European Union policies in acting as push factors , and after Johannesburg we must be even more aware that what we are aiming for is sustainable development , reducing the causes of seeking asylum .
We trust that will form part of the open coordination .
We agree with the number of concerns raised about open coordination : in a number of other policy areas , it has almost become a democracy bypass , leaving out the European Parliament and often also national parliaments .
But we hope that , through the open coordination method , solutions to difficult issues , such as finding best practice for legal entry for asylum seekers and other immigrants , will be found .
Mr President , the asylum system is under pressure and in order to solve this problem , we must give priority to a common immigration policy .
Mr Evans gets straight to the point in Paragraph 1 of his report .
Pressure on the asylum system is indeed considerable .
Many asylum seekers are knocking on Europe 's doors .
Experience has taught us that the majority of them do not fall within the definition of refugee as enshrined in the Treaty of Geneva .
All manner of conceptions have come into being of what a ' refugee ' actually is , and the Member States have developed secondary forms of protection .
How difficult it is to establish any common ground is clearly obvious from the negotiations in the Council on the concept of refugee .
It is therefore useful , based on the guidelines proposed by the Commission , to compare notes in terms of the Member States ' legislation and policies in order to move forwards in joint partnership .
However , the solution proposed in Paragraph 1 of the Evans report strikes me as misconceived for different reasons .
It is , of course , a strange circular argument .
The EU Member States , for reasons of their own , do not pursue an active immigration policy .
The asylum system is getting overheated because many people who actually fall within the immigrant category still try to enter the EU via the asylum system .
They are given the confusing label of ' economic refugees ' .
Should we solve this problem by adopting an active immigration policy ?
That strikes me as a futile exercise .
Surely , it will first have to be established that these people are not entitled to asylum .
It is thereafter possible to address the content of the notion of an immigration policy .
Is this desirable for the European Union ?
I think that the views on this are very different in each Member State .
This is also evident from the reactions to the Commission communication about an open coordination method for Community immigration policy .
Accordingly , the Dutch Government explicitly does not view labour migration as a goal in itself .
Research carried out by the Dutch Government has shown that this form of migration does not solve the Dutch problem of an ageing population or the bottlenecks within the labour market .
I can imagine that this is probably different for other regions in the EU , but it is certainly not possible to adopt a straightforward , all-purpose policy here .
Moreover , it would not solve anything .
Rather than the asylum system , it would then be the immigration system that would guarantee the best ticket into the European Union .
Even if the pressure would be off the asylum system , it would be transferred just as quickly to the immigration system and trigger off the same abuses .
There is no easy solution to this problem .
The best paragraph of the report is that in which a case is made for an integrated vision of asylum and migration issues , trade , development , the environment and agriculture , for as long as the gap between rich and poor is so immense , people will continue to try to build a better future for themselves and their children .
This is a solution which will only bear fruit in the very long term , but it is the best one there is .
Meanwhile , we in the European Union will need to continue to consider the practical implementation of our asylum and immigration policy , taking as its guidelines the notions of compassion and justice .
We will need to employ compassion in receiving refugees who have been driven out of their own countries .
This involves receiving them under humane conditions , as the report stresses , in fact .

This should be accompanied by justice , which is not always easy , because it means justice not only in the form of access to the legal system , but also in the form of refusal and deportation .
The exclusion provisions , which are very topical in the light of the events of 11 September 2001 , also fall within the concept of justice .
Needless to say , these must be used in moderation and with care , but the admission of people who are denied access elsewhere is , in fact , precariously naïve .
If we want to safeguard the security of our citizens , then we ought to apply these provisions , for this has been something of a weakness in recent years .
The Netherlands seemed to go out of its way to offer shelter to people who were denied reception in other countries , and is now experiencing the effects of this .
I therefore endorse restrictive and careful application , but I urge you to apply the necessary dose of reality .
Unfortunately , the world is not a paradise full of well-meaning people .
Mr President , my impression - derived from item 1 as a whole - is that this report makes the serious mistake of confusing the sacrosanct principle of the right of asylum , which has been invoked and established on a number of occasions as one of the fundamental rights of the European Union , with the complex issue of immigration , which is , in any case , a different subject and should be addressed quite separately .
The report before us deals with the need for a legal definition of the right of asylum , but item 1 of this report contains what is , or ought to be , an extremely disturbing admission , especially for its author .
I am referring to the statement that the asylum procedure is often the only way to gain access to EU territory .
If this is the case , the European Parliament 's first task is to bolt the door to stop it , to prevent a major , fundamental principle of our legal tradition being distorted either by those seeking to exploit illegal immigration for unlawful ends such as organised crime , for example , whose intention is thus to use this principle as a means of obtaining entry to the European Union for those who not only are not entitled to it but who should be categorically prevented from setting foot on Union soil , or - worse still - by those seeking to enter the Union to carry out terrorist activities .
The rapporteur states - and I say this with the utmost respect - in the tone of the author of ' Alice in Wonderland ' that there is no proof that the right of asylum has been exploited to help terrorists enter the Union .
I would like , if I may , to ask this question : since we know that thousands of potential terrorists and fundamentalists have penetrated the European Union - and we do not know how they got here , who they are or what nationality they are - how can we fail to draw the clearly logical conclusion that it is precisely the right of asylum that has enabled many of them to enter the Union ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , asylum policy is one of the hottest and most sensitive issues on the Community agenda .
The last elections abounded with depressing examples of political advantage being taken of situations linked to asylum and immigration issues .
The fact is that the drafting of mistaken asylum and immigration policies has contributed to the terrifying increase in xenophobic and racist reactions , which we can only condemn .
Hence the need , which is greater than ever , for common immigration and asylum powers , confirmed once again at the Laeken Summit , which reiterated the need for a common asylum and immigration policy to be adopted by 2004 .
In fact , it is the Europeans citizens themselves who are hoping and calling for action that will add a European value to national policies , whose limitations are becoming increasingly clear , both in terms of security policies and of policies for safeguarding rights and fundamental freedoms .
The proposal we are debating today supports the introduction of an open coordination mechanism , in which the implementation of a coordination policy must function as an incentive and as a means of harmonising national legislations and practices .
We agree with the comments that Commissioner Vitorino has just made to the House underlining the need for legislative measures to be adopted at Community level .
We agree with him not only when he refers to the need for this legislation and to strengthen the Community-led approach that he mentioned , but also because this mechanism , instead of representing genuine communitarisation , is a process that denies the European Parliament an active role in this process .
It is also crucial that we create an equitable and effective asylum procedure , because this asylum procedure has frequently been the easiest means of gaining access to Union territory .
Although we must be able to separate issues that must remain separate , specifically what falls under asylum and what falls under immigration , it must nevertheless be emphasised that it is equally crucial that we establish a common immigration policy that is rational and credible and which necessarily involves a policy of integrating these immigrants , and of effectively combating illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings .
Not only for reasons of humanity , but also because we are constantly aware that this is also necessary in order to reduce the pressure that has been afflicting the asylum system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Vitorino , it is cause for amazement that an institution such as the Commission should commit itself to the open coordination method .
It is something of a Metternich method rather than a Monnet method , and the use of it by you - the European Commission - is an indication that your own approach to asylum policy has failed .
That Mr Evans , the rapporteur , being British , should speak up for open coordination is not that surprising , but it is quite remarkable that you should adduce the Community employment policy as an example of how this method has been successfully used , as you have obviously not been following the current employment situation and the state of the labour market in the EU , otherwise you would be well aware of how open coordination has failed in this area .
Let me make some comments on specific points .
In the report , it is envisaged that asylum-seekers ' biometric data will not be used in the investigation of crime until there is a separate system of European data protection in place for it .
Vote for that , and you leave yourself open to the question as to why the general standard of data protection in the European Union and in its Member States is apparently not sufficient to offer asylum seekers adequate protection against the misuse of data .
When it comes to data protection , we in Europe have the highest standards in the world .
Why you should want to use such an absurd requirement to prevent the effective implementation of Eurodac and hence the protection of our citizens , remains a mystery .
That this report should call for the procedure for acquiring refugee status to be speeded up is indeed a good thing .
What we are dealing with here is indeed , in principle , just the checking of an application .
That , too , is something the PPE-DE Group has been advocating for some time , yet it was your group , Mr Evans , that in various reports advocated one new appeals board after another , guarantees of legal redress that became ever more comprehensive and bureaucratic , the constant reduction of the State 's right to submit evidence and hence , of course , more lengthy procedures .
It would be nice if you were to back up the words in this report with actions in others .
With my third observation , I come to what is our main problem . In this report , you have not a word to say about our society 's real problems .
You have not one word to say about how we should deal with those who support the committing of terrorist acts .
What do we do when someone , with the provocation of our public in mind , wants to call his child Osama Bin Laden ?
What do we do with people who publicly rejoice in the images of 11 September ?
What do we do with Islamic preachers who preach hatred and violence ?
How do we respond to people who by their words trample our free and democratic system of government underfoot ?
Do we have to wait until these people commit a terrorist act before we are permitted to deport them , or before they cease to enjoy the rights of visitors ?
It is that question that is currently being asked over and over again in our societies in view of the situation in which we find ourselves .
It is to these questions that we must give answers .
There is in fact nothing whatever about that in your report , but these are questions we will have to resolve in many future debates .
Mr President , Commissioner , we all know that the events of September 11 and the war on terrorism are being used as an excuse in several Member States of the European Union to block progress on an integrated European asylum policy .
The number of asylum seekers in the European Union fell by nearly two-thirds over the first 4 months of 2002 , compared with the same period last year , having almost doubled over ten years .
In Greece , which is usually generous towards asylum seekers , only 59 out of 2,810 applicants were granted asylum in the first half of 2002 .
This is a dramatic fall in comparison with 2001 , when almost ten times as many applications were granted .
At the same time , according to statistics from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , most mass movements of refugees are offered refuge by neighbouring , equally poor countries ; fewer are opting to flee to the West , that is when they manage to get here at all .
For example , out of four million Afghan refugees , only 38,600 asylum applications were filed in the Union last year , i.e. only one Afghan in a thousand asked for protection from the European Union ; most fled to neighbouring countries .
These statistics speak for themselves and claims that waves of refugees are supposedly threatening Europe and that we should pull up the drawbridge are groundless .
At the same time , of course , xenophobia in the European Union is increasing , while the debate has lost sight of what it is that forces these people to travel so far from home in a bid to escape the endless violation of human rights in their own countries .
It is not just that strict controls do nothing to prevent asylum seekers from heading for Europe ; they encourage many to try and enter illegally , creating work for gangs of smugglers .
And as a result , we end up counting corpses on our borders and coastlines and trying to deal with new forms of slavery and exploitation .
We agree with the open method of coordination , Commissioner , but it is hardly an integrated solution to the problem and we trust that we shall have an integrated policy by the end of 2003 .
Mr President , I subscribe to the minority opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms on this Commission communication , which is shot through from beginning to end with the notion of Europe as a fortress to which hundreds of thousands of victims of imperialist policy are denied access .
It lines up perfectly with the xenophobia and racism which dominate the European Union , especially after September 11 , as the Seville Council made perfectly clear .
Unfortunately , the Evans report , give or take a few exceptions , follows in exactly the same vein .
The Commission communication , which recommends introducing the so-called open method of coordination as a staging post on the road to complete convergence of the Member States ' asylum policies , denies to all intents and purposes the spirit of humanity which should underpin asylum arrangements .
It sets out new repressive measures , such as front security checks , a biometric database such as the Eurodac fingerprint system , gathering DNA etc . , and all at a time when the percentage of asylum applications approved in the Member States of the European Union is already tragically low .
For example , according to statistics from the High Commissioner for Refugees , Greece only approved 25 out of 2,838 or 0.8 % of asylum applications during the first half of 2002 and only 34 refugees were granted temporary asylum on humanitarian grounds .
These figures are a disgrace when you think that the overwhelming majority of people seeking asylum in our countries are from places such as Afghanistan , Iraq , Turkey , Iran or other countries with serious problems .
And , unfortunately , there are more than a few who , instead of being granted asylum , are repatriated - to use the official term - in their country of origin , despite the fact that their very lives are at risk .
Mr President , I should like to make two brief remarks following this most interesting and stimulating debate .
Firstly , in reply to Mrs Boumediene-Thiery , I would draw her attention to the fact that these two issues were not brought together by the Commission .
We addressed them in separate documents .
We are discussing both of them today as a result of Parliament 's organisational arrangements .
For once you cannot blame the Commission .
My second remark , in reply to Mrs Klamt and Mr von Boetticher , concerns the open coordination method .
Since Amsterdam , it has been quite clear that the development of European asylum policy will take place in two stages ( ' generations ' ) .
The first generation will take the form of minimum common rules on a number of elements of asylum policy ; the second generation , later on , will be based upon a common ( maybe even ' single ' ) European asylum system .
In both generations it is undoubtedly quite clear that legislation will play a key role .
You must recognise that , in spite of the fact that sometimes we do not agree on the solutions , the Commission has put forward all the proposals for the first stage of legislation only one year after Tampere .
I freely acknowledge before the House , as I have always done , that finding a common level playing field on this legislation , even on minimum common rules , has been difficult in the Council .
The Council is about to adopt a very famous rule based on one rule with 15 exceptions .
If this was achieved in the field of chemistry it would probably merit a Nobel prize , having one rule with 15 different exceptions , one for each of the 15 Member States .
We need to recognise that these minimum common rules are not sufficient .
I therefore tried to put forward the idea of having a common European asylum policy by means of the open coordination method .
The open coordination method does not go against legislation .
However , its objective is to complement the insufficient outcome that I acknowledge will most probably be the concrete result of this first-generation legislation .
I should like to draw your attention also to the fact that the open coordination method brings transparency into the system .
This is the best way to respect the principle of subsidiarity .
There cannot be a central managed asylum system in Europe .
That would go against the principle of subsidiarity .
Each Member State should be entitled to decide and to take into consideration asylum demands , and to decide in which cases they grant asylum status on the basis of minimum common rules at European level .
The Commission considers that we need to exchange best practices , and to exchange information .
That does not happen at present , and this means that the open coordination method has an added value in bringing transparency to the way Member States manage the system .
Under our proposal , Parliament will be joining this exercise .
I should like to make it plain that I do not want to go against any kind of communitarisation .
On the contrary , I am trying to make sure that we take the necessary and consolidated steps to achieve the Treaty objective .
I do not think the open coordination method is a cop-out .
In the Lisbon agenda you will see a crystal clear reference to the open coordination method .
If you see the proposals that the Commission has put forward on economic governance , you will see that our proposal is to use the open coordination method to determine legally-binding targets , making the open coordination method more effective and therefore achieving more concrete results .
I respect your disagreement , but I do not think that I am wrong .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be at noon tomorrow .
The next item is a joint debate on the following two reports :
A5-0309 / 2002 by Roberta Angelilli on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the Commission Green Paper on Compensation to crime victims ( COM ( 2001 ) 536 - C5-0016 / 2002 - 2002 / 2022 ( COS ) )
and A5-0312 / 2002 by Giacomo Santini on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on a Proposal for a Council Directive to improve access to justice in cross-border disputes by establishing minimum common rules relating to legal aid and other financial aspects of civil proceedings ( 10856 / 2002 - C5-0423 / 2002 - 2002 / 0020 ( CNS ) ) .






Mr President , in its opinion on the Green Paper on compensation to crime victims , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market congratulates the Commission on the approach it has proposed and adopted and welcomes the definition of the three major objectives for possible action at Community level : firstly , the need to guarantee crime victims within the Union the possibility of obtaining state compensation , providing for a safety net for all Union residents ; secondly , the need to adopt the necessary measures to limit the unfair effects that result from the great differences that currently exist between levels of compensation in the different Member States , which , in practice , vary according to the Member State of residence of the victim or the Member State in which they were the victims of the crime ; and , thirdly , the need to facilitate cross-border victims ' access to state compensation , ensuring that victims ' access to compensation is not excessively dependent upon the place in the Union in which the crime was committed .
However , the Committee on Legal Affairs has expressed some considerations - and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , for having included in the body of the text all the amendments contained in the Committee on Legal Affairs ' opinion - to the effect that compensation should cover both material and non-material damage caused to the victim .
Generous time limits should be set for the submission of claims for state compensation ; similar provisions must apply concerning the dies a quo ( the date from which the time limit is calculated ) in order to avoid disparities in the way cases are treated .
Moreover , it is crucial that harmonised compensation claims forms are drawn up in all the Community languages and that the minimum procedural guarantees include , inter alia , the right to impartial judgment , the right to be represented by a lawyer , the right of access to the procedure and easier access for cross-border victims to State compensation .
In conclusion , the Community initiative on compensation to victims would indeed be a major contribution to the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , victim protection has already long been a topic of political discussion even at European level .
Parliament has regularly called , ever since the 1980s , for an improvement in the position of victims of crime .
That victims of criminal offences have to be supported and protected is not a matter of dispute ; the only question is how this is to be done , and to what extent .
With the Vienna Action Plan , Europe took up the issue of care and compensation for victims .
In 1999 , Parliament 's agenda included an item on the improvement of the position of crime victims in the EU , and at Tampere there was a call for the establishment of minimum standards for the protection of crime victims .
Today , we in Europe 's Parliament are giving our opinion on the Commission Green Paper on compensation to crime victims .
We are doing this out of the conviction that the rules of nation states on the compensation of victims are inadequate .
It is unacceptable that victims should be compensated differently within the European Union , simply because , over and above the misfortune of falling victim of a crime , they were unlucky enough to be victims in the wrong country .
To take one example , one Member State may take over the costs of psychiatric treatment of victims of sexual violence , whilst in others , the costs of all medical treatment needed as a result of other offences are covered .
Looking at another area , the burden of proof in all Member States rests with the applicant for compensation , but there are great variations in the degree of proof , and another example is that , in certain Member States , it is required that an offence shall have been reported to the police before any compensation can be paid out , whilst in others that is not the case .
I adduce these examples in an attempt to show the quite different assumptions on the basis of which the fifteen Member States work .
Critics of the Commission and of Parliament charge that we are too slow to pass and implement resolutions on the protection and compensation of victims , and the criticism is also levelled that this Green Paper is aiming at a Community initiative in the form of minimum standards .
What is sought by many victim-support organisations is harmonisation .
I can well understand why it is victim-support organisations in particular that seek speedy solutions , but many small steps and comprehensive educational work are needed if we are to achieve the objective of Europe-wide victim protection .
That means finding and deciding on common rules for all , in all the Member States .
It is , then , all the more important to take the first step of laying down minimum standards for State compensation for those victims of criminal offences who get no compensation from their assailant or by other means .
All this is covered by this Green Paper .
This is a good approach , and , on behalf of the PPE Group , I welcome it as being the right way towards Community rules for victim support in the EU .
I would like to conclude by expressing my thanks to Mrs Angelilli , firstly for her excellent report , but also for her willingness to support the many compromise amendments which crossed group boundaries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now considering two reports that form part of a set of measures designed to promote the creation of an area of security , freedom and justice in order to provide a useful response to the everyday concerns of Europe 's citizens .
I congratulate Roberta Angelilli and Giacomo Santini , because both reports make it clear that the enormous challenge we face consists of creating a genuine area of justice , in which European citizens can see their integrity protected , enjoy access to justice and have their rights guaranteed regardless of the place in which they live and as easily as if they were in their own country .
The Angelilli report is concerned with citizens who have been victims of crime .
It is crucial that we devote all our efforts to preventing secondary victimisation .
It is unacceptable that someone who has been the victim of a crime should be victimised once again because the system provides them with inadequate or non-existent protection .
Mrs Klamt has already given paradigmatic examples of some such situations .
Compensation must be awarded for losses and damage sustained in a way that is immediate , full and effective .
The Member States must , to this end , promote the appropriate harmonisation of their legal and regulatory provisions , because it is unfair that , as a result of the profound disparities that exist , there should be unjustifiable differences in the compensation to which European citizens are entitled merely because they have been crime victims in one particular part of the European Union rather than another .
The citizens must also have accessible and full information on these rights , provided in the various Community languages .
Often rights are not exercised not because they are not in place or are not regulated , but because the citizens are not able to access this information .
The Santini report is based on the observation that the exercise of the freedom of movement will lead to a huge increase in cross-border cases involving individuals with such modest incomes that they might not be able to access justice or benefit from adequate legal aid .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights , specifically Article 47 , provides that legal aid is to be made available to those who lack sufficient resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective access to justice .
We therefore agree that , as already laid down in the Tampere conclusions , minimum rules that guarantee an adequate level of legal aid for cross-border legal disputes throughout the Union must be established , whilst emphasising , nevertheless , that the Member States always have the option of laying down more favourable provisions in line with their own traditions .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Santini , who I have been shadowing on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
It is a very good report .
However , we have done ourselves some damage .
As has been referred to , this will not be viewed easily or lightly accepted by the Council because we have wrongly broadened the scope .
I agree absolutely with the principles within Mr Santini 's report , but we have to be realistic on a consultation process on how to achieve those principles .
This is particularly about cross-border disputes .
If we make it include internal disputes , we create a great deal of problems not only for the Community but also for those Member States that will have to face the potentially huge legal bills that will follow .
That is why I will recommend to the Socialist Group that we support the amendment by Baroness Ludford which reintroduces the notion that this refers specifically to cross-border disputes .
I welcome the fact that the Brussels 1 Regulation will apply to these disputes on the mutual enforcement of civil law decisions .
Equally , I accept that it should not cover proceedings relating to tax , customs or administrative matters .
However , I should introduce one correction .
It may have been a linguistic matter , but Mr Santini said that citizens will be judged irrespective of their financial positions .
This is not true because there is an upper limit set within the directive .
I welcome that the victims of crime will be guaranteed legal aid in order to get compensation .
We agree that legal aid should cover both pre-litigation advice and representation in court .
We also back the proposal to include within the scheme mechanisms for resolving disputes outside the courts .
I will finish as I began by congratulating Mr Santini but by expressing regret that , by broadening the scope and going far beyond that which we can achieve in the House , we are actually urging the Council not to accept our recommendations .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have all fought for freedom of movement - which is a good thing - along with all that has developed from it , in order that people might have the fullest possible enjoyment of it .
Here and there , alas , this freedom of movement brings with it adverse consequences , and both reports deal with this .
The first report - Mrs Angelilli 's , which has to do with the compensation of victims of crime - addresses a mechanism that would help to alleviate to some extent the effects of these unwelcome emergencies , which arise from freedom of movement itself .
With that in mind , the attempt is made to lay down minimum standards across Europe , so that a citizen travelling from one State to another and sustaining some detriment , shall receive appropriate compensation under the same conditions .
I welcome the way that this , in view of post-11 September discussions , is not being focussed only on the victims of specific offences , but that the range is being extended and the victims in question are being granted aid to minimum standards .
It is also noticeable from the second report that the increase in cross-border disputes and offences is actually a consequence of freedom of movement and of the Common Market .
That is why it is so important that we should see the EU as being also a social community , one that does not deny access to the law to people who have been affected by such offences but have fewer resources at their disposal .
This step can , then , only be welcomed and supported .
In particular , I welcome the way in which Mr Santini has put these into more concrete terms and enlarged upon them , stating for example , that the states should bear court costs or that the application for legal aid should be submitted to national authorities designated for that purpose .
Alongside these , there are a plethora of other items that effect very real help for victims and for those with a claim on aid .
Both reports help us as EU citizens to have a positive experience of life in the EU , with all the principles associated with freedom of movement , which we can and must make a reality .
I congratulate both rapporteurs on these excellent reports .
Many thanks !
Mr President , I would like to refer to Mrs Angelilli 's remarks at the beginning of the debate , when she spoke of this issue as being very complicated from a legal point of view .
I have no legal training whatsoever but I have no doubt , as the Commissioner mentioned in his comments on forging together the chemistry of 15 countries , that mutual cooperation across the legal systems and judicial processes of 15 countries is very difficult to achieve .
From the point of view of the ordinary citizens of Europe , however , I would suggest that the notion of the victim of a crime is a very simple one .
Whether while abroad on holiday , for business purposes or perhaps as a student , the victim of a burglary , a violent personal crime , or a terrorist attack takes that crime very personally and expects something to be done about it .
We all suffer , indeed the whole idea of Europe suffers , if nothing is done .
Victims become disenchanted and frustrated , and to them the whole idea of Europe seems to have failed .
We are , then , absolutely right to do all we can to press forward in the ways outlined in these two reports .
We need to look for common rules and common understandings and agreements on legal aid so that , as far as possible , people can receive the sort of support that they would expect in their own country .
The Commissioner spoke about the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is a step forward , but people expect , since this Charter exists , that they are entitled to rights in other countries .
We have established a common market for goods and capital and made it work as a kind of rich playground .
So , just as the previous report called for common European standards on asylum , we are absolutely right to be calling for common European standards for the victims of crime and access to legal aid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks , first of all , to the rapporteurs , but also to the Commission .
You see , Commissioner Vitorino , that I am being very even-handed with praise and blame today .
Let me start with victim support .
Past decades saw well-known worldwide NGOs concerning themselves time and again with offenders in every corner of the globe , with the conditions under which they were detained and with their rehabilitation into society .
Often , unfortunately , their victims were forgotten and left alone .
Even today , far from all our Member States guarantee comprehensive victim support , particularly not to nationals of third States .
In many States , as little account is taken of victims of offences of negligence as of victims who are unable to prove lasting or grave detriment .
To date , only the victim compensation rules in the Scandinavian States - Denmark , Sweden and Finland - can be described as exemplary .
Time and again , in my capacity as a member of the Committee on Petitions , I come up against cases in which compensation was either not paid out to victims , or it was at any rate unreasonably delayed , where even EU citizens in other EU States had applied for it .
In the past year alone , a dozen petitions from victims of violent crime within the EU have been passed on to us .
Admittedly , there has hitherto been no legal basis on which we would have been entitled to intervene .
It is to be hoped that this will now change , particularly if the Commission allows its Green Paper to be followed up by definite legal acts .
There is one thing we should not do at this juncture .
We should not set up another EU fund , as it is intolerable that the Member States should evade their own financial responsibility in this matter .
If the USA can manage to lift the financial burden from dependents of the victims of 11 September , wherever in the world and irrespective of their nationality , then it can also be expected of the Member States of the EU within their own territory .
Mr Santini 's proposal on legal aid is also a significant step towards the creation of this legal area .
The regulation on cooperation and enforcement in civil and commercial cases is already in place , as is judicial assistance between the Member States of the European Union in criminal cases .
This has enabled us to get quicker and simple cross-border justice for Europe 's citizens , which means that time is pressing upon us when it comes to creating a European form of access to legal aid , by which means alone we will contribute to the fair application of existing European regulations to those who would otherwise be unable to take a case to trial .
And , Mr Cashman , you are quite deluded if you believe that this can only apply to cross-border trials , for if you were to establish a higher standard for the whole of Europe , your own people would blow up a storm , and if you were to create a lower standard across Europe , you would have to answer the question as to why you were treating the EU 's citizens worse than your own .
That makes the approximation of laws absolutely necessary , and I do not know any reason why we should not go ahead with it on a Europe-wide basis .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying , on behalf of the Commission , that we very much welcome the joint text on the proposed regulation on animal by-products , agreed by the Conciliation Committee on 12 September .
This proposal is the second major component in our defence barriers against BSE and other serious animal diseases .
The first component was the regulation on TSEs adopted last year .
This proposal is very important - it is essential for the safe collection , transport , storage , handling , processing and disposal of the millions of tonnes of animal by-products produced in the Union every year .
The continued absence of a sound comprehensive regulatory framework to deal with these by-products would be a very dangerous thing indeed .
I would like to express the Commission 's sincere thanks to Mrs Paulsen , for her enormous efforts and tireless work , over nearly two years , in pursuing an agreement between the Commission and the Council on the proposed regulation .
The position we have reached here today owes much to her personal commitment , tenacity and determination .
I also thank , in particular , Mrs Caroline Jackson , chairperson of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and Mr Joseph Daul , chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for their valuable input .
The Commission is greatly encouraged that all three institutions are in general agreement on four key principles .
Firstly , that only animal by-products derived from animals fit for human consumption should be used in feed , cosmetic and pharmaceutical products .
Secondly , that intra-species recycling - known as ' cannibalism ' - should be banned .
Thirdly , that certain provisions should be tightened in order to improve control and traceability in the animal by-products sector .
Fourthly , that alternative disposal options should be approved to take into account scientific and technological developments .
We are also pleased that the difficult issue of catering waste has finally been resolved .
The solution permits a temporary relaxation of the ban on the use of catering waste in feed for some Member States , under certain highly controlled conditions to be established by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health .
The use of catering waste in feed constitutes a major threat of transmission of serious animal diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease and classical swine fever .
It is certain that nobody would wish to see a repeat of the kind of outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease we recently saw in the UK , with its enormous losses to the farming and non-farming community .
The Commission will now focus on preparing implementing measures - including the approval of alternative disposal methods and a derogation on intra-species recycling for fish and fur animals - as well as a number of transitional measures covering such matters as catering waste and used cooking oil , to bridge the gap prior to the application of the regulation .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Mrs Paulsen for the inclusive approach she has given all the other groups during first and second reading and secondly congratulate her on the way she represented Parliament during conciliation , particularly when dealing with some of our friends in the German Green Group , a difficult task at the best of times as I am sure Chancellor Schroeder has found out and will continue to find out .
The European Union produces millions of tonnes of animal by-products and these are separated into three categories according to the risk to humans or animals .
Category one , which contains specified risk material , was implicated in the spread of BSE .
I am pleased that we also included in category one waste from airlines which may have come from countries that do not have the same standards as we do , although I am sure some people would say that some of the airline food would not be considered fit for human consumption anyway .
There is category three , which is fit for human consumption , including catering waste , and category two , which is all the rest .
The big issue at conciliation was that of catering waste and there we had two national problems .
In the UK catering waste is banned .
It was implicated in the start of the foot-and-mouth epidemic in the north-east of England and also in the inquiry into the Classical Swine Fever outbreak in East Anglia , which suggested that the cause might have been a discarded ham sandwich thrown into a field of outdoor pigs .
But historically in the UK , we carried out our processing of catering waste on farms - so-called pigswill .
This was very hard to control and it is not surprising that there were breakdowns in the way that was done .
In some ways I wish that we had gone down the same route as the Germans and the Austrians which was not to process this material on farm , but to put in state-of-the-art multi-million pound installations which were run with typical German efficiency .
Some of those are brand new and it would be unfair to shut them down at very short notice , particularly when one considers the alternatives as to where this waste would have to go .
Maybe it would go into landfill , as much of the catering waste in the UK does , and that would be subject to rodents or seagulls taking part away and distributing it around the countryside .
A second possible way of getting rid of it would be using incineration , which is both costly and damaging to the environment .
It is very good that we negotiated this transitional period to 1 November 2006 .
I said that in the UK we do not have pigswill .
We do , however , recycle waste oil produced from such establishments as fish and chip shops , that monument to the culinary art , but also from other catering establishments and private homes that produce waste cooking oil .
In the UK this was a thriving cottage industry .
Every week a 25 litre drum was taken away and the chef was given GBP 5 , part of the black economy .
This was taken away to be processed into animal feed .
However , when doubts were expressed about the continued use of this , the collectors started to charge a fee and at that point the chefs made alternative arrangements .
That meant it went down the drain . That has resulted in blocked sewers and other environmental problems as congealed fats and oils interfere with the infrastructure below our streets taking away the waste water .
It is important that the UK gets an extension to give it time to review the situation , to evaluate the risks of the continued use of cooking oil , although personally I think they are insignificant , and to put in place systems for alternative uses such as biodiesel .
Mr President , the first task of anyone who has served on the Conciliation Committee must be to congratulate Mrs Paulsen for her drive and tenacity in surviving a complex conciliation which was at times almost overturned by some very unorthodox manoeuvres .
That would not have been right for Parliament , and I am glad that the various parties to this agreement converged in this way .
Mrs Paulsen had to keep her nerve because events elsewhere , including elections , were bringing special pressures to bear on the way in which these events were being looked at .
Yet she was vindicated the whole time by the saga of continuing food contamination scandals which went on in a number of Member States right through 2002 and in the way in which this matter has worked out .
We know all about full traceability for specified risk materials in the United Kingdom because we were forced in the wake of BSE to introduce , almost at gun-point , something which is now going to be uniform across the Community .
This is all to the good .
I believe that the number of by-products that have found their way into the food chain this year show us that perhaps even now , and later when this regulation is fully enforced , there will still need to be vigilance to ensure that above all else the principle of separation is rigorously upheld .
I turn to the questions mentioned already by Mr Goodwill regarding the problem some Member States have experienced .
I am glad that we have found a solution which leaves a temporary period of transition , rather than shrugging aside the need to bring this matter to a conclusion .
I make no comment on the situation as regards the Austrian and German industries and confine myself to the United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom we had certain specific problems : perhaps the Commissioner can make a note of them , because in the final statement we will need to see how these are addressed in connection with the transition .
The first question , familiar to Mr Goodwill , is of small incinerators which have been used as an extremely sensible way of destroying fallen stock on site with the minimum period of contamination risk .
We need to be sure , during the transition period for inspection , that the reasons why these have been used , and used effectively , are fully understood by the Commission and that they are not simply arbitrarily removed from the scene .
The second area is the question of cooking oil .
The United Kingdom is now prepared to accept , rightly , that the transition period should be two years instead of four years and that in that time , given that this whole directive is only going to take effect something like eight or nine months from now , there will have been an adequate period for the industry concerned to adjust its practices - and probably its profits - to other ways of disposing of this , particularly in the field of biofuels .
Lastly , I am glad the United Kingdom withdrew its objections relating to the application for a transition period for the land application of blood from slaughterhouses .
This is a pretty repulsive habit .
We could not have justified it and am glad that the United Kingdom withdrew its objections .
In this matter , too , the principle of cleanliness and separation should be paramount .
Mrs Paulsen has showed us the way and it is up to us to follow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should sincerely like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , who has guided us through the minefield of issues which this regulation has presented in an atmosphere of mutual consultation .
I am pleased that this regulation provides a modern version of obsolete legislation on offal .
After two years of negotiations , it was very much overdue .
What is important in this regulation is that dead animals and condemned animal material can no longer be brought into the food chain .
The only products which may still be used for the production of animal feed will be material derived from slaughtered animals declared fit for human consumption .
Additionally , it is clear that the recycling of animal meal in animal feed is nothing short of cannibalism , and should thus be banned by introducing separate production lines and full traceability .
This regulation 's implementation should therefore be foolproof , and we have not heard the last of this , of course .
Controlling cannibalism will require an important reorganisation of the sector that collects , and disposes of , animal waste .
We are aware that there are quite a few tricksters and frauds active in this sector who are involved in very shady practices , and that this matter is highly susceptible to fraud .
This will therefore require considerable efforts in the area of inspections on the part of the Member States , as Mr Whitehead rightly pointed out .
I should like to finish off with a comment on kitchen and restaurant waste that contains animal products , on which we have reached a respectable compromise .
It was not easy , but the compromise is before us , mainly thanks to pressure from our German and Austrian fellow MEPs .
I do not want to hide the fact that this issue is very sensitive in my country .
All agricultural organisations in Belgium insist on an absolute ban on this practice due to health risks .
Minor causes can indeed have grave consequences , as was borne out by the outbreaks of foot and mouth disease and African swine fever .
Despite this , I can tell you that the majority of my group will eventually be endorsing the texts before us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me just start with warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen .
I am committed to retaining the use of food waste as feed under appropriately strict conditions .
Let me make it clear that we are talking here about dishes officially permitted for human consumption .
Let those listening to me understand that , to take a couple of examples , this is about unsaleable bread that will no longer be fresh the following day , about left-over pieces of cake and that sort of thing .
The prevention of disease is adequately taken care of by the heating of food waste in the manner prescribed , which furthermore facilitates proper recycling of such remnants and thereby acts as a deterrent against even more ' rubbish tourism ' .
Moreover , it provides pigs with a first-rate supply of essential amino and fatty acids , and makes it possible to reduce the importation of feedingstuffs .
It is a fact that liquid feed , that is , swill , derived from food waste , is known to have relatively few negative effects on rearing pigs .
There is a need to guarantee an appropriate standard of sterilisation in order to kill off pathogens .
The outcome of the conciliation procedure , with the seven amendments , was indeed accepted by the Council without further ado , and , on the extremely important Amendment No 25 , which embodies a comprehensive compromise , I welcome the Council 's draft providing for transitional measures under stringently monitored conditions for at most four years from 1 November 2002 onwards .
Any firm undertaking by the Commission to develop a directive on biowaste including kitchen and food waste , by the end of 2004 , must primarily aim to stipulate safe use , recovery and reuse .
Contamination has to be monitored , and we welcome this approach .
It is the firms that have invested a great deal of money in these measures in order to meet the very highest standards , and are officially monitored , that are the best guarantee of food waste for feed being harmlessly removed and processed under controlled conditions .
As has already been pointed out by those who spoke before me , we could give a whole catalogue of examples to demonstrate that no adequate guarantee can be provided by a general ban on feeding this sort of stuff to animals .
What becomes of it then ?
The future should find us still not destroying this valuable feed .
Let me say in conclusion that , on this issue , I am myself a strong advocate of a regulation rather than a directive , because I can already see how these things will be transposed differently in different countries , because I have an inkling that competition will be distorted , and because , if something is wrong , then it is wrong everywhere , be it in Germany , in Austria , or in any other Member State in this internal market .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to express my gratitude to Mrs Paulsen for the good cooperation .
The outcome is a respectable one .
I believe that what have before us is a good regulation , one that meets Parliament 's requirements arising from the committee of inquiry into BSE .
The main reason why this is important is that we are not just talking about feeding methods or about the authorisation of feed subject to certain conditions ; it is also being made clear what happens to those things that cannot be used in feed .
Rules are therefore laid down on destruction .
That is what we must also achieve when it comes to the area of food waste .
A simple prohibition will not suffice , as it is not known what will then become of the stuff .
As I have always said , you can 't just chuck the stuff in a ditch .
It is precisely then that it becomes hazardous , when , unsterilised and unmonitored , it can find its way to animals , possibly leading to the spreading of plague and foot and mouth disease .
But not if it is sterilised .
I am glad the Commission has acceded to this proposal and said that it will , by 2004 , present a directive - and yes , Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , I too think it should be a regulation - on biowaste , in which it will lay down rules on all the possible uses of food waste , including its use as feed .
It is unfortunate that the compromise we reached has not been minuted .
As it will be the next Parliament that will have to negotiate about it - and things are forgotten very quickly - I will be distributing a note for the records which you can have a look at .
We may be able to sign it , and then give this a permanent place as what we want as regards the handling of this issue in the next Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
Mr President , a letter was sent from Commissioner Patten to the President of Parliament yesterday asking Parliament to adopt , as quickly as possible , Supplementary and Amending Budget No 4 in order to allow the budgetisation of the EUR 70 million for Afghanistan .
The additional funding is consistent with the pledge made by the Commission in Tokyo last January .


At the trialogue which was held yesterday evening between 9 p.m. and 10.30 p.m. , an agreement was reached between the representatives of Parliament and the Council that Supplementary and Amending Budget No 4 should be adopted as quickly as possible , as already approved by the Council .
On the basis of the letter from Commissioner Patten , could I ask you to consider the vote on the SAB 4 as an urgency , so that we can adopt it during this part-session ?
If that is agreed to , then we will be calling a meeting of the Committee on Budgets at 10.30 a.m. this morning .
I should therefore like to inform those of my colleagues who do not already know , that there will be a meeting of the Committee on Budgets at 10.30 a.m. today in place of the coordinators ' meeting that was planned .
As soon as your Committee tables the report , it can be placed on the agenda .
As there are no problems we will deal with it this week .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0289 / 2002 ) by Jonas Sjöstedt on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms ( COM ( 2002 ) 85 - C5-0079 / 2002 - 2002 / 0046 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank Mr Sjöstedt , who is rapporteur for this subject and who has made a sterling contribution to this complicated area .
It is an area that is important not only for ourselves here in Europe but also for the rest of the world and , in particular , for our partners in the developing countries .
As you must be aware , the Protocol we are to debate today is linked to the European Community 's recently implemented ratification of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety .
The overarching purpose of this UN agreement is to establish common rules for the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms with the objective of creating global protection of biological diversity and human health .
The European Union must fulfil its international obligations .
We must therefore incorporate the provisions of the Protocol on Biosafety into our legislation .
This proposal supplements the Community 's existing regulations , particularly on the issue of the export of genetically modified organisms , so that it is in greater accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on Biosafety .
The proposal consists of the following main parts .
Firstly , the obligation to give notice of exports of genetically modified organisms intended for deliberate release into the environment .
Secondly , the obligation to inform our international partners about the Community 's methods , legislation and decisions concerning genetically modified organisms , as well as about any unintentional release of such organisms .
Thirdly , a set of rules to be used for identifying genetically modified organisms for export .
These rules are in accordance with the latest developments within Community legislation on genetically modified organisms and , in particular , with the provisions of the draft regulation on traceability and marking .
The present proposal contains no new special Community provisions concerning imports by one Member State from another , or movements between Member States , of genetically modified organisms .
Such imports or movements will , in the future too , be covered by existing Community legislation .
I would emphasise in no uncertain terms how important it is for the work on this proposal to proceed swiftly .
The EU has played a key role in the international negotiations right from the beginning .
We must show that there is no doubt that we shall fulfil our commitments and that we shall be able to implement the Protocol in full as soon as it comes into force .
Mr President , when the Cartagena Protocol was adopted a couple of years ago , it constituted major progress both for the European Union and the EU countries .
The Protocol is based on the precautionary principle and respects the right of states to have stricter national rules governing the trade in genetically modified products .
The Protocol is an important example of the way in which global trade regulations can be based on environmental and consumer protection .
It constitutes a positive alternative to parts of the World Trade Organisation 's practice .
With the adoption of the proposed law we are now debating , the Cartagena Protocol will become EU law .
While existing EU rules would apply to imports , the proposed law would regulate exports from the EU .
It is a matter of urgency that the rules be adopted .
The number of countries ratifying the Protocol is increasing , so that it will soon be possible for it formally to come into force .
By adopting this legislation , the EU can become a positive global example in this area .
We in Parliament should like to cooperate closely with the Commission and the Council to ensure that these laws are made ready as swiftly as possible .
As rapporteur , I believe that the Commission 's proposed legislation has quite a few weaknesses .
In important areas , the proposals do not go as far as the Cartagena Protocol itself , and in other areas the proposals create an unnecessary lack of clarity .
I and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy therefore propose tightening up on a number of points .
It must not be possible to export seeds or products not approved for use within the European Union .
Only for reasons concerned , for example , with the climate , will it be possible for seeds to be exempted from this rule .
We cannot have one set of safety and consumer protection measures for ourselves , and another set for others .
In order for products to be approved for export , the importing country must be required expressly to have approved their importation .
It must never be possible for a failure to respond to be interpreted as authorisation , as it in actual fact could be under the Commission 's proposed law .
That especially applies to countries with limited technical capacity in this area , for it is crucial to ensure that they genuinely recommend the imports and are able to handle them .
The actual exporter shall always be responsible for notification .
That is important in order to prevent a lack of clarity where the matter of responsibility is concerned .
It is also more in line with what is in actual fact prescribed by the Cartagena Protocol .
In the continued negotiations within the framework of the Cartagena Protocol , the European Union must support proposals for international regulations explaining companies ' legal responsibilities .
The public 's right to information about what is exported must be both clarified and reinforced , at the same time as respect for legitimate company secrets is maintained .
EU regulations must also make it unambiguously clear that exports to other countries must always respect the stricter rules which these countries are entitled to introduce , and this in full accordance with the Cartagena Protocol .
I therefore hope to see the adoption of as large a proportion as possible of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , as well as of the amendments tabled jointly by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
I also wish to thank the responsible Commission officials for their very helpful cooperation .
I would also thank my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was in the year 2000 that the European Union signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety , an international agreement which is now to be implemented , and as quickly as possible .
The Protocol aims , by applying international rules to trade in living GMOs , to prevent effects detrimental to biodiversity and to human health .
It governs the safe transfer , handling and use of genetically modified organisms , placing the emphasis on their movement across borders .
For this there is to be a procedure involving the prior informed consent of the importing country .
In the case of GMOs intended for immediate use as foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , or for processing , it envisages notification to the Commission or to the Biosafety Clearing House .
The Regulation 's provisions will apply only to export to third countries outside the European Union .
Community law already applies to imports into the European Union and to trade between its Member States .
The future EU Regulation should be as strictly as possible in accordance with the Protocol 's requirement , in order to avoid unnecessary bureaucracy and for uniform international standards to create legal certainty .
It must , at the same time , be ensured that European export businesses do not , as a result , face formalities additional to those with which they must already comply when exporting to third countries .
The report that Mr Sjöstedt has presented has , however , largely lost sight of the aim of maintaining biodiversity .
Of the many demands contained in it , some , on the one hand , go far beyond what the Cartagena Protocol requires , whilst others attempt to artificially restrict trade in living GMOs .
I see it as inexpedient to incorporate into the Regulation requirements relating to traceability and liability , as these issues are currently being debated in the course of a separate legislative procedure and therefore do not belong in this Regulation .
The Protocol takes for granted the exclusion of GMOs exported for use in closed systems from the complicated and expensive notification procedure .
No such provision is present in this report , or in the Commission proposal .
That is why I , along with Mrs Sommer and Mr Purvis , am reintroducing the Agriculture and Rural Development Committee 's Amendment No 50 , which we ask you to support .
It is my conviction that GMOs used in laboratories and not released into the environment represent no danger to biodiversity or to human health , and should therefore be excluded from the notification procedure .
Our Amendment No 51 calls for further derogations from the notification procedure in order to avoid unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles hampering trade in GMOs .
Moreover , the Regulation must follow the Cartagena Protocol as closely as possible in order to create greater legal certainty for international trade .
That is why GMOs in respect of which the importing country has already granted an exporter a license , and GMOs in respect of which the importing country has already granted a license for field trials , need to be capable of being exported without expensive approval procedures .
Dual notifications make little sense , as they result in more bureaucracy and far from greater safety for people and the environment .
What we need is sensible and practical rules in order to make good use of biotechnology 's chances in third countries while maintaining biodiversity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Sjöstedt , for the good work he has done on this report on the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol on biosafety .
As the Commissioner has repeatedly observed , he has obviously studied the original document with great care , and this has enabled him to add even greater precision to certain items in the Commission proposal , which is in any case essentially a good one .
The implementation of this Protocol has mainly to do with seeking something long overdue , namely rules for EU exports of living GMOs to third countries , and in this practicability is of the utmost necessity .
We have to bring into being a realistic and usable piece of legislation .
It is precisely for this reason that I consider it wrong and , indeed , damaging for us to want to use this report on the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol to intervene in ongoing legislative processes .
By this I mean the proceedings relating to genetically modified foodstuffs and feedingstuffs and their labelling and traceability .
It was only a few weeks ago that we debated their first reading and had a plenary vote on them .
The decision was a close-run thing , in other words , there were divergent opinions , and we are at present waiting to hear what position the Council takes on this .
The proposal for a directive on environmental liability is also only now being debated in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with little prospect of any decision on it , which means that anything this report lays down on the issue of liability for the traceability of GMOs and additives must be emphatically rejected .
These issues have nothing to do with the transposition of the Cartagena Protocol into Community law , and so I have decided to bring in a number of requests for separate voting in order to correct the result of the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which I believe to lack objectivity .
Nor initially did the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development take the right approach , in that it , in its opinion , sought to extend the derogations from the documentary and information procedures for living GMOs in transit and in closed systems to organisms genetically modified for the purposes of research and development , that is , to field trials under Part B of the Release Directive 2001 / 18 .
This was however , in my estimation , more of an inaccuracy , or rather a misunderstanding , as such a course of action would not be justifiable in terms of ethics or morals .
This is , in any case , about living GMOs , as yet at the research stage , and thus not guaranteed to be safe .
If we allow GMOs that are not permitted within the EU to be exported to third countries for the purposes of field tests - that is , for the purpose of their release into the environment - and do so without the possibility of their being monitored , then we are acting irresponsibly .
I say this precisely because I am an advocate of green genetics , as I am sure will have become abundantly clear in discussions to date in this House on the Release Directive and on draft regulations , traceability and the labelling of genetically modified foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
A derogation from the requirement for documentation of living GMOs intended for release in third countries would mean that we were helping to send research into a lengthy foreign exile outside Europe , whether the EU 's moratorium remained in place or were lifted , as it would be , in every instance , much simpler to engage in research anywhere other than in the EU .
We must see to it , though , that we make research within the European Union possible again and move it forwards , an incidental consideration being that we will then be able to monitor what it is up to .
I am therefore , together with my colleague Mrs Emilia Müller , introducing two new amendments on behalf of my group , namely Amendments Nos 50 and 51 to Article 4 , which have already been mentioned .
The first of these amendments seeks to restrict derogations from the documentary and information procedures to GMOs in transit and in closed systems .
This is where we really need these derogations in order not to hamper research , and I am convinced that fear of possible mishaps in this area , such as those that might result from containers fracturing in transit , is exaggerated .
Were it not so , I would not dare cross the street , get into a car , or board an aeroplane , as the possibility of an accident is always present , even if its likelihood is minimal in the extreme .
The second amendment has to do with a derogation from the information procedure for exports of GMOs to a third country , where this third country has already granted approval for release to another country in respect of the same GMO .
These derogations are necessary , as the use of the so-called AIA - Advanced Informed Agreement - as an information procedure in this instance offers no greater security and thus makes transborder movement unnecessarily difficult .
I hope you can follow my line of reasoning , and , of course , therefore ask you to support me with your votes .
I should first like to thank the Commission for the proposal for a regulation it has tabled and to thank Mr Sjöstedt very much for an outstanding report on the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol , which will place us in the best possible position to ensure global protection in connection with the movement of GMOs .
I think it important that the developing countries in particular be protected against the harmful effects of what is often the aggressive marketing of GMOs , with their possible serious consequences for people 's health , especially if we wish to conserve biological diversity in the countries concerned .
Certain points in the Commission 's proposal for a regulation are not perhaps entirely clear , but that is something I think is largely remedied by Mr Sjöstedt 's report and a number of the amendments tabled .
In this context , I shall just highlight the essential features .
First of all , I think it crucial that we help the developing countries develop the administrative capacity and expertise needed if they are not to be crushed by multinational companies with unlimited marketing resources available to them .
Secondly , it is important for the precautionary principle to be established .
In relation particularly to the developing countries , it is absolutely crucial that doubts about the harmful effects on biological diversity in the countries concerned should really be taken seriously , and it is also crucial that the legislation apply both to GMOs released into the environment and to genetically modified food and animal feed .
Finally , I think that Mr Sjöstedt is right to emphasise , and table proposals about , the fact that it is not enough for exporters to give notice of movements of GMOs .
There should be actual approval on the part of the authorities in the recipient countries , organised in such a way that the absence of a response from these authorities could not of course be interpreted as a tacit acceptance .
I think that this should apply to all movements , and not only the first , since the recipient country should have the opportunity to monitor the spread of GMO products in its territory .
It is also good that only products approved by the EU itself should be exported from the EU area .
Finally , I would add that it is very important for the EU countries to apply tough and uniform sanctions so as to avoid a situation in which certain countries visibly get away , or almost get away , with disregarding the legislation while others do not .
A state of affairs ought not to arise in which there is more incentive in some countries than in others to contravene the legislation on transboundary movement .
I think that by adopting Mr Sjöstedt 's report and a number of the amendments tabled also on Mr Sjöstedt 's initiative , we shall see the Cartagena Protocol implemented fairly and consistently .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome Mr Sjöstedt 's report .
In my opinion , he has done a splendid job , above all because he has dared to go beyond the minimal standard laid down by the Commission .
I do think that the way we vote on this in Parliament has to set a milestone , and - as the lady who spoke before me said - must make it clear that the protection of biodiversity and of the public has pride of place , but that so too does the freedom of choice of what we term third countries , to which we export .
It has become clear from the latest reports from , and the latest difficulties with , the United Nations , with African States , especially Somalia - countries who have , as it were , a gun put to their heads and who are told to eat or die , countries where the hunger of people in these countries is exploited as a pretext for forcing them to buy genetically modified foodstuffs - that we are dealing here with a real lack of free choice .
I cannot do other than urge the Commissioner to take a firm line with the USA , and I want to take this opportunity to beg you not to bow down before the USA 's threats , but rather make it abundantly clear that we will not give way on this .
Most of all , though , we must not lift the moratorium , for , as you will be aware , only one Member State has transposed the Release Directive .
Both a rule on liability and a satisfactory rule on labelling are a long way off .
We have to focus on that .
By this report and this vote , we have to show that we are in a position to close the gaping loopholes that are still there in the Cartagena Protocol .
I want particularly to highlight food aid and the export of foodstuffs , where we must not yield to American pressure by denying these countries what they want , but must make clear that they have to be informed about these matters as well .
Here too , what matters must be our refusal to trample on the right of consumers around the world to decide what they eat ; above all , our vote must send a clear message that we cannot export to other countries a risk that we are unwilling to take ourselves .
That was our experience with Eastern Europe , but especially with the Third World .
We cannot simply move the risk elsewhere , but must make it our concern that the standard be enforced in Europe and that we avoid research that would not even be carried out here turning these countries into hazardous areas .
We must not misuse these countries for the purpose of research that is full of risks .
To do so would be not just an offence against safety ; we would also be trampling human rights underfoot if we were to exploit these countries for the purposes of research that we find too risky .
Mr Sjöstedt has , though , already addressed the importance of our finding a truly satisfactory solution to the issues of liability and labelling .
We have to fashion liability into a tool to get industry to deal with this issue in a more responsible manner , and so I would reiterate my plea to the Commissioner that she should , in her closing statement , enlarge on her view of UN food aid and what she plans to do about the moratorium until such time as we have sorted out these criteria , of which we would remind the Commission too , in a satisfactory way .
Mr President , here we are once again to speak about GMOs .
Today , we are discussing the transboundary movement of these goods that are quite unlike any others .
Will our next step be to pass legislation on cases involving the accidental release or the unintentional risks of GMOs ?
I am , of course , being ironic .
But this surely marks just the beginning of long series of debates which , we must admit , sometimes take on a surreal quality .
We approve of the direction of the proposal for a regulation on the requirements of the Cartagena Protocol , but we would like to point out the paradoxical aspect of the process .
This agreement is designed to provide the necessary legal framework for the transboundary movement of GMOs , but , at the same time , it acknowledges the contradictory notion of unintentional transboundary movements .
It is evident that such provisions enable situations of scientific uncertainty to be dealt with , an approach that the countries of the South do not have the resources to undertake as impartially as ourselves .
Moreover , during the vote we took in July to set a threshold of 0.5 % or 1 % for the adventitious contamination of GMOs , did we show impartiality ?
Furthermore , are we not going round in circles at the moment in the Agriculture Council , with regard to the proposal on genetically modified products intended for animal feed ?
Which procedure should be chosen to authorise these products ?
Must we lay down a permitted level for non-deliberate traces of GMOs that are unauthorised but are considered to be safe ?
The Community has decided to play a leading role in the sale of biotechnology , but the approach is entirely paradoxical : even though neither the safety nor the danger of GMOs has been established , it is already being presumed that they will be extremely successful on the market .
It is also true that the Commission has started to ask that the moratorium be lifted .
The protocol does indeed leave the Member States a great deal of discretion , based on the precautionary principle .
Yet , the Sjöstedt report reduces this room for manoeuvre .
We must remain vigilant and remember that Community law uses the precautionary principle as it sees fit and that , when the States wish to take advantage of it , it is suddenly placed well out of reach .
The current French embargo on British beef is a worrying illustration of this .
It is up to the Member States to ensure that scientific uncertainty is not transformed into a futile problem of social uncertainty in the face of the risks , or even to lay the foundations for an acceptable co-existence of GMO and non-GMO cultures .
We are not closing the door on biotechnology or their transfer , but we wish to voice our reservations concerning a text which is merely a weak link of a shaky legislation thrown together in piecemeal fashion and which shows no hesitation in putting the cart before the horse .
We are therefore choosing to abstain from the vote on this report .
Mr President , I much regret that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy did not deliver an opinion on this subject .
Our coordinators were led to believe that there would be insufficient time to prepare an opinion before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy finalised its report .
In fact , this process took quite a lot longer than originally planned and there would have been sufficient time for the Committee on Industry to have given an opinion .
An opinion from that committee ought to have been regarded as essential - in fact it is arguable that the Industry Committee should have been the committee responsible for this report .
This proposal will have a substantial impact on the European Union 's biotechnology industry , on the EU 's research programme and , in particular , on the priorities of the Sixth Framework Programme for Research .
It also impacts on our trade in GMOs and in genetically modified research material with both developed and less-developed countries .
The Commission proposal adds undesirable restrictive requirements beyond the internationally agreed Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety , but the Environment Committee 's suggested amendments go drastically further .
It is essential that in our vote today we radically change the direction of this report .
I am only sorry that , coming late to this matter as I did , there was insufficient time to introduce all the changes and separate votes I would have liked .
Why is it such a problem ?
These additional restrictions and bureaucratic requirements will only discourage investment in life science research in Europe , and further encourage the investment in research to transfer to other areas with more favourable legislation outside Europe .
Our scientists will go the same way as the research investment .
Have the Commissioner and the rapporteur any concept of the damage this is likely to do ?
Did they give any consideration to the ambition expressed at Lisbon for Europe to be the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world ?
This proposal does not restrict imports into the EU of GMOs for contained research , but exports of public and private GM research material to third countries will be subject to yet further and disproportionate regulation .
This proposal runs diametrically contrary to the EU 's life science and biotechnology action plan .
Was there any coordination or consultation with the Commissioner for Research and the Council of Ministers for Research ?
It is quite appropriate that the Commission should propose , and Parliament and the Council approve , the requirements of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety , but we should go no further .
If we do , we will jeopardise our life science base for the future , our scientific community , the whole Lisbon strategy and Europe 's future as a dynamic knowledge-based economic power in the world .
I call on Parliament to vote overwhelmingly against Mr Sjöstedt 's report in all its critical aspects and , in particular , to support Amendments 50 and 51 , which will at least mitigate the extent of the damage this proposal and report are likely to cause .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to echo the words of thanks to the Commission for the present proposal .
It cannot be emphasised enough that the proposal is important for , among others - and this is sometimes overlooked - the developing countries , and that sufficient resources must be made available .
I should also very explicitly like to thank the rapporteur , not only for the volume of work , but also for the excellent work he has done , and for the political courage he has displayed in making a few observations with regard to the Commission proposal .
I am also somewhat taken aback by the reactions in this House , where the divide is once again apparent .
The MEPs to the right claim that we can apply the Protocol to the letter , but if we do , we must do it properly .
At the same time , we must ensure that science can carry out its research unhindered .
Those are the goodies .
The other side of Parliament is represented by those who are always frightened of God knows what and who want to impose restrictions on everything .
This is the wrong way to view the situation .
It should be viewed within the framework of the general debate surrounding GMOs , in terms of the consumer 's right to freedom of choice and of the precautionary principle .
We still have no 100 % certainty about this technology .
We must therefore ensure that at least the consumer has the choice .
This must be included in the Protocol .
This is also what we should now have the courage to vote in favour of .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the rapporteur 's political courage and his observations .
I hope that tomorrow 's plenary will adopt the same stance .
Mr President , I am pleased to speak on this report on the transboundary movement of GMOs in which the Committee on the Environment has adopted a more stringent and more comprehensive position than that proposed by the Commission , following the lead given by the rapporteur .
I would like to add to what colleagues have said in thanking him for his work .
I also welcome the fact that the Committee on the Environment expanded the regulation to cover food and feed which have been produced from or with the aid of GMOs , as well as GMOs intended for contained use .
The report shows that whilst the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety is a good basic framework for regulating the transboundary movement of GMOs , this is a minimum , a base line from which parties can and should be proactive in aiming for ever higher standards of control to meet the demands of the consumer .
This includes , as many colleagues have already mentioned , the right of freedom of choice .
We are only too aware of the recent examples of food aid to developing countries being cynically used to force GM food on people , to promote GM food and to force countries that have declared themselves GM-free to accept GM grain .
This includes countries such as Zambia , Mozambique and Zimbabwe which have all taken a stand against the untested and unproven nature of GMOs and it is totally unacceptable that these are being forced upon them by countries such as the United States .
The European Union , in cases such as this , buys local non-GM food , adhering to the principles and the rules of the recipient countries in a manner in keeping with the ethos of the Cartagena Protocol .
On the other hand , in the past two years Bolivia , Colombia , Guatemala , Nicaragua and Ecuador have all been forced to accept GM food aid even though this was contrary to their national regulations .
I welcome the committee 's report which clearly allows for countries to take more proactive steps to ensure international biosafety .
It is an important step forward in the whole GM debate and the report has my full support .
Mr President , I would like to start by offering Mr Purvis some small comfort .
He is indeed right that it would have been a good thing to have had an opinion from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , but we , the European People 's Party members of the Environment Committee , whilst of course representing the interests of the environment and of consumers , also represent the interests of business .
We all stand for an environmentally responsible market economy .
We know that protecting only the environment while ruining the economy is no use to consumers .
With us , Mr Purvis , the environmentally responsible market economy is in safe hands .
Austria ratified the Cartagena Protocol this year , depositing the instrument of ratification with the UN in New York on 27 August .
We know that some Member States see ratification as dependent on the passing of this draft EU regulation on the implementation of this Protocol .
This gives us all an interest in this draft being passed quickly .
Allow me , Mr Sjöstedt , to comment on some of the amendments , for example Amendment No 6 .
The Regulation addresses only the Community , so that it is quite unnecessary , and , I think , irrelevant , to speak of ' any other Party ' .
Like some of my predecessors on the floor , I think that the Protocol should cover only living GMOs , and that anything else would be wrong .
The area of liability and compensation is also , of course , very , very important and crucial , but on this we should wait for the outcome , which we expect to bring with it traceability and labelling .
It would , after all , be absurd for us now to insert some provision or other , and then engage in long-winded discussions on a quite different regulation , or another directive , on traceability , labelling and liability .
I rejoice in the knowledge that the Danish Presidency has as one of its objectives a Common Position at the Environmental Council on 17 October , following the conclusion of the First Reading stage in plenary , which is planned for the end of September .
We look forward to 17 October with great interest and wish the Danish Presidency and ourselves all the best for it .
Mr President , EU legislation runs up against boundaries on a regular basis .
Many of our rules affect imports and exports , and this brings with it a dual responsibility .
We must ensure that we do not compromise in the area of safety and at the same time , we must resist the temptation of imposing unnecessary restrictions on third countries and European exporters .
I should like to thank Mr Sjöstedt for the courage with which he has negotiated this narrow path .
Where biotechnology is concerned , there is in this Parliament a strong need to send a message to the rest of the world .
The message is that biotechnology is controversial , possibly even dangerous and undetectable .
The consumer must therefore be informed of GMOs .
I have no problems with sending out this message within the European Union , but we must refrain from applying it in the context of the Biosafety Protocol , which is about safety .
In the case of non-detectable GMOs , safety is not an issue .
If the importing country does want this notification , then this should naturally be supplied .
However , this is completely unrelated to safety , and this is why we do not actually need Amendment No 30 .
Ladies and gentlemen , we continually need to send out our message , but we should realise that forced evangelisation does not work .
The world is certainly not waiting to be patronised by Europe .
In his explanatory statement , Mr Sjöstedt states that the EU must play a leading role in legislation in the field of biotechnology , but we should realise that we have long given up our pioneering role in this respect , in which we could give the world much more .
Unfortunately , with regard to biotechnology , Europe is trailing behind .
Hardly any GMOs are being exported , at the very most products produced by means of them .
Cheese and olive oil are prime examples of this .
I should like to ask the Commission a question .
What will be the implications if this report were to be adopted ?
Would this increase the EU 's deficit ?
What would be the additional administrative burden for exporters , and what would be the economic implications of this ?
Mr President , the regulation on the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms is a rather surreal document .
Therefore , please will you forgive me my customary digression , for I cannot stop my flights of fancy .
Yesterday , I met a GMO wandering about between borders , who said to me : ' Why have you got it in for me so badly ?
Yesterday , while I was wandering between borders , I went to Naples .
I saw the beautiful Gulf of Naples , Vesuvius and Mergellina .
It was absolutely beautiful !
Then , a little further on , still by the sea , I saw a horribly ugly , uninhabited area where there was a steelworks that had been deserted for 10 years .
The area was called Bagnoli .
Why do you not do something in Europe to enhance the environment in this area near Naples ?
There you are , you see , wandering from one place to another I have been useful : I have seen an area where you , as Europe , might be able to do something to enhance the environment .
Why , then , have are you so against us GMOs ?
Even we have our uses .
Are you sure you are aware of our full potential ?
Therefore , be more flexible in allowing the genetic modification of organisms which are useful to the human race . '
Mr President , I wish to thank both my colleagues and Mrs Wallström for the viewpoints that have been put forward in this debate and that I think provide quite a clear picture of the lines of demarcation .
I think that there are a number of factors that should be borne in mind where this protocol is concerned .
The first is , of course , that we are concerned here with minimum regulations .
We must comply with what the protocol requires of us , but we may , according to the protocol , go further if we wish .
That is the situation that applies .
It also , of course , means that other countries around the world may go further than the protocol requires .
What I state in the report is that we shall respect this .
We require of our exporters that they respect the Cartagena Protocol and so , too , the legislation that other countries may adopt and that may go further than the European Union 's .
If we did not , we should in practice be acting contrary to both the spirit and the letter of the Cartagena Protocol .
I believe there is no question of our doing that .
Secondly , we should be aware that the Cartagena Protocol is in the process of development .
Regular negotiations are under way .
Quite a few areas of the Protocol have still not been clarified . It is just the general thrust of it that is being delineated .
Other areas have been clarified .
We must therefore bear in mind that we need a policy that is far-sighted and that shows the general direction in which the EU wishes to develop the Cartagena Protocol in the future .
It is precisely this to which the regulations on liability relate .
We are not concerned here with the EU 's liability legislation , which we are in the process of debating elsewhere .
What is at issue is Article 27 of the Cartagena Protocol , which says that we must begin to negotiate internationally concerning liability where this type of product is concerned .
As a Parliament , we support the Commission and the Member States in campaigning , in future negotiations within the framework of the Cartagena Protocol , for a global system of liability which would of course favour the serious actors in this area .
It is a system of this kind that is required .
When it comes to the amendments , I believe that Amendment Nos 50 and 51 seriously weaken the report by aiming to remove important areas from it .
Amendment No 50 , in particular , actually goes against the Cartagena Protocol .
We cannot adopt that amendment .
I should also like to ask those who regard GMOs differently from myself to reflect for a moment .
We naturally form different judgments of what is possible and different assessments of the risks that this technology may involve .
Irrespective of how we regard the future of this technology , I think there is something we must bear in mind , namely that we must have a system of rules under which the companies that operate in this area are credible .
Is a company credible if it exports to countries that have not given their permission ?
Is a company credible if it exports to a country that has not been able to respond to the request for permission ?
I believe that an industry that acts in this way disgraces itself .
We do not stand to gain , and nor should industry stand to gain , from rules that lead to what is in actual fact the bypassing of countries ' right to say yes or no to would-be imports .
Next question : are we credible if we export to others what is not good enough for ourselves ?
Are we credible if we export what we have rejected , for example for reasons that have to do with environmental safety , biological diversity or consumer protection ?
Of course we are not .
Even someone who takes a very positive view of this industry - complicated though it is , with both advantages and disadvantages - ought to appreciate that it is in everyone 's interests to have comprehensive , credible regulations .
If the European Union accepts these regulations , they will have an effect not only upon ourselves and our exports , but also upon the world as a whole .
They will show that the major global players too take this issue seriously and are prepared to assume their responsibilities .
It is with this in mind that I have prepared this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want first of all to thank you for your interesting and constructive contributions to this debate .
I want to begin with a general comment .
The Commission is , and remains , very active where the issue of biotechnology is concerned .
As you know , we have presented a communication on how we should make use of biotechnology .
We are actively working on our internal Community legislation in this area , partly by revising Directive 2001 / 18 / EC on traceability and marking , and we are also working on the issue of liability for environmental damage .
It is constantly a question of striking this delicate and difficult balance between , on the one hand , exploiting the advantages of a new technique , a new technology and new knowledge in this area and , on the other , preserving biological diversity and , most importantly of all , protecting people 's health .
I believe that this proposal is in line with Community legislation and that we are still being ambitious .
I was myself involved in the negotiations in which the EU was the party pushing to guarantee the introduction of international regulations .
I believe that we are achieving that balance in this area too .
It is also true , as Mr Sjöstedt points out , that there will be further negotiations and work in a number of areas with a view to shedding more light on a number of important issues .
If , finally , I may now offer my views on certain of the amendments in order to clarify the Commission 's attitude , I will begin by commenting on Amendment Nos 30 and 57 which cannot be approved because they go against the proposal on traceability and marking by extending the proposal also to include food and feed manufactured with the aid of GMOs .
It is important for different legal acts on biotechnology to tally .
Amendment Nos 5 and 47 deal with the important issue of capacity development in developing countries but contain no mechanisms for putting this into practice .
The Commission believes that this is an important issue but that it can better be dealt with in a more suitable forum , for example the European Development Fund .
Amendment Nos 7 and 45 relate to the issue of environmental liability , and the Commission again believes that this proposal is not the right instrument for getting to grips with this problem , to which special international negotiations are better suited .
Further attention will be given to this issue in international negotiations .
Amendment No 22 proposes that the export of GMOs for deliberate release into the environment should be limited to organisms already authorised within the EU .
In its present version , the amendment could entail serious obstacles to research outside Europe comprising , for example , field trials involving GMOs not cultivated in our latitudes .
The Commission is not therefore able to accept this amendment in its present form .
Amendment No 29 addresses more fundamental problems .
Firstly , procedures are being established that do not in their entirety correspond to Article 11 of the Protocol on Biosafety and , what is worse , are inconsistent with Article 12 of Regulation ( EC ) No 178 / 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law .
For that reason , the Commission cannot accept the amendment .
The proposal in the last sentence of Amendment No 60 to the effect that an exporter should be obliged to give notice of further movement of GMOs already authorised in the recipient country would not be in accordance with Community legislation governing deliberate release or with the Protocol on Biosafety per se .
This part of the amendment cannot therefore be approved .
It is , of course , a question of not creating unduly bureaucratic rules that cannot be implemented in practice .
The Commission is , on the other hand , able to accept Amendment Nos 50 and 51 .
Mr President , I want in conclusion to repeat that the Commission shares most of the European Parliament 's priorities and views in the problem areas .
If we want it to be possible to implement the Protocol on Biosafety , we must , at the same time , be accountable for the feasibility of such implementation .
International discussions on the Protocol on Biosafety are still going on .
A proposal capable of being implemented will not only help make it possible for the negotiations to continue in a constructive climate but also help show that sound protection of the environment and of human health can be combined with trade .
We shall have to return to other issues mentioned in the course of this debate , such as the moratorium and UN food aid , for they demand both time and thorough preparations .
I hope that they will lead in time to a constructive exchange of opinions , but this is not the right time and place to touch on all these different aspects .
A summary of the Commission 's position on the matter of the amendments is being presented in writing to the President
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be at noon today .
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution ( B5-0490 / 2002 ) tabled by Dagmar Roth-Behrendt on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the postponement of the ban on the marketing of cosmetics tested on animals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are discussing today is actually a technical measure .
The resolution before you , on which we are to vote , refers to what we term comitology , something which the spectators in the galleries will be surprised to learn , many Members of this House have difficulty understanding , and indeed , they certainly do not have to .
It is comitology that entitles the Commission to use the specialist committees to approximate legislation within the scope of the power that the legislation itself confers .
The resolution passed unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy charges the Commission with now desiring to avail itself of a right which it does not possess .
What we are talking about is the Commission 's intention of deferring the entry into force of the sixth amendment to the Cosmetics Directive , which was actually meant to have happened some time ago .
In the sixth amendment to the Cosmetics Directive , Parliament decided on a ban on the marketing of cosmetics that had been tested on animals , sharing as it did the conviction of most of the public that we have enough cosmetics and do not need more - toothpaste , shower gel , and so on - for which animals have had to suffer and die .
This ban had a definite deadline - 1998 .
In 1997 , the Commission gave itself the power to delay its entry into force .
Whilst , admittedly , stating that the entry into force was to be in 2000 , it added , at the same time , the option of an extension of two years .
I do not want right now to state whether that was lawful .
As things stood , the marketing ban was meant to enter into force on 30 June 2002 , and it did so .
The Commission is now planning to use a comitological measure to again , very soon - in a week or a few days , quite possibly on 24 September - put back the date of entry into force , by six months .
This it justifies by the assertion that we are in the midst of the conciliation procedure on the seventh amendment to the Cosmetics Directive , and that the measure could therefore not enter into force in June .
Mrs Wallström , I am sorry that you are the member of the Commission to whom I must say these things .
We charge you with acting illegally , with breaking the law .
You are in breach of the Treaty and of existing legislation !
I would much rather say that to Mr Liikanen , but he is , unfortunately , not here today .
I am aware that the Commission acts as a collegiate body ; I am equally aware that there are individuals sitting on the Commission who have very different views .
That , Mrs Wallström , is why I regret that it is you whom I have to address today .
I would very much prefer to have been very hard on Mr Liikanen .
I admit that , with you sitting there , I find it more difficult .
Nonetheless , what you are doing is illegal !
It is against the law , and we will therefore be taking you to the Court of Justice if necessary .
I am sure that the majority in this House will support that .
What you are now proposing to do is not merely contrary to the law , but is positively absurd .
I could use old-fashioned language and call it daft !
You want to pass a measure with retroactive effect .
You want to pass something that enters into force retroactively , namely from 30 June .
Why , actually , do you want to do this ?
We are already at the end of September .
The conciliation procedure will be completed in two months at the latest - it has to be .
Even now , you have not implemented the marketing ban .
In theory , you are already acting illegally , but we are saying : OK , that 's something of a legal vacuum , we 'll put up with it .
The Member States are not proceeding with transposition , and we know that they are doing the right thing by waiting for the seventh amendment .
What the Commission now has in mind is the creation of a precedent , and we are not going to let them get one past us .
They want , again , to give themselves the right to defer the sixth amendment , and if we now lie down quietly like little lambs , then they will believe that they have the right to carry on doing the same thing .
We will not let you have your precedent !
We are not good little lambs !
I 'm not one , and nor are my fellow MEPs !
That is why we are telling you now that your actions are illegal .
This resolution makes that very clear .
We call upon you not to implement this measure .
The four articles are very clear in calling on you to desist . We are telling you to keep your hands off this measure .
We are telling the Member States not to touch it , not to pass it into law .
And we are telling you that if you do it anyway , we will drag you off to the Court of Justice !
Mrs Wallström , I really do beg you to take this message back to the Commission .
I can see the gentleman from the Industry Directorate-General sitting beside you .
Tell them that we are serious about this .
We believe that you are in breach of the law !
As the Commission , you may not break the law .
You know that it did not do past Commissions any good , and you too should act as properly and honestly as possible .
You are not doing that if you want to pass another Implementing Measure .
So , as rapporteur for the Cosmetics Directive , I can only tell you , as firmly as I can : hands off !
Mr President , of course it is nicer to stand in for colleagues under circumstances where you might receive applause rather than be attacked .
I would never want to be attacked by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , because I respect her very much .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to thank her and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for the resolution on the postponement of the entry into force of the ban on the marketing of cosmetics tested on animals .
The aim of this postponement is quite simply to regulate a short-term situation , from 1 July 2002 until 31 December 2002 , and this corresponds to the period envisaged for conciliation .
The directive currently in force prohibits the marketing of cosmetics products containing ingredients or a combination of ingredients tested on animals after 30 June 2002 .
The current conciliation procedure between the European Parliament and the Council relating to the seventh amendment aims to settle definitively the question of tests on animals in the cosmetics sector .
This conciliation procedure is expected to be finalised in the coming months .
At the same time , there are responsibilities incumbent upon the Commission in the areas of the free circulation of goods , protection of public health and respect of international rules .
The Commission therefore considers it has an obligation to take the appropriate measures in accordance with the provisions of the current directive .
The Member States , represented in the Cosmetics Committee , will have to express their views on this proposal .
The Commission is convinced that further work , in close cooperation with the European Parliament and the Council , will finally lead to a balanced solution within the context of conciliation .
This solution should be of genuine benefit to animal welfare whilst safeguarding consumer health and our international commitments .
It is the intention of the Commission to do its utmost to achieve a result which satisfies everyone .
I will , of course , give your regards to Commissioner Liikanen .
Mr President , Commissioner Wallström always brings a light and happy touch to our proceedings and we are grateful for that .
The severity of some of the remarks you will hear from the floor today do not reflect on her , but on the fact that she is caught in one institution which is now on a collision course with another .
The rapporteur said that those listening to us in the gallery today may be curious as to what the word ' comitology ' means .
Some of us are too .
Our visitors should not go away with the feeling that comitology could be effectively translated as a lateral means whereby the Commission can frustrate the will of the Parliament .
We are an elected institution .
We have certain powers . They have been extended .
They are still not all that considerable , but we know where the boundaries are .
On this issue I must say to the Commissioner - and I hope she will take this back to Mr Liikanen - that we in this House have had a debate which has continued through a number of Parliaments , through pretty much the entire parliamentary lifetime of everyone sitting in this Chamber now , from 1993 onwards .
In 1997 the Commission purported to give itself a further power of delay and that was extended , although challenged , because all of us here - and everyone who serves as I do on the Conciliation Committee - agree with the rapporteur in acknowledging the difficulties which arise where there are not yet viable alternatives to some forms of animal testing .
That is perfectly taken into account in the deliberations we have had , which estimate that it may take another decade to reach the point and the conclusion that we all want .
But what happens in the meantime ?
What happens if this conciliation fails ?
We are not talking then of something which is only temporary , only due to last for the duration of the present conciliation .
We are talking of something quite different .
I would like to read to the Commissioner the fifth paragraph of the vice-chairman 's letter , written on behalf of our committee , to Commissioner Liikanen .
He says that the Commission exercised its powers - which are disputed anyway - in 1997 .
When the implementation date for the marketing of animal-tested cosmetics was postponed to 30 June 2002 by Directive 2000 / 41 , this postponement was to be - to quote the words of Recital 10 - for the ' last time ' .
Now here we are again - and it is not the last time , it is the penultimate time .
Or is it just one in a whole series of delays and frustrations ?
If you have an elected Parliament you have to listen to what it says , otherwise these people in the gallery are wasting their time and we are wasting our time in coming here .
Commissioner , you must go back and say to Mr Liikanen that he should think again .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are as one in our displeasure with the Commission .
It is not acceptable for the Commission to act illegally , for them to put off the implementation of this decision , delaying it , and so on .
Nor is it acceptable for them to look on and do nothing while the Member States endow their omissions with something like legitimacy .
Now at last , what has been resolved upon - namely , a ban on the marketing of cosmetics tested on animals - must be put into effect with all force .
The Commission is itself , after all , the guardian of the law , and as the guardian of the law , it must ensure that laws are implemented .
Now the Commission , rather than guarding the law , is obstructing it .
What you are achieving here will be catastrophic in its effect .
It is precisely in terms of the great implementation deficit in our European Union that you are giving such a bad example that in future all the Member States will be able to point to the Commission and say : Look at that , even the Commission itself is incapable of implementing its own laws , preferring to make laws for itself , and set itself above the law .
As Mrs Roth-Behrendt so rightly said , it acts illegally , bending the law to suit itself and contributing to the Member States ' noticeably diminishing interest in putting the law into real effect .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would like to reiterate , with as much emphasis as I can muster , that it is not acceptable for you to send out this calamitous signal ; on the contrary , the Commission must change its ways , become the guardian of the Treaties and do everything in its power to really get the Member States to transpose this law , and not itself go and break current European law .
That is not tolerable , and Mr Whitehead was right to say so .
How on earth do you intend to get it across to the public that the Commission has failed to make any real effort to put into effect things that should have been done in the past ?
Quite apart from that , I find it positively absurd that the Commission is also stabbing the Conciliation Committee in the back , depriving it of fallback positions , and making something of a mockery of the work currently being done in Parliament .
That the Commission should go so far as to do that really is unique in history .
You can see how great is our displeasure , and I cannot expect us to do other than adopt this resolution by a large majority ; I look forward to the Commission really seeing what an emphatic rebuke this is and realising how far-reaching is its significance .
Mr President , everyone is becoming caught up in the revision of the directive on cosmetics .
What has happened to the sixth revision ?
Are we moving straight on from the fifth to the seventh and ignoring the sixth ?
That is what everyone is wondering .
However , we all want to have safe and anti-allergenic cosmetics , to spare animals any unnecessary suffering , to maintain jobs , competitiveness and the expertise of our businesses .
This seemingly straightforward desire seems difficult , nigh impossible , to implement .
This resolution is a good illustration of Parliament trying to gain the upper hand , and the Council , quite rightly , refuses to support it .
To impose a target date for a ban on animal experiments could lead to several measures .
The first is to no longer guarantee the safety of products placed on the market .
These products would not have been subject to the full tests that provide the same guarantees as those carried out on animals .
The second point is to put European products on the markets of third countries at a disadvantage by continuing to carry out tests on animals , these are currently the only fully reliable tests .
The third point is to risk a sanction being imposed by the WTO which may perceive this ban as a barrier to the marketing of cosmetics produced outside the European Union , even though it is generally accepted that few directives proposing alternative solutions will come to light until another ten years or so and that animal experiments may be phased out completely in perhaps another 20 years .
In my view , it would be more realistic to enter into dialogue with the Council , leaving behind this overly passionate - and now ideological - debate , so that we can work together to find the best solution which will be acceptable to industry , consumers and animal campaigners .
I believe that a ten-year ban which includes exemptions for three types of tests - namely reproductive toxicity , toxicokinetics and toxicity through repeated use - would be more acceptable .
Lastly , I note that some directives are being revised for the seventh time whereas others , such as Directive 79 / 409 EEC , have never been revised before .
Mr President , I should like to concur with Mr Bernié , who stated that this is an ideological debate .
However , and this is meant for the Commissioner 's ears , it transpires that the Commission does not share Parliament 's ideology which has been approved here many times .
It therefore breaks the law - if I may put it that way - by flouting the rules that we have laid down several times .
In other words , the Commission 's ideology is not in line with Parliament 's wishes .
This strikes me as a dangerous situation , not only because Parliament is thus rendered a plaything , but also because the responsibility of Parliament - which has not always been undivided in this very complex matter , but has always acted responsibly - is being eroded at the very moment that we are discussing the conciliation procedure relating to the seventh amendment .
I would therefore once again ask the Commission to take account of what Parliament has always stated , namely that animal testing for the purpose of cosmetics is unacceptable , that safety should always come first and that we are willing to help consider all the possible alternatives , and help weigh these up .
This is , in fact , something we have always pointed out for every amendment to this directive .
I would now ask the Commission not to frustrate Parliament , to withdraw its plans and implement what we jointly agreed on .
Mr President , I know that our concerns are close to the Commissioner 's heart .
You , Commissioner , are a young and beautiful woman , and , whilst you have no need of cosmetics , I need them urgently .
I will be seventy next year , and , whilst I am very keen to get some anti-wrinkle cream , I do not want some animal to suffer as a result .
Do you really believe any woman would use any cosmetic product if she had to see an animal suffer for it ?
We want to look good without others having to suffer to make it possible .
I really want to make an appeal to the cosmetics industry .
Look how the introduction of the catalytic converter led to prophecies of ruination and claims that the end of the motor industry was nigh -- and yet , it experienced a boom .
Why does the cosmetics industry not announce that it will invest money - a great deal of money - in research , in order to have the means to make women beautiful , but not at the cost of the suffering of others ?
I believe the cosmetics industry would enjoy a massive upturn , and European women like us would be even more beautiful than all the other women on earth .
Mr President , it would be indeed tempting to enter into this debate .
I used to be a minister for consumer affairs so I could very well do so , but will not because my task is to represent the Commission .
This is purely a technical issue of ensuring legal clarity during the six months that the conciliation procedure is ongoing .
The Commission does not want to impinge on future decisions or the result of the conciliation procedure , but would underline that it has a responsibility to ensure the observance of rules on the free circulation of goods , the protection of public health and the respect of international rules .
We have been urged by the Legal Service to make sure that we provide legal certainty to economic operators , who must ensure that the products they put on the market are safe .
That is the aim of this postponement .
This is important because the Commission proposal also has to be retroactive in order to achieve the objectives of ensuring that products are marketed only when they fulfil the conditions laid down by Directive 76 / 68 and because we must also be able to require manufacturers to guarantee that the products they put on the market are not harmful to human health .
The situation is such that there are no comprehensive alternative testing methods at the moment and that is why we must ensure that there is legal certainty for these six months .
That is the background to the Commission proposal .
I have taken note of everything you have said and fortunately , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , we have developed the capacity for listening to two people at the same time .
You have to do that and the advantage of listening to German is that all the verbs come at the end so that also helps !
Thank you , Commissioner , for your additional intervention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Casaca ( A5-0275 / 2002 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on scrutiny by Member States of transactions forming part of the system of financing by the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund .
Mr President , Commissioner , pursuant to Rule 9 ( 1 ) of our Rules of Procedure , I must first inform you that I am a farmer and as such I hold a direct interest in every aspect of the Agricultural Fund , such as this proposal for a regulation .
The Commission is proposing a reduction in the minimum number of compulsory scrutinies for commercial and industrial undertakings which have received an agricultural subsidy from the Community budget , for the disposal of agricultural surpluses from the internal market or for other purposes .
We have nothing against reducing this number , since the quality , the Community character , the selection process and the transparency of this process are , of course , significantly improved .
We have been extremely concerned to see the high level of fraud and irregularities that beset operations whose control is covered by this regulation , specifically livestock exports and subsidies for the disposal of milk products and we have expressed this view on numerous occasions .
As seen in the European butter falsification case , fraud against the financial interests of the Community is indissociable from fraud against the financial interest of the Member States , against public health and against farmers , in whose name these considerable amounts of Community monies are spent , but who are often harmed by them .
According to information published recently in the press , the number of seizures by Members States ' customs services of falsified food products rose from 2 340 in 2000 , to 4 106 in 2001 and Commission administrators have stated that organised crime is today focusing more on falsifying food products than on falsifying luxury articles .
We are also receiving news of glaring shortcomings in the fight being waged by the Member States against food falsification , specifically in key fields such as wine , oil , and meat and milk products .
Given these circumstances , we again insist , as we have done over the last three years , on the Commission 's significantly increasing its direct action to monitor fraud and falsification in the food trade and industry .
We welcome , of course , the proposals to reform the CAP , which call into question the continuity of these intervention mechanisms , which have proven to be open invitations to fraud and falsification , being of dubious effectiveness in supporting farmers ' incomes , opting instead for direct aid granted according to the area farmed and to the rural work undertaken , using criteria of sustainable development .
There cannot , of course , be effective control without transparent procedures and without democratic scrutiny by Parliament .
A few years after the scandal broke of the more than 35 thousand tonnes of butter falsified by the Camorra and disposed of in Europe and beyond by milk product companies from various Europeans countries , we have still not been told which companies were involved and what measures have been adopted against them by the European Institutions , and to prevent this type of activity .
When will this matter be finally cleared up ?
What progress has been made on physical scrutinies of these high-risk products that allow us reasonably to expect that we will see no further occurrences of scandals of this scale ?
I must highlight once again that the idea that only the falsification of milk products directly subsidised by Community funds can be considered to affect the financial interests of the Community is unacceptable .
If this approach is accepted , whereas farmers that exceed their production quota for cow 's milk , respecting the financial interests of the Community , are heavily penalised , industrial concerns that sell milk products that are not made with milk would not be penalised , despite having a much more damaging effect on the Community 's financial interests .
I also think it is important , where this regulation is concerned , to disseminate the list of commercial and industrial undertakings and the amounts with which they are subsidised by the Agricultural Fund to dispose of surpluses .
I fail to understand why any competition process to adjudicate a commercial bid for tender or even to award a scientific grant has to be public , divulging the sums and the actors involved , but when we are talking about multinationals that receive sometimes enormous sums to get rid of food products , the public does not have the right to know who is receiving funds and to what ends .
Democratising Europe and increasing the confidence of the citizens in their institutions inevitably require a more transparent attitude and equitable procedures .
We hope that due account is taken of this regulatory amendment by both the Council and the Commission because it presents a unique opportunity to overcome the obvious shortcomings in this field of protecting the Community 's financial interests .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Casaca for his report , although the Commission does not agree with all aspects of it .
I should underline that the implementation by the Member States of Regulation 4045 / 89 is generally satisfactory .
The Commission 's proposal therefore only contains technical amendments aimed at adjusting reference amounts for inflation , as was the case with the last amendment in 1994 , simplifying Member States ' reporting requirements and including the possibility of reducing the number of scrutinies in certain duly motivated cases .
These would be cases in which control services from more than one Member State joined forces in scrutinising international-scale companies receiving EAGGF aid .
As I have said , the implementation by the Member States of the obligations arising from this control regulation is satisfactory , but some technical amendments are called for .
Let me stress one important factor : the regulation is a control regulation and not an anti-fraud regulation .
The Commission therefore shares the opinion of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that Article 37 and not Article 280 is the most appropriate legal base .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I really would like , as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to thank the rapporteur most warmly for the work he has done .
The Commission proposal is one that I am able to welcome in its entirety , as it aims to improve the combating of fraud in the area of agriculture .
For there is one thing that must be clear to all of us , and that is that fraud harms farmers themselves .
The EAGGF guarantee is a means of financing , for example , export refunds , interventions by the various market organisations or the co-financing of supporting and other measures for the development of rural areas outside the Objective 1 regions .
As the Commissioner has already pointed out , Regulation 4045 / 89 deals with retrospective checking of the business records of undertakings in receipt of agricultural aid from the Community budget for EAGGF guarantees .
Thus , this Regulation is the core anti-fraud measure in the agricultural sphere .
I welcome the Commission 's presentation of proposals for adapting this instrument and bringing it up to date .
Controls are important , especially in agriculture , which is a sensitive area , because the whole industry would suffer without them .
The selection criteria for the undertakings to be audited were last amended in 1994 , but have not been further adapted since then .
To take an example , the annual rate of inflation has to be taken into account .
Use of risk analysis techniques is to be even further improved .
Aid payments already received , which are fixed as the threshold at which scrutiny starts , are to be raised , and administrative assistance has to be simplified .
This makes me very thankful that this will take place across all the Member States , as this will enable us to reduce the number of audits by up to 25 % , which must in no way be taken as a reduction in their quality , but a more targeted selection of undertakings to be audited , and one that relates more to the risks involved .
Fraud needs to be combated in a hard-hitting and focussed way .
In future , therefore , electronic data and documents will be subjected to scrutiny , yielding data on production and on the type of produce .
Direct payments to the producer will continue to be excluded from scrutiny , as will those payments covered by the integrated administration and control system .
I would like to conclude with particular reference to the real importance of taking into account the need to create special framework conditions , based on a multi-annual approach , for this in controls and measures or rural development projects .
Mr President , first of all I welcome the report .
I think it is very timely , and it will certainly be welcomed by everyone , because most people would welcome a reduction in inspection .
However , that does not mean in any way actively encouraging lesser controls .
I happen to believe that if you are going to have real control of the finances of the European Union , it can only be best carried out at Member State level , because the Member States also have the ability to follow such controls through .
I would agree totally with the previous speaker , that the vast majority of people in the agricultural industry , be they in the manufacturing side , the factory side or indeed at the farm level , are not involved in fraud .
There will , however , always be a small number of people in any country who are prepared to abuse a system .
I think that in Europe we must be more specialised in what we try to do , we must be clearer and more specific in our targeting of inspections as regards the areas we inspect , because in many Member States there is no doubt that some European money is not spent very wisely , and could be much better spent .
I welcome the fact that the threshold is to be increased .
I think it is timely and I return to my point - I still believe that the majority of contacts should be left to the Member States and that we in Europe should be more specific and more targeted in the areas that we want to see inspected .
No one , I repeat , wants to encourage fraud ; certainly we in this Parliament would not in any way want to encourage fraudulent acts and where they are found they must be dealt with very severely .
So , we must have good control but it must be targeted , it must be specific , it must be to the point , and it must be in areas where abuse has been found .
I certainly believe we can improve the situation , I believe this can be achieved , and I believe it can be done by targeting particular areas which we consider to be the most vulnerable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of our group , I wish to thank Mr Casaca for this report and also make it abundantly clear that we support him , even on those points where the Commission thinks it can make distinctions between control measures and anti-fraud measures .
According to your institution 's information , losses of EUR 430 million were sustained in this area last year , which means that it is not we who suffered , but those sitting up there - the taxpayers of this European Union of ours .
When we talk about how we should reform agricultural policy in Europe , as the Commission recently proposed , in order thereby to bring agricultural policy closer to the public , and in this case , closer to the taxpayers - something to which Mrs Schierhuber , a farmer herself , referred , and on which point I wish to give her my support - we have to distance ourselves from such quibbles about what is control , and what is directed against fraud .
It is therefore my view that the Commission would have been well-advised to follow our thinking , which is that of the rapporteur and of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and , in the final analysis , give these measures the legal basis of the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
We have already given some thought to how we could put a stop to export refunds , especially in the area of live cattle exports .
The images we see of Mediterranean harbours , which our young people get to see , are far from being an advertisement for this agricultural policy and far from being an advertisement for the European Union .
That is something we have to do away with , and there have been amendments on the subject tabled by this House in this Budget .
Let me say loud and clear that , in the preliminary draft budget , the Commission has given us no support .
The amendments will be back , and we can then expect more cooperation in the future , for , in this Parliament , which makes it its business to monitor the budget , we are well aware that this system of export refunds cannot be made immune to fraud .
On the contrary , such a thing is impossible .
The system of agricultural export refunds as currently practised is an invitation to fraud .
That is a challenge , and I see the debate on the choice between Article 37 or Article 280 from the Treaties as purely academic .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , we , who talk more to the people who live alongside us , eat and drink with us and pay us taxes , cannot afford that for the future .
Here the wholehearted support for our rapporteur and for his report .
Thank you , Mr President .
I should also like to congratulate Mr Casaca on behalf of my group .
I share his relentless ambition to improve agricultural controls .
If this policy is already controversial , and European agricultural policy is controversial , then we must in any event ensure that the money is well spent .
What is the essence of the Commission 's proposal ?
It aims to reduce the number of controls , but to improve them at the same time .
We hope that the latter is the case , but everything is yet to be proven , of course .
We will be closely monitoring this process , something that I support .
The proof will be in the pudding .
You will be given the benefit of the doubt , but I hope that your premises are indeed genuine .
Something which Parliament has always asked for are margins of error for the individual sectors of the budget , and this also applies to the agricultural budget .
How great is the margin of error in the dairy sector , for example ?
How much is it in the cereal sector , or the tobacco sector ?
The big question is whether you are able to supply these figures by means of this other system , because based on the Commission 's new system of accounting , we expect that these figures will be available in due course .
The Court of Auditors has said that it will not be able to do this .
We would therefore ask the Commission to indicate , more or less on an annual basis , what the estimated margin of error and the estimated improvement will be .
This will enable us to assess improvements in the Commission 's control procedures .
One subject that has not been touched upon , not even in the Commission proposal , is that we have noticed an increasing emphasis on rural policy in Commissioner Fischler 's proposals .
Funding for rural policy is subject to good agricultural practices , which is excellent , and we must incorporate the environment and similar issues in this .
However , what exactly are good agricultural practices ?
My guess is that good agricultural practices in Sweden may on the whole be different from good agricultural practices in the Netherlands , or Portugal , or Greece , or wherever .
This is the essence .
What is considered normal in one country is still not normal in another country .
My final comment concerns Amendment No 10 pertaining to the publication of all data on the various destinations of agricultural funds .
I agree with this in principle , but as far as I know , this does not apply to any of the other subsections of the budget .
This is why we will be keeping our powder dry for the time being and will not be voting for this amendment at this stage .
Mr President , like my colleagues , I endorse the Commission proposal that has been tightened up by Mr Casaca .

As we have grown accustomed from Mr Casaca , it is a very sound report with good recommendations , and I regret that the Commission is unable to indicate that it will be adopting all of Mr Casaca 's proposals , certainly in the light of the wide support which these proposals are enjoying from the Committee on Budgetary Control .
One of the aspects involved is the legal basis of this proposal .
As is generally known , we take the view that this should be Article 280 because it is essentially about the good management of EU funding .
This is not about giving in to the agricultural lobby for the umpteenth time .
In a way , the agricultural subsidies are , in fact , the EU 's best kept secret .
We know that a great deal goes wrong .
Only last week , it transpired from the Court of Auditors ' report that subsidies for oilseeds are being misused on a large scale , and yet , little seems to be done about it .
It is absolutely essential that we should make these flows of funds transparent .
Indeed , not a great deal of aid lands with the small farmers for whom it is intended , but ends up instead with large multinationals , as Mr Casaca has already explained .
Yet , it is not possible to make this data public .
The VVD and CDA in the Liberal and Christian-Democratic groups - that are , incidentally well represented in this debate today - are opposed to making these public .
Why ?
Fear of public access ?
Mrs Maij-Weggen was this Parliament 's rapporteur who spoke in favour of public access to documents .
The Liberal group has always set great store by public access .
So that cannot be the stumbling block .
Could other elements be at play , such as self-interest and looking after the group 's supporters ?
Or a reluctance to make the flows of funds transparent because that would clearly demonstrate the need for reforming the Common Agricultural Policy ?
I am afraid that this is the case .

I also regret that Mr Mulder is unable to support Amendment No 10 by Mr Casaca about making the flow of funds known , giving the excuse - for it is nothing but an excuse - that anything that does not apply to other areas of policy should not apply to agriculture either .
Mr Mulder constantly hides behind this argument .
He has done this for the past couple of years , and this is not the way forward , certainly not given the fact that the agricultural budget accounts for half of the European budget .
This problem will become more pressing following enlargement .
Even more businesses will join , and it is then even more important that we know where the money ends up .
Agricultural policy has taken on undesirable forms over the past few years .
Subsidies do not end up with those for whom they are intended .
An example of this , which was quoted only this summer , is the fact that even the Dutch Queen receives subsidies for creating an olive tree plantation in Italy .
If there is somebody in Europe who does not need this money , then surely it is one of the world 's richest women .
And this is going on while rural policy in Groningen in the Netherlands , for example , has insufficient funding to help small farmers keep their heads above water .
This proves that this policy has got out of hand and that we must inject transparency into the flow of funding .
This could , in turn , serve as a basis for a thorough reform even before the new Member States join .
For this is desperately needed .
Mr Casaca 's report is a first step in this direction .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Paulo Casaca , on the quality of the work that he has submitted for our consideration , but especially on the rigorous work he has undertaken as a Member of this Parliament on accounting transparency and Community procedures .
I , like the rapporteur , acknowledge that the Commission proposal is acceptable , because it undoubtedly represents a significant increase in the quality of Community controls and procedures and demonstrates that the Commission is already committed to this procedure .
The monitoring of expenditure and of all Community funding procedures is indissolubly linked to greater transparency and equity .
It is , therefore , in these fields that the Commission and Parliament must focus their main concerns .
We are all aware of the quantity and the scale of fraud that has been perpetrated - despite the existing monitoring system - and therefore nothing that we can do to improve the system will be cost-free or dispensable .
The Commission in particular and the European Union in general can only gain by disseminating all available information to the citizens and primarily by the public 's understanding of the relationship between the main beneficiaries of common funding policies .
We look forward to seeing whether the promises made by the Commissioner responsible for agriculture in this field can be fulfilled in the short term .
I also wish to endorse the rapporteur 's proposal aiming to change the legal basis from Article 37 to Article 280 of the Treaty .
This would be a major change , of great significance , which would attach the utmost priority to protecting the Community 's financial interests .
I should like , finally , to remind you that fairness in international trade is an incalculable asset in the medium term and , above all , that there are no isolated or unconnected economic sectors .
The potential harm to third countries arising from protectionist policies or the absence of transparency in procedures or in the implementation of rules will eventually be suffered by those who make this form of behaviour the norm for intervention .
It is absolutely crucial that the proclaimed reform of the CAP can incorporate these and other principles .
As there is plenty of time before the vote , I intend to apply the catch-the-eye system so that Members not on the list of speakers can take the floor .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I wish to thank all my fellow Members who have been kind enough to refer to the work that we have produced in this field and I should like to say that , on this matter , the Committee on Budgetary Control has , in fact , worked extremely well .
We have all shared the same vision , which essentially we all hold with regard to the need to protect our financial interests , and we have produced a piece of work that is essentially collective .
Having said this , I should also like to thank the Commissioner for the attention that she has paid to this report , but I must say , Commissioner , that your intervention raised some questions that I think are absolutely crucial to clarify .
And , with the permission of the President , I should like to ask you four very specific questions highlighted by this report :
Firstly , the Commissioner tells us that Article 280 only concerns fraud and that this regulation is about scrutiny .
Commissioner , this is not the first time that I have heard the Commission say this , but I am tempted to say that perhaps the Commission needs to take a closer look at Article 280 .
Because , and to translate freely from the English version , the first paragraph of this very Article states that ' the Community and the Member States shall counter fraud and any other illegal activities affecting the financial interests of the Community ' .
It is quite clear , therefore , from the wording of Article 280 that we are not only dealing with fraud but with all and any illegal activity that threatens the financial interests of the Community .
It is , therefore , perfectly clear that this regulation falls entirely within the scope of this protection , and I must say that the overwhelming majority of processes to recover money undertaken by the Community are done carried out under this regulation .
I would say that perhaps around three-quarters of these processes and three-quarters of the appropriations recovered fall under this regulation .
How , then , can the Commission say something like this - that this has nothing to do with Article 280 , when this regulation is a straightforward transcription of what is laid down in Article 280 ?
Secondly , the Commissioner says that the performance of this regulation has been satisfactory .
As has already been said , I do not believe we can look at this regulation in isolation from the other regulations and from the entire legal structure intended to protect the financial interests of the Community .
From this point of view , I only wish to point out once again the scandal that I have already mentioned ; the scandal of the butter falsified by the Camorra of Naples and which had the cooperation of major European milk-product undertakings in almost all large European countries .
This is a scandal that started in 1995 , that involved at least 35 thousand tonnes of falsified butter , and which was only stopped in the year 2000 , in other words , 35 thousand tonnes of butter were falsified over five years , involving large undertakings in France , Germany , Belgium and probably in other countries .
And not once did this regulation enable the Commission to understand the first thing about this falsification of butter .
A local investigation had to be conducted by the Italian police in Naples for this scandal to start to be unravelled .
We are now in 2002 , and we still do not know which undertakings are involved and what the Commission intends to do to these undertakings .
And the Commissioner thinks that this is satisfactory . Please forgive me for saying so , but this is not satisfactory .
I do not think it is satisfactory that food falsification has almost doubled between the year 2000 and 2001 , which is , for example , another figure that has appeared in the press and which has not , so far , been denied by the Commission .
This , as far as I am concerned , is not satisfactory ;
Thirdly , Commissioner , we have the issue of transparency .
I have heard the Commissioner call for transparency - and rightly so - in the most varied circumstances .
In these circumstances , however , I do not understand why it is that when we reach this point , the Commission and , therefore , also the Commissioner , are no longer calling for transparency .
How is it possible that we can go onto the Internet and see who is applying for grants funded by the Community science Programme , for example , and who has received these grants , but we cannot find out which multinationals receive millions and millions of euros to export European food surpluses or to dispose of them on the internal market ?
Why is this a State secret ?
Why is the Commission not telling us which undertakings these are ?
How much are they receiving ?
For what purpose ?
What aspect of this needs to remain secret ?
And here , as our fellow Members have already said , and quite rightly so , our problem is not just with the Commission , but also with our fellow Members from the PPE and the Liberals , who have also hitherto refused to accept that this rule , which I believe is fundamentally transparent , is included in the regulation ;
Lastly , Commissioner , I have a question to ask you about the definition of the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
Because this definition has been made in the following way : the falsification of milk products is only considered to be a problem for the Community if the perpetrators are in receipt of a Community subsidy .
In other words , if they do not receive this subsidy , it is no longer an issue for the Community .
This is completely absurd , Commissioner , for the following reasons : milk producers exceed their reference quantity - in other words , they are producing milk - and this milk has not been subsidised - the Community allows the industry that buys their milk to immediately enforce preventive retention , in other words , even before a quota surplus is observed , a preventive retention of money is made to pay a fine on the quota .
In other words , even if these farmers have committed no offence , have not even increased their milk production , money is nonetheless taken from them .
This is what is happening to milk producers .
If we have an undertaking that is producing ' fake ' milk products , in other words , that is making butter without milk , that is making butter with a huge variety of things that should never be used in any food product ; totally artificial things , then the Community says the following : well , this is not our problem unless Community export subsidies have been received .
This makes no sense at all !
This is the Community doctrine , however , and has been the doctrine advocated in the Committee on Budgetary Control , year after year , and is still being advocated .
I cannot accept this , Commissioner !
I would like you also to explain to us clearly why the Commission is adopting this attitude , because I cannot explain it to anyone !
I cannot go to the farmers of the region that I represent here and tell them something like this , because there is no possible explanation for this and therefore I should like the Commission to clearly explain the reason for this incongruity .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Members of Parliament for their interesting speeches - I have learned a lot of new things , including about the equal treatment of the Belgian Queen , and olive growing .
Mr Casaca was right to express concerns about irregularities .
I would like to point out that Regulation 4045 / 89 scrutiny results in a high number of irregularities being reported to OLAF , and also in the identification of and follow-up to cases , to which Mr Casaca referred .
This is very important .
I should like to make clear the Commission position on some of the amendments and I will also try to answer Mr Casaca 's four questions .
The first one concerns the legal basis .
I have three points to make .
Firstly , Regulation 4045 / 89 is a control regulation and not an anti-fraud regulation .
Therefore , Article 37 is the most appropriate legal basis .
Secondly , these are technical amendments and there is no justification for making substantive changes at this point .
Thirdly , the opinion of Mr Casaca 's own committee - the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market - based on the advice of Parliament 's Legal Service , was that Article 37 was the most appropriate legal basis .
It is very important for all those involved that a distinction is made between control and anti-fraud .
That is why the Commission rejects this amendment on the legal basis .
Amendments 2 , 3 and 4 expand on or slightly strengthen the existing provisions and are acceptable to the Commission .
Concerning Amendment 5 , I have to stress that , as Member States are already required to send the Commission a list of beneficiaries , this part of the amendment is unnecessary .
The methods used by the Member States to calculate the minimum number of scrutinies have been checked by Commission services and found to be satisfactory .
That is why the Commission rejects this amendment .
We can accept Amendment 6 , even though it seems to be superfluous .
Amendment 7 exceeds the nature of a technical amendment , would mark a major change in the relations between Member States and could also have major legal effects .
The Commission is not opposed to the amendment in itself but , in view of the legal and political issues , it is a question that needs to be taken up at horizontal level , and that is why the Commission rejects it .
On Amendments 8 and 9 , the Committee on Budgetary Control wants Commission staff to carry out a certain number of controls each year , one in each Member State , plus one multinational control .
In allocating its control efforts , the Commission makes use of risk analysis .
This approach has been demanded and supported by the European Court of Auditors and Parliament .
These Amendments 8 and 9 would drastically limit the effectiveness of any risk analysis because of the amount of work that would have to be done every year .
DG Agriculture 's audit services are responsible for the control of many measures , and to oblige them to carry out all the controls required by these amendments - whether they are high risk or not - is not an acceptable approach .
Furthermore , some Member States have one control service , others have several , and difficulties may be identified in some but not in others .
However , Amendment 8 requires one control per Member State per year whatever the circumstances : this does not take account of the risks identified and will mean scarce resources also being used on low-risk controls .
If Parliament insists on diverting from this professional audit approach , then it would also effectively be requiring the Commission to commit additional budgetary means to recruit the necessary staff .

Finally , the amendment by Mr Cunha aimed at publishing the list of beneficiaries , to which Mr Casaca referred .
The Commission promotes openness and transparency but does not think that this is a wise proposal .
The programme may be decided up to 12 months before the beginning of some scrutinies , and giving a beneficiary 12 months ' notice of a control cannot be good control practice .
In any event , Regulation 4045 / 89 forbids the use of nominative data in this way .
I understand that there is also a volume question that has to do with the practicality of giving out some of the information in a meaningful way .
That is why this amendment is not acceptable to the Commission .
With regard to the specific case concerning butter , I cannot supply all the details on that .
However , I would ask you to send the Commission a written question on this case .
We could then update you on what actions have been taken .
We will have to come back to the other more general political questions , because I would like to restrict my comments to the proposal before us .
Mr President , as we have a bit more time today , I would like to avail myself of the opportunity you mentioned earlier .
Here is a Commission proposal , one that has been the subject of wide public discussion in Europe , on how the agricultural policy should be reformed .
We are now telling you , Commissioner , which strands of the agricultural policy the Budget Control Committee believes should be changed .
Its arguments are well known .
The question of the legal basis - about Article 37 or Article 280 , as proposed by us - is of course not just an academic one .
It is about how public the area of agricultural policy should become .
Is Parliament really on board , or is it not ?
It is about all these things .
That is what we want , and we owe it to our citizens .
When I said earlier that our present systems of export refunds cannot be made proof against fraud , you on the Commission ought really to have pricked up your ears , if you are really serious about protecting the tax revenues that we raise in the Member States .
No reaction on the part of the Commission reaches my ears - on the contrary .
Looking at the preliminary draft budget for the coming year , we find one particularly sensitive area , one I have mentioned before , namely the subsidies for exports of live animals , specifically cattle .
On that , I must say that our budget is so lacking in transparency that Parliament first has to coax these export refunds , which do not even have a credit line of their own , out of it !
Commissioner , we will try to get one in the 2003 budget year , so that we can get a slightly clearer view of things .
Let us get back to our cattle .
I see that the figures for these next year are bigger than those for this year , adding up to a policy precisely contrary to what we actually wanted - down with export refunds , especially where live animals are tormented in the way they were in the past , and where the Commission is not in a position to guarantee the correct implementation of what the directives contain on the subject .
In today 's budget , Commissioner , we already have an agreement between the Finance Ministers and Parliament to the effect that the Commission will , by 31 May , present a report on the proper implementation of the Animal Transport Directives in the Member States and the number of sanctions eventually imposed by the Commission on those Member States that may have contravened them .
As yet , nothing has been put on the table - nothing !
How are we to get to grips with the issue if you simply refuse to do anything ?
We will bring this issue up again .
I would be very happy if we could leave this debate at least with the certainty that we would soon have your institution 's report on the table .
To repeat : the policy you are at present pursuing runs directly counter to our own interests .
You are increasing export refunds , at any rate for cattle .
You cannot , then , shuffle off onto anyone else the responsibility for the unspeakable torments inflicted on the live animals that we are exporting to the Middle East .
You yourselves must shoulder that responsibility , and if you think that controls in the Member States are in fact satisfactory on the whole , then I will repeat that last year 's irregularities and frauds amounted to EUR 430 million .
I do not know how our fellow-citizens of the EU understand your utterances on the subject .
Finally , I was not in Johannesburg , and so I do not know whether you also represented us , but , Commissioner , was it not made clear to us there , all the time , that export refunds of this sort , this kind of agricultural policy , this type of subsidy , ends up making a massive contribution to the great misery to be found in many parts of the world ?
Oh yes , we will find room in our budget for some sort of aid , for handouts of some kind , but what I have said is a fact , and you are at present engaged in a policy contrary to the interests of these countries and , above all , against those of Europe 's taxpayers .
Please do not let these announcements be the end of the matter .
You may well have had the opportunity today to show your goodwill with a few small steps closer to what Parliament is proposing , but - and not only with regard to transparency - you have failed to do so , preferring to hide yourselves behind this or that paragraph .
We , who seek re-election by our fellow-citizens , cannot do that .
That is why we have to counter your conception of agricultural policy with our own .
Mr President , since we are all having a go at the common agricultural policy , I too would like to state a few facts in relation to it .
In the UK this weekend there was a huge rally - Liberty and Livelihood - where thousands of people gathered in London to protest at various problems relating to the countryside .
What this rally did not put across , however , was the way that the countryside is massively subsidised .
Agriculture in particular is very heavily subsidised compared to every other industry in the European Union .
When we see 40 % of the EU budget going to 5 % of the EU population then the policy is clearly in need of radical reform .
It seems strange to me , however , that within this reform process two areas are not being touched upon . These are the scandal of the EU sugar market , where extortionate prices throughout the EU enable people to take advantage of what I believe to be a very corrupt regime , and also the scandal of the tobacco industry , the existence of which people are bound to feel is an absolute contradiction at a time when the European Union is also trying to promote health initiatives .
These are key areas .
But the most important issue here today is transparency .
Why is it that , while I can go to a website and find out where every single euro in relation to regional policy and Structural Funds is paid out in my area , I cannot do the same in relation to the common agricultural policy ?
That possibility does not exist and it is a possibility I want to see created .
That is the relationship the taxpayers of Europe need to have with the recipients of this funding : in that way perhaps we will be able to see how much Prince Charles , the Queen and the rest of the royal family receive in relation to subsidies granted under the common agricultural policy .
We need to crack this open .
It is crucial that we get the support of the people who call repeatedly in this House for transparency .
That is what we are asking for .
The Commission needs to cooperate much more closely with Member States across the whole of the European Union to ensure that this is the case .
Agricultural subsidies make up a huge proportion of the European budget .
This is a fact .
For 20 years , I have been hearing that this proportion should be reduced , but this is an extremely slow process .
As an MEP , it fills me with great sadness and I am extremely disappointed about the fact that Parliament still has no grip on the situation .
When Mr Casaca then tries - at least based on the authority which we clearly have , which is a budgetary authority - to gain an overview of the whole subsidy scheme , we do not exactly receive satisfactory feedback from you .
It appears that you , as Commissioner , allow yourself to be fobbed off with what is being whispered into your ear by the bureaucrats who have accompanied you for so many years and who have for so long denied Parliament any direct input .
After all , we want to gain a grip on agricultural policy , the export subsidies , and the way in which these subsidies are distributed .
We would like to see an end to the exploitation of the developing countries .
I fully concur with what Mr Bösch and Mrs Morgan said on this subject .
When I was in Johannesburg , I was ashamed when I saw how , with our subsidies , we sound the death knell for a number of countries that have few resources to survive .
There are a few countries that only have sugar to export , and we have managed to hold on to these wretched subsidies that we grant to our sugar barons thanks to our Member States .
Parliament has decided in the Committee on Development and Cooperation that this should stop .
However , an amendment has crept in surreptitiously , upon which the plenary has yet again voted to maintain the agricultural subsidies for sugar .
There are innumerable examples quoted here .
As democratic representatives of our citizens , we would like a grip on these subsidies .
Similarly , I fail to obtain an explanation for the way in which Europe manages to distribute unnecessary and harmful subsidies , while we are actually committed to solidarity with the developing world .
I recently visited Botswana , where , apart from diamonds , they only have a few cattle to export .
We concluded an agreement in this respect .
There are so many African countries that wish to trade fairly with us , yet we still fail to create the opportunities for this .
Finally , I should like to point out that with regard to agricultural subsidies , export subsidies for live animals too are a disgrace and unacceptable to our public opinion .
I am appalled to find out that you intend to increase these .
Surely that is impossible .
I should therefore like to concur with our fellow MEPs in their plea .
I myself was a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control for a while , and I have great respect for my fellow MEPs and for their reports .
I always read the reports with great interest , but I would finally like to see some change .
In the final analysis , we are not here to keep the show on the road ; we are here to create justice .
Mr President , I do not want to discuss what has been said .
I am just very glad that I came into the Chamber early in order to do some work in peace and quiet , and then witnessed an interesting debate .
I would like to congratulate you , Mr President , on permitting it and making it possible , and on giving your colleagues in the Bureau a good example to follow in the future .
What a pity so few Members were here , but perhaps more will turn up in the Chamber when word gets around .
Thank you , Mr Swoboda for your kind words .
I can assure you and the rest of the House that the Bureau as a whole is making an effort , now that the Rules of Procedure have changed , to ensure that debates in Plenary are exactly as you said .
This is a policy of the Bureau as a whole and I think that , as we have just seen , we can make debates in Plenary even better than they have been in the past .
Mr President , following on from Mr Swoboda 's excellent suggestion perhaps this could be taken on board in the context of the whole debate about the catch-the-eye procedure .
We have a debate this afternoon on the budget where catch-the-eye is to be applied .
Perhaps the Bureau and the Council of Presidents could also consider the possibility of formalising the rule so that every debate that ends before the time allocated to it then finishes with a period of catch-the-eye .
I agree with Mr Swoboda that it is an excellent innovation .
It adds to the liveliness of the debate and it also means that the people in the public gallery have something to watch and to listen to in the last half hour , rather than having to face an empty Chamber .
The next item is the vote .
Mr President , might I just ask you to give the floor to our Committee 's rapporteur on this area , so he can say a few words on this report ?
The rapporteur is Mr Mulder .
Mr Mulder I will give the floor exceptionally to you because I understand you have been carrying out the work on behalf of the Chairman of the Committee .
Mr President , Parliament is not always able to congratulate the Commission , but I should like to do so on this occasion .
Agricultural policy in the EU is controversial and if that is the case , for whatever reason , we must , above all , ensure that there is a sound mechanism to control the expenditure of the funds .
So far , the Commission has been able to inspect these funds two years following closure of the accounts .
Last year , Parliament proposed in a resolution to extend this period to 36 months .
The Commission followed this up promptly , for which I should like to give it credit .
At this stage , we can only hope that the Council meets Parliament 's and the Commission 's wish to improve control on agricultural expenditure .
Mr President , in June last year , we debated the First Reading of a Commission proposal on the regulation on structural business statistics , in order to add to it two sectoral annexes , one of which relates to credit institutions and the other to pension funds and , at the same time , to extend the scope of the regulation to other financial institutions , pension funds and credit and insurance auxiliaries .
Finally , two new items relating to the environment are included in the statistics on industrial firms .
Structural business statistics on credit institutions , pension funds and other businesses in the financial services sector are necessary in order to evaluate the single financial market , back up macroeconomic statistics and keep the stability of the EU 's financial system under observation .
Data on industry 's expenditure on the protection of the environment are an important tool for policymakers in assessing the cost of adherence to environmental law , including its effect on businesses ' competitiveness , and checking whether the polluter-pays principle is being adhered to .
Following the first reading , I , as rapporteur , made contact in July 2001 with the then new presidency of the Council in the hope of an early Common Position from the Council , but this turned out to be over-ambitious .
The Belgians appeared to have forgotten us , and the Common Position eventually turned up towards the end of the Spanish Presidency .
I am glad that , despite what we term the summer recess , Parliament has allowed me to present my report for Second Reading just three months later .
I can sympathise with those Member States who have problems with submitting definite data on pension funds , but the Council has accepted four amendments by us , and I propose that this House should vote in favour of it .
Mr President , this report is concerned with N1 vehicles which is Commission jargon for vans .
This is of interest to that most notorious of British drivers - white van man ! White van man , as we know in the UK , is a person who despite being in a Ford Transit van thinks he is Michael Schumacher .
I know that this is a uniquely British thing , as here on the continent - and particularly in Italy - every driver thinks he is Michael Schumacher .
This report is largely technical and concerns how we test the CO2 produced from these vehicles .
I have managed to secure exemptions for small manufacturers of specialist vehicles , in particular ambulances , and have also introduced the concept of families of vehicles in order to group together the thousands of vehicles produced in different derivatives .
N1 vehicles are important to all of us because you are likely to make your last-but-one journey in an N1 vehicle i.e. an ambulance .
But you will also be pleased to know I have secured an exemption for the vehicle you will make your last journey in , because hearses are also to be exempted from this directive .
It gives me great pleasure , as a fellow Scot , to welcome to the European Parliament Sir David Steel , President of the Scottish Parliament , who has taken his seat in the distinguished visitors ' gallery .
Sir David will be holding a number of meetings in Parliament and will be observing the proceedings .
You are most welcome to this House , Sir David , and we would like to wish you a pleasant and fruitful stay .
Mr President , I cannot disguise my disappointment that the report has just been rejected .
I would say to those who voted against it and to the members of the PPE-DE Group that I hope they realise they have just voted against greater cooperation in matters of asylum in the European Union ; they have voted against sharing best practice in measures as we move towards a common asylum policy ; they have voted against looking at good ideas and sharing those ideas ...

( Applause from the left )
They have voted against measures to make certain that we are absolutely clear that people do not abuse the asylum system for terrorist purposes .
Those are the things we were looking at and it has been rejected by members of the PPE-DE Group .
That is a disappointment for this House .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
( Applause from the left )
I do not want to start a debate .
Mr Ribeiro , can I ask what your point of order is and perhaps you could tell us under which Rule you are making it ?
Mr President , I wish to use this point of order to draw attention to this highly irregular procedure , which demonstrates merely what it is to be a bad loser following a vote .
This intervention should have been made , at the latest , at the time of the explanations of vote and not now .
To my mind , this is a most irregular procedure .
. ( DE ) The Commission proposal for facilitating more extensive financial corrections is to be welcomed .
The accumulated fraud with EU funds gives cause for concern , as do a number of situations in the institutions - I wish briefly to refer here to the Court of Auditors ' most recent special report on the support system for oilseeds .
These matters call for more effective action than has hitherto been the case .
The Commission proposal for increasing , by means of an extended time period , the possibilities for recovering amounts lost , is a step in the right direction .
The Freedom Party delegation has therefore voted in favour of the report .
The reason why we are not opposed to this draft text is so that workers who so desire can leave employment before retirement age .
Several aspects of the draft text are , nonetheless , unacceptable .
It is unacceptable , first and foremost , that job cuts are not being made on a voluntary basis and that all those who so desire cannot benefit from being released from their duties .
What is equally unacceptable is that 600 officials are being encouraged to retire , whilst only 273 are being taken on .
This means there will be additional work for those who remain , whereas the report acknowledges that 1 254 positions need to be filled .
And , if the institutions are planning to compensate for the lack of employees by increasing job insecurity and sub-contracting - which is often one and the same thing - this is no better .
All this is unacceptable in a context of unemployment and job insecurity .
Therefore , whilst we are not opposed to the draft text , we did not wish to give it our backing and we abstained from the vote .
.
( PT ) Because Portugal , and more precisely the coasts of the Algarve , have already suffered unprecedented maritime pollution , I can only agree with the recommendation by the rapporteur , Mr Bakopoulos , with all the European Commission initiatives that aim to improve legislative standards applicable to maritime safety and to the prevention of pollution by ships , and with making the implementation of European policy in this field more effective .
This is why I agree entirely with the proposal to create a single maritime safety Committee , thereby replacing national committees .
This new structure will constitute a qualitative leap in the safety of European coasts and in the fight to prevent pollution caused by ships .
I voted in favour of Mr Goodwill 's report on the basis that it will help to further protect the environment .
The proposal extends the scope of existing Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 80 / 1268 as regards the measurement of carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption .
In other words new light goods vehicles will now have to respect requirements that are broadly similar to the ones that are already applied to passenger cars .
I hope that by measuring the fuel consumption and carbon dioxide in these vehicles we will be able to develop possible measures to improve vehicle performance in these areas .
In order to secure an EU type approval for light commercial vehicles , the Directive will include a requirement that in the future vehicles be tested for carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption .
Member States will not be able to allow the registration and entry into service of light commercial vehicles if they do not have a valid certificate of conformity for this type of approval after 1 January 2007 .
Ultimately , both the environment and vehicle operators stand to gain from this proposal if carbon monoxide can be measured and then cut back and if vehicle performance can be improved .
We voted against this report which again proposes , on the pretext of ' combating terrorism ' , to ' facilitate co-operation between the police and judicial authorities in the fight against terrorism ' .
Stepping up repression wherever this may be ( Ireland , the Basque Country , Corsica , etc ) with contempt for the quest for a political solution , has not yet shown that it is the way to stamp out terrorism .
Repression has instead , in response , played a part in fuelling terrorism .
In reality , ' combating terrorism ' is only being used here as a pretext to further strengthen Europe 's security measures , whilst once again highlighting the fact that it is beyond the control of the population .
The fact that this proposal emanates from the Kingdom of Spain , whose security measures have retained many of the traits inherited from Francoism , does nothing to inspire confidence .
It is certainly not a lack of security measures that Europe is suffering from . It is , on the contrary , suffering from abuses of security , where migrant workers must , in addition to all their other problems , deal with the suspicion of being potential ' terrorists ' .
I have voted in favour of these two proposals because they form part of a coherent set of horizontal measures that will ensure the correct and effective implementation of the measures that the EP has already adopted in the fight against terrorism ( the framework decision on combating terrorism and the framework decision on the European arrest warrant ) .
Serious account must be taken of the terrorist threat , on both sides of the Atlantic , because it constitutes not only one of the greatest threats to democracy , the free exercise of human rights and free economic and social development ; above all , it constitutes an attack on the most fundamental of human rights ; the right to life .
I am , therefore , pleased to see that the European Union has made considerable progress since the terrible events of 11 September 2001 , on exchanging information , on police and judicial coordination in the fight against terrorism and on its legislative framework .
I hope that the next step will be to reach agreement on the priority that must be attached to the issues of funding the fight against terrorism and of stepping up our dialogue with the United States ( and the priority for the negotiations opened this summer and an agreement on judicial cooperation with the United States to be concluded ) .
The fight against terrorism must always be marked by the values of the democratic rule of law , by respect for citizens ' rights and by common standards of justice .
Any fight that disregards these priorities would represent an unjustifiable concession to barbarity and an unacceptable rejection of the values of our civilisation .
This initiative by Spain , within the Council , is part of the process of strengthening supranational police and judicial mechanisms - specifically at EU level - in the name of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' .
Bodies which evade democratic and jurisdictional control ( Europol and Eurojust ) , are being developed and strengthened , bypassing the guarantees for rights and freedoms laid down in national legislative and constitutional frameworks .
Cooperation between national States is bypassed with the creation of mechanisms for supranational control over these States .
It is worth emphasising that the proposal for the creation of a ' mechanism for evaluating the legal systems and their implementation at national level in the fight against terrorism ' bypasses and breaches the legal base that currently exists in the Treaties .
Amongst other aspects , these initiatives are part of a security shift that increasingly threatens fundamental rights , freedoms and guarantees .
Although the rapporteur has tabled proposals for amendments that seek to introduce assurances and safeguards for fundamental rights , freedoms and guarantees - for example , for the transfer and management of personal information and data ( it should be noted that Europol is bound by agreements with third countries , not least with the USA ) - this does not change the general tenor of the initiatives that have been proposed .
Hence our vote against the report .
I have voted against the report by Mr Galeote in the conviction that the new Rules of this Parliament have been used in an improper manner by the big political groups of this House .
The Galeote report is best summed up in the words used yesterday by Mr Turco during the debate .
I would support his analysis as a whole .
While the British Conservative Delegation are determined to play a full part in the fight against terrorism and fully support enhanced cooperation between the police and other law enforcement organisations in the various Member States , we cannot support moves towards the extension of Eurojust .
The United Kingdom should not become a member of Eurojust and should retain its own strong resistance to terrorism .
The Delegation supports the initiatives in the recent Kirkhope report on the establishment of Joint Investigation teams in which police forces combine intelligence in the fight against major criminals .
This initiative has yet to be implemented in the Member States .
Eurojust is not the way forward and is unnecessary if cooperation is improved following the Kirkhope report .
For the reasons outlined above the British Conservative Delegation abstained on this report .
As today 's debate has amply illustrated , the machinery for producing undemocratic , repressive legislation has gone into overdrive in the European Union .
The objective of the Spanish Government 's initiatives ( voted without debate under the new Rules of Procedure ) is to strengthen and accelerate the decisions on collecting and exchanging information which have already been taken and to stifle the Member States with strict supervision to ensure they transpose the European terrorism law and the European arrest warrant into their legislation quickly and faithfully .
Their fear appears to be that , with pressure from democratic grass-roots movements already voicing their opinion in numerous countries , the Member States may not fall into line with this dire legislation .
As part of improved coordination , Member States are obliged , contrary to all notions of national sovereignty , to collate a minimum number of facts on so-called terrorist-related crimes and pass them on to Europol and Eurojust .
Just what is meant by coordination and uniform police and judicial cooperation is perfectly clear from the confidential Europol document leaked recently which , under the telling title ' European Best Practices on Handling Information Sources ' , sanctions the use of grasses and sting operations by agents acting for the police who will go unpunished even if they help commit the crime !
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the texts in question .
. ( NL ) Authoritarian governments have always been characterised by the notion that they can best survive criticism on their policy by restricting their citizens in their freedom of information exchange , opinion , organisation and travel .
The fear of terror attacks that has grown since last year has prompted a revival of plans to reinforce the army , police and secret services and to restrict civil liberties .
For a while , this fear makes these controversial plans more acceptable to a large proportion of the population than they would be at other times .
The public have since discovered the drawbacks of such a development .
In the Netherlands , a campaign among computer users against the requirement that electronic mail be stored , requested by the Council , gained 2500 supporters within the space of two days last week .
Quite apart from this breach of the mail 's confidentiality , which has been in existence for more than a century , there have been attempts to deprive radical opposition movements of all prospects and cause them to resort to violence , upon which they can be declared illegal .
Political organisations in exile , based in Europe , are stripped of their right of residence and are cut off from the movement of payments .
Fortunately , this Parliament too is starting to realise that fear of terror should not be a reason for abolishing the democratic and tolerant character of our society .
I reject the proposal , but endorse the proposals to better protect personal data , inform Parliament and place reports in the public domain .
.
( PT ) My vote in favour of this report reflects my agreement with the two initiatives by Spain aimed at establishing measures to facilitate cooperation between the police and judicial authorities in the fight against terrorism . My favourable vote also reflects my support for the main amendments tabled by the rapporteur : the stipulation that information transferred under this decision should be limited to criminal investigations of terrorist activities ; the call for each Member State to appoint a Eurojust correspondent responsible for issues involving terrorism , rather than giving the Member States the option to appoint another competent authority and the call for Member States to set up joint investigation teams to combat terrorism whenever closer cooperation is needed and , specifically , for complex cases with transnational implications .
Mr President , I have to say , with regard to the Gebhardt report , that I could not prevent myself dreaming of Mr Antonio Di Pietro , our fellow Member , who is well-known in Italy and throughout Europe in circles where judicial networks are a topic of conversation .
On the subject of networks , I dreamt that Mr Di Pietro was a fisherman and that he was casting nets from his boat .
However , the net he was casting was a judicial net and it caught a lot of big fish , but the small fish managed to escape because , as you know , they want to become pensioners .
Well then , in my opinion , this dream means that we will have an excellent catch of European criminals in this judicial network , as I saw in my dream .
The British Conservative Delegation do not see any cause to introduce pan-European judicial training .
This is a matter for individual Member States and the present system of training the Judiciary is unique and particular to each of those States .
It should remain this way .
There are also implications for the budget of the European Union which are unacceptable and will be separately resisted in the budgetary process .
The British Conservatives cannot support the measures in this report .
. ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the French initiative under our consideration will improve our knowledge of the legal and judicial situation of the Member States and of the Community and , consequently , the performance of all members of the judiciary in the European Union and its Member States - judges , magistrates , lawyers and , possibly , police officers with duties similar to those of a magistrate .
This network , comprising national schools and institutions of the Member States responsible for further judicial training , has already existed informally since October 2000 , but does not have legal personality .
This limitation means that it cannot receive funding from Community or Member States ' budgets , which will change if this French initiative is adopted , as it will then be eligible for funding under the EU 's general budget .
In short , this is yet another boost to improving our knowledge of the judicial and legal systems of the Member States and of the legal instruments on which judicial cooperation in the EU is based .
Mr President , if Commissioner Wallström will forgive me , last night , I dreamt of her too .
Why is that ?
Because I had met a GMO who said to me - none of us know what GMOs look like - that he , in his turn , had dreamt he was Ulysses , tied up so as not to succumb to the temptation of the sirens , and that he had seen a beautiful GMO - resembling Mrs Wallström - which called to him : ' Follow me , follow me and you will be happy . '
But it was only a dream , Mr President : reality is different .
I therefore voted against the report , despite the fact that I was convinced in my dream that I should follow the recommendations of the siren , Commissioner Wallström .
I am afraid Mrs Wallström seems to be paying more attention to Mr Barón Crespo than to you , Mr Fatuzzo .

The Commission proposal on the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms unfortunately does less than the Cartagena Protocol which it is supposed to apply .
The main shortcomings which need to be addressed are as follows :
One : the principle of prevention needs to be clearly stated in the Community text .
Two : the same weights and measures should apply to both the EU internal market and external trade .
If a product is not marketed on the internal market , it should be banned for export .
Three : full responsibility for the movement of banned genetically modified organisms should rest with the country of export ; it should not be shifted on to the country of import .
Four : the public must be fully informed .
Five : everything should be done to ensure that large companies do not use their multinational structure to evade controls .
The amendments by the European Parliament Committee on the Environment are on the right track , which is why I support them .
In May 2000 , the European Union and its Member States signed the Cartagena Protocol on the prevention of biotechnological risks in the fields of the safe transfer , handling and use of GMOs .
This European Commission proposal for a regulation is extremely important because it boosts the practical implementation of the Cartagena Protocol in the European Union , thereby preventing situations of distortion of competition that could arise if these rules were defined at national level .
The rapporteur has improved the proposal for a regulation , and his proposal to ban GMO exports that have not been authorised in the European Union itself warrants particular applause .
It is crucial that we make ongoing efforts , also within the framework of transboundary movements , to ensure an adequate degree of protection for the safe transfer , manipulation and use of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) created by modern biotechnology , which are likely to have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity , and thereby to prevent risks to human health .
This is the concern of this Regulation , now being studied at first reading , which seeks to establish the provisions necessary to the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol .
We fully support this because in this highly sensitive field , the Community Regulation is seeking to prevent disparities and the imposition of Member States ' regulatory and administrative legal provisions and thereby to provide greater legal security and to contribute to the smooth functioning of the internal market .
In view of the potential risk that GMOs can constitute for the environment in general and biological diversity in particular , we Swedish Christian Democrats have chosen to support a restrictive policy .
With reference to the precautionary principle , we believe that the country of import 's rules must be respected by the exporter .
We also believe it to be very important for common rules governing liability for damage to be drawn up at international level .
It should , moreover , go without saying that we must not export GMOs that we do not ourselves permit within the European Union .
The provisions of the regulation should be applied , irrespective of when the Cartagena Protocol comes into force .
Mr President , last Thursday , I was taking part in a television programme in Milan .
The Cardinal of Milan , His Excellency Dionigi Tettamanzi , from the city of Genoa , had stated the day before that we must open our arms to the immigrants who come to Europe , particularly , to Milan , and I am afraid that he received abusive telephone calls during the programme from disgruntled people who did not agree with this recommendation .
Therefore , voting for better immigration , I thought of what Mr Vatanen said to me , personally , a few days ago : ' What if we had been born in Senegal ?
What if we had been born in one of the countries from which these people are forced to emigrate to come to Europe and make a living ? ' .
. ( NL ) During the Cold War , refugees from the East were very welcome in Western Europe .
Seeking refuge was praised as a freedom-loving act , which presupposed universal solidarity .
These days , refugees mostly hail from further afield , look different to western Europeans , and there is far less understanding for the situation from which they are fleeing .
Since the standard of living in the country they are leaving behind is always lower than ours , they are from the very start suspected of having economic motives for fleeing .
This situation has been exacerbated over the past year by the fear that refugees could be terrorist infiltrators .
EU Member States tend to prescribe upper limits to the number of refugees they will allow in their countries , and set their reception levels lower than those of the neighbouring states .
This is how we create a Fortress Europe , which denies access to people even in huge distress and in respect of whom international treaties are being violated .
The upshot is that , even more than before , families are being torn apart and that people are sent back to a country that is unsafe for them , where they head for disaster .
I reject the main idea , but support the proposals tabled by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs not to extradite anyone to countries where capital punishment is a threat , possibly to deny refugee status only to war criminals , and to take account of the increasing number of female asylum seekers .
Mr President , Mrs Angelilli 's report recommends - and I support this - providing compensation to crime victims .
I personally and the Pensioners Party which I represent , not least because many pensioners and elderly people are the victims of crimes , albeit minor crimes such as bag-snatching and burglary , believe that it is right that the state should provide compensation for the victims of crimes .
Indeed , it is not just the authors of the crimes who are guilty : the State which ought to be carrying out scrutinies and monitoring and guaranteeing that these crimes do not happen , preventing them , and which ought to be educating its citizens to respect the law , is guilty too .
I therefore call for this initiative to provide compensation for the victims of crimes to proceed and for public officials who do not do their job properly , especially the most influential , high-level politicians and administrators in our States , to receive heavy fines .
The report by Mrs Roberta Angelilli is an improvement on the Commission 's Green Paper on a legislative framework for compensating victims of crime .
The basic idea put forward in the report , that all Member States should establish compensation schemes for victims of crime who cannot obtain compensation from the offenders responsible for the crime or through any means , including victims of terrorism , is a good one , because the European Convention on the Compensation of Victims of Violent Crimes , which has applied since 1988 , has not been signed by all the Member States and , even where it has , it does not allow the victims of violent crimes to apply for state compensation .
The directive on best practices in the various Member States , which the Commission is also called on to introduce , is a good move and will help less-experienced Member States deal with these issues .
My vote in favour of this report reflects first my applause for the Green Paper on ' Compensation to crime victims ' , presented in May of this year by the Commission , which has provided a considerable boost in this sensitive field , attempting to lay down minimum common standards for the compensation of victims , that are respected throughout EU territory and , whenever possible , in accordance with the principle of reciprocity where third countries are concerned .
Furthermore , my vote reflects my support for the magnificent report by Mrs Angelilli .
The report suggests specifically that the minimum standards must include a clear definition , agreed on by all the Member States , of the types of offence that could be liable to compensation , with the prior provision of some objective characteristics .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's recommendation for the creation of a European victim support freephone line which would operate around the clock in all the official languages of the European Union .
Mr President , what purpose do the cosmetics with which many women beautify themselves serve ?
One poor elderly pensioner said to me : ' I have beggared myself with these cosmetics which have made these women look so beautiful .
I have spent all my money .
Now I am penniless , a poor pensioner , but I am happy because I have enjoyed my life ' .
Another pensioner , however , said to me : ' I , on the other hand , resisted the temptations of these women who use cosmetics and now I am a rich pensioner , but I regret the fact that I too did not have a happier , more enjoyable life with more contact with beautiful women who use cosmetics . '
I did not know what to do , so I looked at Mrs Roth-Behrendt , who I am sure uses cosmetics which have not been tested on animals .
What a beautiful lady Mrs Roth-Behrendt is !
It is patently obvious that the cosmetics she uses are useful , maybe even more so than those tested on animals .
Well then , we must follow the example of Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and so I voted for the motion .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

It is my sad duty to inform you of the murder , in a terrorist attack , of Don Juan Carlos Beira Montes , a Civil Guard , in Leiza , in Navarre , Spain .
Once again , the blind hatred of ETA terrorism has struck a citizen of the Union , a member of the police force of a democratic State .
As on previous occasions , I would like to express the European Parliament 's total condemnation of this act and our complete solidarity with the family of the deceased , the citizens of Spain and the Spanish authorities .
Together we will win the battle against terrorism .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to observe a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr MacCormick has the floor .
Mr President , might I draw attention to Item 12 of the Minutes , dealing with one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
My name appears twice in that list , but Members present will recall that I specifically made a point of order , concerning rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure .
I therefore think that this should have been recorded as a point of order , while the point that I was making should be recorded in the Minutes .
Your comments will be taken into account and the Minutes will be duly corrected .
Are there any other comments , ladies and gentlemen ?
( The Minutes were approved thus amended )
Mr President , we have never done anything like this before and I welcome the opportunity to open this debate .
In normal , run-of-the-mill circumstances when we have the budget debate , we have already voted on first readings in committee , we come to the Chamber and most of us make a three-minute speech if we are lucky or , if not , a one and a half minute speech .
What is more , they are statements and nothing is really gained because the work has already been done .
What we are trying to gain from this session is a real dialogue , mainly with the Commission , but also with the Council , to seek guidance on how we should vote next week and to ask questions concerning events since the preliminary draft budget ( PDB ) was first presented .
Since the PDB several things have happened , including the Council 's vote on its draft budget which is what we vote upon .
Our committees have been working with the rapporteurs to ensure that we can bring forward sensible amendments .
As always , the amendments in front of us always exceed the amount of money that is available .
It is the job of both our rapporteurs to assess those amendments .
No doubt during the debate you will be asked questions concerning what you think of some of those amendments .
We also have the situation of a more precise legislative programme since the PDB and we need to assess the changes .
We have had external events such as the floods and we want to know how these will affect next year 's budget .
From our own perspective there are areas where we are unclear on how things will be funded .
For instance , we still have no agreement with the Council or the Commission on how the EUR 27 million in Category 2 for the fisheries reconstruction programme will be found .
Maybe someone will ask about that and if there are any ideas we will be grateful to hear them .
A prime objective of the Development Committee is to ensure that the Global Health Fund has a significant amount of money .
One of the reasons for this is that if we do not put in significant amounts the European Union may not have a seat at the table - a seat on the board .
Is that true ?
What amounts do we need ?
I would hope that this issue will also be raised with the Commission so we can have guidance on it .
With those few opening remarks , let me thank not only the Commission in general but also the individual Commissioners who are going to contribute to this debate .
I would also like to thank the President-in-Office for being here .
I hope the debate will be useful , fruitful and influence our votes next week in committee , because if it does not we will all have wasted four hours of our time .
Mr President , like the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , I am most grateful for this new debate .
We floated the idea as early as last spring , when we were extremely uncertain as to whether our efforts would come to anything .
For us , it has been the overarching objective to try to reform the European Parliament 's budgetary work , especially with a view to next year 's completely new method of ' Activity Based Budgeting ' .
In this context , it has been important also to be able to renew the debate itself , which is perhaps the most visible part of Parliament 's budgetary work .
This reform also means that we have endeavoured to increase the committees ' participation in the work .
I have been round practically all the committees and discussed budget issues with them , and we are now also encouraging the committees to take an active part in today 's debate .
By using working parties and different types of report to focus more sharply upon the degree of implementation and upon the major budgetary deficiencies we have in the area of implementation , we shall now tighten up our demands for Parliament 's budgetary decisions actually to be put into practice .
Against this background , I welcome the way in which the Commission , the Council , a majority of Commissioners and the Danish Finance Minister in his Presidency role have taken part in the debate , and I hope that Parliament 's own representatives will also make substantial efforts to ensure that we obtain a more exciting and constructive debate than has been provided by the fairly predictable monologues delivered up until now .
The EU 's budgetary system suffers from serious defects , especially a lack of flexibility .
I believe that both Parliament and , certainly , the public have difficulty understanding why it is completely impossible to find resources for the proactive part of agricultural policy known as rural development , while billions are allocated to the other dimension of agricultural policy .
Knowing , as we did , that there were resources elsewhere that were not being used , it has also been difficult for us to refuse the administrative expenditure needed for enlargement and to try to find a way of funding this expenditure without making use of the flexibility instrument .
Consequently , one of this year 's innovations is that we have tried more systematically to find and make use of unemployed resources and have contrived more systematically to bring expenditure forward in order to ease the pressure on a heavily burdened category over the next few years , something which might , for example , make it easier to meet the needs that exist prior to enlargement .
That is a temporary solution .
I really think we need a much more extensive budgetary reform .
I also think we should address this issue in the Convention .
The incredibly inflexible budget ceilings we live with at present should not be turned into permanent fixtures . They should definitely not be enshrined in the Treaty , and Parliament should self-evidently have the same right of co-decision in agricultural policy as we have in other areas .
I should also like to thank the Danish Presidency for its extremely sober and constructive approach so far .
We reached some sound agreements in July , and we had a stimulating three-way meeting yesterday about how we might solve the problem of the floods .
I should like to round off this introduction by appealing for the same constructive approach when it comes to solving the major outstanding problems , above all in category 4 , concerned with external expenditure .
We need much more flexibility .
Parliament will protest at the fact that , without new resources being supplied , we are constantly adding new expenditure in relation , for example , to Afghanistan and the Global AIDS and Health Fund , over and above the contributions we have already made in relation to the Balkans , Kosovo , Serbia etc .
That , I believe , will be one of the main points in Parliament 's criticism of both the Commission 's and the Council 's handling of the budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as President of the Council , I am delighted to have been given the opportunity to attend this debate , in which Commission representatives are taking part , on the European Parliament 's 2003 budget .
I am convinced that today 's debate will give Parliament and the Commission the opportunity to touch upon many important subjects relating to the 2003 budget .
I again have the pleasure today of meeting Mr Wynn and the two rapporteurs for the 2003 budget , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck .
I should like to begin by expressing my personal thanks for the constructive and focused dialogue on next year 's budget that has been conducted by Parliament and the Council to date .
I also wish to take the opportunity of thanking the Budget Commissioner , Mrs Schreyer , and the other Commissioners for their really helpful cooperation .
There is no doubt that the EU 's 2003 budget is a major challenge .
The EU is to take up quite a few new tasks next year .
Allow me to mention just two . The EU institutions are to prepare themselves for enlargement , and the EU is to assume responsibility for the UN police force in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The Council , Parliament and the Commission are agreed that what is at issue here are political priorities to be adopted by the EU .
For that reason , the budget procedure has until now also been characterised by a desire to find practical solutions and reach compromises .
I am convinced that this fruitful cooperation can continue in the autumn , and I shall do everything in my power to help bring this about .
I want to conclude by wishing the Members of the European Parliament , together with the Commissioners , a constructive debate .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , the 2003 budget is probably the last budget to apply to 15 Member States of the EU .
We are , more or less , on the eve of enlargement .
The budget year 2003 will , then , have further challenges in store not only for the candidate states , but also for all the European institutions that need to prepare themselves .
These will be areas of major concern in 2003 .
But , of course , we also have other priorities in addition to these .
I agree with all those who say that European politics must concentrate on stability and security .
These are also reflected in the 2003 budget , in Commissioner Vitorino 's budget for measures in the areas of internal affairs and justice policy or - and in many and varied ways - in the budget for foreign policy measures .
Your House has tabled several motions relating to the security of our external representation , but of course also to all the aid given to Afghanistan .
Aid , the increased funds for the Mediterranean , and of course pre-accession aid as well , are , in the final analysis , expenditure on Europe 's enhanced political stability .
The Commission has decided on sustainable development as the third focus of its attention .
This , too , touches on many specific budgets and programmes - the energy programme , the research programme , Mr Nielsen 's programme or , to take another example , the rural development funds and the major Structural Funds for which my fellow Commissioners Mr Fischler and Mr Barnier are , respectively , responsible .

In this debate , we will probably have much to say about the state of the accounts , and the implementation , of the Structural Funds - but not to the exclusion of other funds .
The budget books for 2001 did indeed reveal a surplus of EUR 15 billion at year-end .
Parliament has had the consolidated revenue and expenditure accounts since 1 May .
That is a massive surplus , not a fictitious one as occurred in certain private firms ' recent accounting scandals , but a real surplus .
The Finance Ministers were very happy to enter this real surplus in their books , although Parliament took a rather more critical view of it .
It is a fact that we must manage many programmes better in 2003 .
The Member States also have their part to play in this , and there is a need for good cooperation in this area .
The Commission informs Parliament and the Council of the state of the accounts on a weekly basis .
I might mention that this demonstrates an openness not shown by any Member State 's government in its relations with Parliament .
It goes without saying that such budget information is important in deciding on the best approach to the budget for the coming financial year .
For it is evident that funds are short in any budget , even if it is a relatively large one .
We have to face up to new challenges , for example when great and terrible catastrophes occur , in order to provide aid in a spirit of solidarity .
A new instrument has now been created for this .
I am very grateful for the speed with which agreement could be reached on the creation of such a new instrument .
It really does give expression to the fact that Europe is a community of solidarity .
Apart from that , though , the new programmes require us to do a lot of restructuring and free up funds elsewhere .
This should not be forgotten in today 's debate , in which , no doubt , voice will be given to new desires and new proposals .
We should also bear in mind the subsidiarity issue , on which subject I have to say that the Commission cannot work miracles ; if political objectives are to become reality , and of course if expenditure programmes are to be implemented , it needs the staff to do it .
I hope that Parliament will give its support to finding a solution to this question of the staff expenses for 2003 .
Let me express my gratitude to Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck for what they have just said , and for the motions that have already been submitted .
Development shows how much is expected of Europe , and how much from European politics , and we should live up to these expectations .
I do think that today 's debate will be an exciting and wholly innovative one , showing again that the European institutions are very much ready to innovate .
My group welcomes this new procedure .
It is rather an imaginative way of reshaping our political debate on the priorities for the budget for 2003 .
My particular role in introducing it today is to look at our strategy as a group , one which we have accumulated over the past couple of years .
On this basis we have six particular points which we have put down as amendments which I wish to review briefly .
The first refers to how we handle outstanding budget commitments , which now amount to something around EUR 110 billion .
In a joint declaration which we signed with the Council on 14 December 2000 we wanted to see these commitments reduced to normal levels by , if I remember correctly , December 2003 .
Therefore , the first of our amendments aims at getting clarification from the Commission as to exactly what its intentions are in trying to fulfil this commitment , how it is going to be done and how quickly it will be achieved .
Secondly , in terms of Commission reform , which was also included in this joint declaration back in December 2000 , we wanted to have a range of knowledge about how to achieve the reform .
Some of us are in doubt about how far this reform has gone , how the rest of it is going to be achieved and when it will be implemented .
That is the reason we have put the five hundred posts in reserve , which we wish to see released in stages as and when we receive information about the completion and the effectiveness of the reform .
Thirdly , in relation to this there is the specific case concerning the Chief Accountant , where we have put a small amount of Commission travel expenses in reserve .
We want to get to the bottom of the situation .
We are seeking information and not the resignation of the Commission as some have rumoured .
Therefore , we want Mrs Andreasen to come and tell us exactly what her allegations are .
We also want to know exactly what the Commission 's response to those allegations is .
Fourthly , we wish to deal with the Council in terms of foreign policy and security .
This is because we have had amounts put in the budget for 2003 , but before approving them we want to enhance the position of the other institutions - Parliament as well as the Commission - in knowing how policies will be implemented .
We have an instinct that we do not like to see the Council spending large sums of money in managing foreign policy without proper accountability .
Fifthly , we have consistently said as a Parliament that we do not want to see expenditure on Afghanistan made to the detriment of other spending priorities in category 4 .
We are therefore suggesting that the flexibility instrument could be used for this purpose as well as perhaps dealing with that commitment made in the 2002 budget to deal with the EUR 27 million on fleet restructuring .
Lastly , we have taken a slight departure from the norm and are recommending that the 220 Council posts are not approved until we have received a satisfactory explanation on a number of points which are listed in our amendment .
These include the implementation of the early retirement scheme .
We also need explanation , more particularly , on foreign policy so that we know what the projections are and how the Council thinks expenditure might be implemented over the next five years .
I conclude by saying that this has nothing to do with revolution or our socialist leader , who says that these are undercover censure motions .
This is about accountability and the proper functioning of democracy , where we as a Parliament are taking our responsibility in the budgetary process , using the reserve on a judicious basis to get the information that we need to be able to carry out our job effectively .
Mr President , Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , let me also , on behalf of my group , in this new sort of debate - not indeed the only one , as we will be having another in October on the substantive votes - set before you our position , our approach and our concerns .
I wish to make reference to the great challenges before us , which have just been described .
I have great confidence in the work of our two general rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , who have previously shown their capacity for excellent work .
In managing the workload over the coming months and weeks , it is on their shoulders that we are standing .
The greatest challenge is enlargement , which has already been referred to many times , and which marks a fundamental change in this European Union of ours .
The European Union will , in two years ' time , have an appearance quite different from any it has had before , which will not only have an effect on financial matters , but will also bring cultural changes in its wake .
All this will need proper preparation .
Here in Parliament , we will , whilst taking up our respective positions , have to show openness - freedom and openness to the acceptance of others , of new ideas and new impetus .
This must also show itself in the budget .
Secondly , we have experienced in recent weeks , which started with a vast catastrophe striking Austria , Germany , the Czech Republic and Slovakia , followed by other regions of the European Union , that we are inadequately prepared for the disasters that can afflict our continent .
It is not enough to give assistance only in cases of emergency , although thank God this assistance will now be financially resourced in such a way that we are not only giving people the impression that we can help them , but are actually able to provide aid efficiently and effectively .
No , it is not enough to help only when something has happened ; we have to take preventive action .
We have to work together on early warning systems , on research into environmental changes , in order to be able to prepare ourselves , rather than , like a rabbit fixated by a snake , waiting for the worst to happen , but getting to grips with it early on , in order to see what can be prevented right from the outset .
Thirdly , there is the issue of work creation .
This continent still has too many people unemployed .
Although this is one of the richest continents in the world , people are forced to remain unemployed even though we have vast amounts of money to use to counter unemployment .
I speak , of course , with particular reference to the Structural Funds , but I also have others in mind .
It must be possible to guarantee greater efficiency , and the faster and more efficient distribution of resources .
We have proposed an efficiency force to shed light on all the bureaucratic apparatus , enabling us to act quicker and get money to where it is really needed so that people gasping for breath in the tangled bureaucratic undergrowth do not sink back in despair and say they can do no more .
We also have to ensure that this EU of ours plans for the long term , with regard to staff expenses as much as to anything else .
Thank God our staff are relatively young , but we have to finance all their pensions out of the budget .
If we want to plan for the long term here , we have to make an early start on ensuring that funds are put by for this purpose so that we can give help in this area , or else we will run into major problems , at any rate further down the road .
There are initiatives that have been in place since 1996 , but which have not to date been implemented .
That is something we have to get to grips with .
We must help small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union to have their share of economic development .
Success in this European Union of ours must not be the preserve of the big firms that can afford their own legal departments and tax departments ; it must be put within the reach of small enterprises and micro-businesses .
We have submitted amendments on that subject .
In these discussions , you will find us to be willing to work constructively with you .
Other amendments have been tabled , but I wanted to set out the focal points of our approach .
Thank you for your attention .

Mr President , firstly I wish to thank the budget rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , who have done some excellent work and aided the Committee on Budgets in its task .
European Union budgetary policy is overshadowed by the unsatisfactory way in which the budget itself has been implemented .
As Mr Elles stated in his speech just now , a good EUR 15 billion in budget commitments remained unspent last year , which is an inconceivably huge amount of money .
The Commission has suggested the blame lies with the Member States .
We must ask what the Commission intends to do in the area of legislation to eliminate this defect in the system .
I would similarly like to ask the Council what it intends to do to simplify the implementation of the Structural Funds , pre-accession aid and other long-term programmes , in order to avoid the build-up of such enormous outstanding sums in the future , and , indeed , reduce them .
The payment appropriations in next year 's budget stand at just 1.01 % of GNP , which is to say EUR 5.9 billion below the financial perspectives .
Such meagre sums will not help to reduce the arrears : they will , instead , pile up when the eastward enlargement of the EU has taken place and a lot of other problems lie ahead .
Our group supports preparations for enlargement to the east .
Next year is the last in which they can be carried out properly .
For this reason , the administrative process must be reformed and made more flexible , so that human resources may be deployed more swiftly and appropriately than is the case at present .
We support the reform of the Commission , but at the same time we insist on greater clarification in the areas of personal accountability and job descriptions .
Moreover , we believe it is important that administrative accountability is also reflected in greater efficiency in such areas as making payments .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the biggest problem with the budget is the outstanding RAL appropriations .
The problem is so huge that it cannot be seen .
It is good that an attempt is being made to reduce the scale of the RAL problem .
As a ' sunset clause ' is being introduced to achieve this the Commission 's inefficiency might fade from view as a result .
Today , however , that inefficiency is visible in the growth of RALs , as certain other groups have remarked here .
Our group agrees that enlargement should become the budget 's main area of focus .
In that connection we must ensure that the European Union is able to function in all its official languages right from the outset .
We call on the Commission to reject any proposals that state that some languages should be accorded a position that is inferior to others with regard to interpreting .
If an interpreting facility cannot exist for all languages , let us draw lots to see which ones are not to enjoy that facility .
In July 's conciliation process the Council promised to produce a legal basis for the early retirement of twenty or thirty officials on temporary contracts employed by Parliament 's political groups . In exchange it obtained provisional budgetary unity .
It got a very good deal .
The spirit of budgetary unity allows certain Member States to obtain financial aid from the EU in exchange for scrapping their fishing fleets .
This has been agreed and we do not oppose it .
However , losses cannot be overcompensated for , and , for that reason , many members of our group feel it is important that the new fisheries programme proposed by the Commission be approved .
Nevertheless , there are forces at work to block it , in the same way as it is being reduced to what is just a new agricultural programme under the direction of a certain large Member State .
Some of our group wish the Commission every success in its reform of the fisheries and agricultural programmes , and some do not .
Opinions differ in our group on the question of whether it is necessary to support European-wide political parties out of the EU budget .
As there is no legal basis for supporting Europarties this way , we are proposing , as a technicality in the budget , that we should make a p.m. entry under the corresponding budget heading .
It should not be proposed that money be given away when it is not legal to do so .
I would like to say this to the President-in-Office of the Council : do please correct the regulations pertaining to the Members of the European Parliament so that a legal basis is achieved in respect of this issue too .
We are pleased , in the main , that the Commission has proposed reducing the amount spent on propaganda in the wake of the Prince programme .
The Commission 's actions are evidently worse for the EU with propaganda than without it in terms of legitimacy .
We on the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy were disappointed with the course of action the Council took when it made its funding decisions in respect of the Sixth Framework Programme for science and research .
The programme was agreed upon without any formal settlement .
We hope that the traditionally excellent spirit of cooperation that exists between Parliament and the Council can continue with regard to this issue also and that the Council will restore matters to what was originally agreed .
Mr President , the Commission formulated three priorities in its Annual Policy Strategy : enlargement , security and sustainable development .
The Commission has now requested 500 additional positions to guarantee the smooth running of the enlargement .
In principle , I can understand this , for if 10 new countries join , this will result in more work .
However , I do have a few questions in this respect .
Is it correct that you are now requesting staff for the priority of enlargement , while the priority of sustainable development is systematically being managed with too few officials ?
If I understand the Commission ' Better Regulations ' proposals correctly , the Commission even suggests passing the responsibility for notification mainly to the Member States from now on .
Is this because you really believe that Member States are better placed to comply with environmental legislation and to monitor it , or are there simply budgetary reasons for this , namely that you do not have enough officials to check whether the Member States indeed comply with this legislation ?
If this is a budgetary issue , I do fear for the priority of sustainable development .
Another question concerns the 700 positions which we rubberstamped in previous years .
Am I right in thinking that these have been distributed reasonably evenly across the entire Commission and have not really been clustered according to certain priorities ?
It would be regrettable if this were the case .
I should now like to turn to the enlargement and the EU budget .
If I understand it correctly , six candidate countries risk receiving less funding from Brussels in 2004 than they did in 2003 , and four countries are even at risk of becoming net contributors .
It is fortunate that you are prepared to compensate for this , and it is , indeed , excellent , but the bill could still be higher than estimated in these candidate countries if their implementation of the Structural Funds is not as successful as you estimated .
Is it therefore possible - and this is a proposal on our part and I would appreciate a response - to see if these candidate countries could take their projects through the entire procedure as early as 2003 ?
In other words , if they could complete all the administrative formalities , so that they can start immediately with the real construction work on 1 January 2004 ?
Allow me to make one final point .
If this is also a debate on what Mr James Elles said in response to Mrs Andreasen , my group is also of the opinion that any problems in the accounting system must be closely examined after the Commission 's and the Court of Auditors ' hearing .
We would possibly need to invite Mrs Andreassen at that point .
It is up to us MEPs , though , to examine this .
As for the link with the Commissioners ' wages , it is really beyond me how the PPE has worked this out .
Thank you , Mr President .
I have been a Member of the European Parliament for 23 years - the first 10 in the Committee on Budgets - and I am from time to time a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I was involved in putting Parliament 's house in order following its scandalous dealings with taxpayers ' money which have left us with the still unfinished business surrounding the issue of reimbursed travel expenses .
I have read the annual reports by the Court of Auditors . I was involved in dismissing the last Commission , and I have always been very critical of the lack of transparency in the Commission .
Not by any stretch of the imagination did I , however , at any time think that the Commission did its accounts on an Excel spreadsheet so that the figures could be adjusted without anyone 's knowing .
If the owner of an ice-cream stall or hardware shop were to do his accounts in the same way , it would be unlawful and lead to legal action by the tax office .
In this case , we are talking about the Commission , but the legal action is being taken against the person who revealed the accounts scandal .
There is a desire to shoot the messenger for bringing bad news .
The Spanish Chief Accountant , Mrs Andreasen , deserves a lot of praise for having given Parliament the information we should have received from the Commission .
Mrs Andreasen initially went through the internal channels and passed her observations up the line to Mr Prodi , but to no avail so far as I understand .
The Commission wanted her to sign off an account that half the Directors-General had signed only with reservations .
Since 1994 , the Court of Auditors has refused to vouch for the correctness of the underlying transactions .
For eight years , therefore , my web site , bonde.com , has contained a letter from an office in the Court of Auditors to the Commission , and it is the most alarming letter I have read in my 30 years in the EU .
The Commission 's current practice of accounting on spreadsheets lends itself to poor administration and fraud .
Against that unfortunate background , SOS Democracy wishes to invite all adherents of ordinary accounting to meet Mrs Andreasen on Wednesday at 3 p.m. in conference room R3.1.
We should together discuss how we can deal with what , to me , looks like the worst scandal in the EU 's history .
Now , we know a little about how matters stand .
From now on , we all share the responsibility .
Thank you , Mr President and Mr Pedersen .
Mr President , previous speakers have already addressed many important items in the 2003 budget , but we have to take care not to focus on too few of its specific areas and end up trying to give everyone a slice of the cake .
Those who suffered flood damage must now get aid very quickly and without red tape , and it goes without saying that provision must now also be made for the future .
We must , though , take steps to deal with the constant increase in unemployment .
SMEs continue to gasp under the excessive burden of taxes and levies placed upon them , whilst , at the same time , investment activity in Europe is declining , and the unemployment rate is , as already mentioned , constantly rising .
The excessively high rate of unemployment among young people is a particular problem , and there is urgent need for special programmes to reduce it .
I hope that Members of this House will support the motions we have tabled on this subject , which seek to promote apprenticeships in SMEs .
Such action would strengthen SMEs and help those young people who , in Europe , have little or no chance of vocational training .
Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner Barnier .
On behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I must express our concerns regarding the implementation of the budget for the European Social Fund .
The Social Fund plays an important role , of course , in the development of poor regions and of the European Employment Strategy , and it will indeed also be very important in connection with the forthcoming enlargement .
In this area too , moreover , we see the build-up of outstanding commitments , something which we regard as a problem .
Now , Commissioner Barnier has just presented a communication on developments concerning the implementation of the Structural Funds , providing us with a number of explanations as to why larger outstanding commitments than expected are accumulating , and that is something for which we should thank the Commissioner .
There are of course new rules and procedures for the 2000-2006 programming which are to be incorporated , and the Member States have apparently overestimated the ability to implement the projects in the first few years .
What basis have we , however , for believing that things will be much better over the next few years , apart from the incentives contained in the ' N + 2 ' rule ( otherwise known as the ' sunset clause ' ) according to which the money is lost if too long a period elapses before the payments are utilised ?
As MEPs , we constantly hear complaints that this is an unwieldy system .
A good overdraft facility at the bank is needed if money from the Social Fund is to be received .
It is the long time it takes to make the payments that is a problem , and one that the Commission must do something about .
We are also told that the rules and procedures are too complicated , and it was agreed in July that Parliament and the Council should simplify matters in order to encourage utilisation of the funds .
You too , Mr Barnier , have put simplification on the agenda .
How quickly will it be possible , however , for the work on simplification to take effect ?
Will it have done so by 2003 ?
What are the deadlines for this work ?
Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , for us the problem of implementation should be a shared problem , and I personally cannot accept what Commissioner Barnier has said , when he simply washes his hands of the problems of four or five Member States .
The problem is a shared one , the solution is a shared one .
The fact that we have EUR 100 billion of outstanding commitments should be a problem for all the Community 's institutions .
We cannot accept the premise that it is the sole responsibility of those Member States .
We certainly want to see action by all the institutions , including the Commission , and this Parliament in particular , as a matter of urgency .
Turning to transport , we want to see action quickly here too .
In particular , we want to see a reinstatement of the cuts of EUR 1 million proposed by the Commission in overland transport safety .
It is absurd to propose to cut accidents on the roads by 50 % in 8 years and yet cut the budget in that key area .
Thirdly , we want to see a reinstatement of the 20 % reduction proposed by the Commission in sustainable mobility .
Again we talk a lot about the environment , but the very programmes that will help protect and preserve it will be cut if the Commissioner has his way .
Fourth and finally , I agree with the Commission on the need for more transparency .
At the moment my committee , which takes its job seriously in trying to scrutinise the budget , simply does not have the facts at its disposal to make a proper quantitative , as well as qualitative assessment , of what is happening to the budgets for transport and the Structural Funds .
I hope that after this debate we can work harder to make sure that we can demonstrate to the European taxpayer that value for money is being given .
Mr President , Commissioner , as many speakers have stated here already , the latest budget monitoring figures also show that the implementation of the Structural Fund programmes and payments made with regard to the programmes have progressed far too slowly .
On the other hand , regional differences have also grown .
It is therefore very clear that regional aid will be needed in the future too , as Mr Puerta suggested .
Delays in structural policy were largely due in the early stages to the slow preparatory work undertaken by the Commission and the Member States .
Now it is burdensome administration and complicated , rigid procedures that are causing the delays .
These are also causing problems in countries that have kept to the timetable .
The implementation thus far of both last year 's and this year 's budgets have led to a considerable increase in unpaid amounts of money .
Our group is very worried about the possible negative impact that will have on next year 's budget and the Union 's structural policy both later on and in general .
There should be compliance , however , with the N + 2 rule , as it will help shore up implementation of the Structural Funds .
Now we are compelled to ask , despite this communication and Mr Barnier 's fine words , what the Commission intends to do before this parliamentary term ends .
What concrete measures are there , whereby practices associated with the Structural Funds can be clarified , simplified , and speeded up ?
This is a very tough question too because enlargement is just around the corner and we need to find remedies for these problems , with more in the way of results and less bureaucracy .
Mr President , whilst the Budget Memorandum for 2003 still leaves many questions open , the economic situation in 2002 is becoming clearer and it is easier to get an overall view of it .
I believe that it is not only in Germany that the goal of stabilising euroland by not exceeding a public debt of 3 % of gross domestic product is in danger of being missed .
The absence of 2 % -3 % annual economic growth means that grossly excessive unemployment figures can no longer be artificially covered up .
This makes it all the more understandable that the backlog of Structural Funds is being treated as if the funds were not there .
The prospect of actually successfully solving the problem of mass unemployment in the coming fourth quarter is made fainter by mounting indirect labour costs and the failure of the European Union , among others , to solve the problems caused by distortions of competition .
I also believe that the days of public jubilation at the freedom apparently won through globalisation are over .
The 2003 budget will instead be measured against the yardstick of seriousness , transparency and honesty .
I can recall that Parliament was always more than merely critical of the annual accumulation of financial resources from the Structural Funds .
What is decisive for the public 's sense of belonging is what goes down well with them .
The Commission 's non-existent policy on non-existent Structural Funds does little to promote a feeling of belonging on the part of the European Union 's citizens .
The winter months are going to be the most difficult in economic terms for a long time .
The many pledges made in the wake of the flood disaster must at last be worked off at a more rapid pace .
If they are not , there is a growing danger of those aspects of land use for which we have already accorded financial assistance from the sources available triggering substantial conflicts between business , transport , housing , leisure and tourism at the various structural levels .
The situation is grave , and I assume that it is known that the public are seeing the gap between income and expenditure narrowing still further .
They need the money that is kept in Brussels .
Mr President , Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I welcome Mrs Schreyer 's statement to the effect that sustainable development is a focus of attention , and hope that it really will be possible to promote it even with these deficits , by which I mean the unused appropriations , which will , next year , be subject to the N + 2 rule .
We know that the deficits are primarily the result of long drawn-out problems with approval , but also of the Member States ' inability to really create proper programmes out of the reform measures contained in the last reform of the Structural Funds ; this obliged the Commission to follow matters up any number of times .
Both , then , are to blame .
There is now the danger of big projects being supported because there is suddenly more money , and for that reason I warn the Commission against allowing that .
There are indications that projects will again be supported without their being either efficient or sustainable , and I would ask the Commission to exercise its monitoring functions and ensure that sustainable development becomes a reality in the budget .
Mr President , I do indeed believe that this debate is extremely useful inasmuch as it allows us to discuss a number of difficult issues , including funds , in a general context .
What some people seem to be suggesting is completely unfair , namely that fraud would be involved in funding that goes unspent , for that is the problem with commitments outstanding .
The problem lies in the very fact that it goes unspent , which is an entirely different issue .
I also think that too much blame is being apportioned to the Commission and not enough to the Member States .
I myself come from a Member State which is very much to blame for not spending the necessary resources properly and promptly , and I hope that this situation will improve in future .
This is a good example , though .
In my view , the system is flawed on two counts .
Firstly , we have a new fund each time , which means that each time , we lose a year .
This is exactly what happened now and seems to be inevitable .
I would ask the Commission to examine whether this can really be done in this way , for this is an inherent problem .
Secondly , I wonder whether we will ever be free of these commitments outstanding .
Is it not possible , or conceivable , instead of simply leaving these , to conclude an agreement at a given point with a Member State that fails to manage to spend that money ?
We could , for example , say that we will channel this money back to the general resources , and this Member State will receive a reduction on their contribution , which has to be paid anyway .
I think that this Member State could be very happy with this proposal , and indeed that everyone could be , as it allows money to become available for those who need it .
Needless to say , this should be done on a voluntary basis ; if not , the system would never work and Member States would never agree to it .
Maybe , though , it is possible to solve this issue relatively quickly and pragmatically .
I fear that it might be too pragmatic , for everyone likes to claim that funds should be spent , only to place many obstacles along the way should this then appear necessary .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to a number of budget lines that are dealt with in the Committee on Employment .
First of all the three lines dealing with social dialogue - B3-4002 , B3-4003 and B3-4310 .
The last one deals with the Trade Union Technical Bureau for Health and Safety .
We are looking to increase the amounts on each of these lines , largely because of enlargement .
It is very important that we get the basic building blocks of social dialogue in place in the applicant countries and we need to begin to channel resources in that direction .
Secondly , I should like to mention B3-4314 . This concerns health and safety improvements in small- and medium-sized enterprises .
We are looking to renew this line once again .
I very much hope that following the work we have done on the new European Health and Safety strategy here in Parliament - a report will shortly be appearing in my own name - on a proposal from the Commission for a multi-annual programme for high levels of health and safety in SMEs .
I hope that will come forward in the coming year and give us a permanent legal base .
My final point concerns B3-4106 .
This is a proposal for a new budget line in the names of Mr Howitt and Mr Andersson , although it was endorsed by the Committee on Employment as well .
It seeks to give a solid base for support to social NGOs . It is very important that we do this to underpin civil dialogue .
Mr President , we have already talked about the under-implementation of the Structural Funds , and the menacing shadow of the guillotine has already been invoked .
I would now like to add that it is no coincidence that many are in danger of losing part of their entitlement too .
In other words , we risk suffering the blows of the stick without even tasting the carrot .
We must take action but , Mr Bonde , we must make sure we do not set our sights on the wrong target .
The European Commission is not the only one with responsibility in this area : a great deal of responsibility lies with the Member States too .
We must make sure that we do not prescribe ourselves the wrong medicine .
Personally , I am allergic to the reserves pill , which often does more harm than the original problem , and the idea that some political groups have of putting some of the Commissioners ' expenditure in reserve is downright ridiculous .
The direction we must take is that of increasing payments and simplifying procedures .
Commissioner Barnier has already told us what he intends to do and we are waiting for further clarification .
Nevertheless , I would also like to hear what the Council has to say , if possible , and I call for greater attention to be paid to some of the Member States , who are sleeping the sleep of the unrighteous where this whole issue is concerned .
Mr President , I would like to take a few moments to confirm what I said earlier and provide some more detailed answers .
I would also like to thank the speakers who have clearly understood what I meant earlier , particularly Mr Pittella who pointed out just now that the Member States have some responsibilities .
But , to be very honest , Mr Watts must have misunderstood : the Commission is not shirking its responsibilities .
I myself am greatly concerned , Mr Watts , by the underspending .
I must simply reiterate that my work is based on estimates which are compiled by the Member States .
There are some details that I must give to you , or confirm for you , which have been in evidence for three years , in other words , since I took up this position .
For example , the Member States gave priority , at the beginning of this programming period , not to new programmes and to new projects , but to old programmes and to old projects which should have been completed .
They therefore concentrated their efforts on winding up old programmes and they took longer to prepare the new programmes .
This is one reason .
A new method of certification was also introduced , which caused some problems .
We should also mention the new payment system .
All sorts of rules were adopted in Berlin or after Berlin , which I am obliged to introduce .
I would also add that many Member States - and Mrs Fiebiger mentioned the crisis and the lack of growth earlier - must cope with relative budgetary difficulties .
I would point out that we are not funding the programmes 100 % .
There is an additionality rule whereby the Member States must provide part of the funding and some of them probably found it necessary to stretch their budgetary expenditure further .
These are some of the details that you will find in the report and the communication that Mrs Schreyer and myself have given you .
With regard to the RALs , once again , I think that it is usual to have approximately two years of programming since this is in line with the N + 2 rule - so that makes about seven years of programming and two additional years in total .
What would be unusual is for us to continue to support , through the RALs , very old programmes .
That is why my work seeks , as a matter of priority , as I said to you at the beginning , to withdraw the RALs from the old programmes , which has almost been achieved .
I would also warn you against drawing an assessment of the situation from one moment to the next .
When you look at the RALs , at the beginning of the year for example , you do not gain an accurate picture because , although almost 99 % of expenditure was committed in April , the payments can be made up to the end of the year .
Therefore , at the beginning of the year , it looks as if the RALs are substantial .
That is how the figure of 100 billion may have been arrived at .
As I am speaking to you today , namely 24 September , the RALs for the old and new programmes amount to approximately 50 billion , which is an accurate reflection of these two years of programming .
Mrs Schroedter , whom I would like to thank , moreover , for the work that she has done - and I am thinking , in particular , of her excellent report on the second progress report on cohesion - emphasised the issue of sustainable development .
Mrs Schroedter , rest assured that I am keeping a very close eye on ensuring that the Structural Funds are implemented as per the regulation and in accordance with European directives on the environment .
For all sorts of political and personal reasons , I am working to ensure that the Member States , both present and future , use the Structural Funds in the appropriate manner , with respect for sustainable development .
That is why for example , Mrs Schroedter , I decided to propose , with regard to the consequences of the floods , that , in the future regional policy that I shall submit to you at the end of 2003 , whilst consolidating what we have already done under these programmes , the prevention of natural risks is virtually a compulsory priority in all the regional programmes .
The N + 2 rule is strict , but it is useful .
Once again , as for natural disasters , I have placed the emphasis on prevention .
Last November , I wrote to all the Prime Ministers , as did Mrs Schreyer .
Since prevention still costs less than restoration , we hope that this will enable us to reduce the risk , Mr Pittella , of appropriations being wasted .
At the end of the year , since it is the first meeting , the risks of wasting money under the N + 2 rule will be very low .
The risks will probably be higher next year , because , since the programmes were signed in 2001 , the effects will be felt in 2003 under the N + 2 rule .
As far as the floods are concerned , Mrs Fiebeger , you urged us to act quickly .
To be very honest - and many German and Austrian leaders pointed this out to us - rarely has the Commission reacted quite so quickly to current events .
It took us less than four weeks to propose a flexible budgetary instrument , with Mrs Schreyer 's leadership .
A few days later , I proposed the rules and arrangements for this fund to the Commission .
The ball is in the European Parliament 's court .
Last night , the Council held a trialogue meeting .
I hope that we will be in a position , before the end of the year , before winter , in other words to grant the appropriations which are expected so that restoration , repair and even prevention work can begin .
Regarding the social dialogue , I listened carefully to the questions which have been put to us .
They concern , in the main , Heading 3 , and Mrs Schreyer or Mrs Diamantopolou will answer them later .
Lastly , I would like to point out that , with regard to all these problems , and I am coming to my conclusion , Mr President , the Commission is not shirking its responsibilities .
I am trying to favour transparency , to explain the truth and to be proactive in terms of transparency , as I have just said , as well as in terms of simplification , as this is the purpose of the meeting on 5 October with the ministers .
I would also like to emphasise how the useful role played by the Structural Funds in improving governance on the ground , in the regions and in each country which is in need of them , including the oldest countries of the Union .
In the area of partnerships , assessments , discipline and planning , the role they fulfil is that of a lever . I would like to convince you of their importance .
The Structural Funds do not just represent money , they also represent real progress in terms of public administration , governance and , ultimately , democracy .
Thank you , Commissioner Barnier .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my Committee has very carefully considered its amendments , and its vote to introduce them was unanimous .

As already set out in the guidelines , we put the emphasis on such things as the management of borders , an area in which the ARGO programme is of fundamental importance , contributing as much to the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice as it does to preparations for enlargement .
Enlargement makes the topics of external border control , visas , asylum and immigration even more urgent .
Efficient cooperation by the Member States and the candidate countries in these areas , and especially in combating illegal immigration , is indispensable , and requires that the necessary resources be made available for it .
My Committee also supports efforts to integrate third-country nationals who are long-term residents here by establishing a pilot project .
This would serve to transmit the values underpinning our coexistence in Europe .
I am very glad that the Commission accepts this .
Security , freedom and justice are not , of course , to be had for free , but my Committee 's present proposals do not represent any increase in the financial framework over against last year 's budget .
What we are asking for is only 99.4 % of last year 's figures .
This is something I particularly want to underline , as we have greater responsibilities towards the EU 's citizens in view of 11 September .
I would like to conclude by reminding you of the 21 September 2001 action plan to combat terrorism , which envisages joint action by all specialist units to prevent and combat terrorism , and requires that Europol and Eurojust be equipped for this purpose with special resources .
It is with this in mind that I hope that my Committee will be backed up by Parliament 's , the Commission 's and the Council 's own proposals .
Mr President , the culture , education and information element of the budget accounts for barely half of 1 % of the EU budget , compared with 50 % of the budget that goes on agriculture .
So I will remind Parliament and the Commissioners , as culture spokesmen do every year , that perhaps we have not got our priorities quite right .
To turn to the issue of information : this should be a shared responsibility between the institutions and the Member States .
We wonder whether the Member States have got their responsibilities quite right in this respect .
Earlier this year the Culture Committee visited Copenhagen , and we would like to pay particular tribute to the Danish Government and Danish Parliament for the information they give to their citizens about the working of the European Union .
The EU has a responsibility to see that its citizens are well informed .
Certain members of staff make great efforts in this respect , and we would also pay tribute to Commissioner Vitorino for the work and the vision that he is putting into this .
However , we are not succeeding .
The citizens of the European Union do not have enough information .
We do not live in a neutral situation , we live in a situation where there is a great deal of disinformation and it is the responsibility of all concerned to see that is answered .
I therefore make no apology when I point out that the proposed budget for information policy on the various B3 lines is less than EUR 100 milion or less than 37 cents per citizen per annum .
That is a very small sum indeed .
As I speak , I know that Euronews - the television channel that seeks to give objective information about all European issues - is itself suffering very serious financial difficulties .
I hope the Commission and the budget rapporteur will look very closely at their pleas and make sure that Euronews is a success .
I will remind the House that the successful slogan for the Irish ' No ' campagin was ' If you don 't know , vote no . '
We must see that the European citizens do not vote no , because they understand what the European Union is about .
Mr President , first of all I wish to thank the Parliament for its invitation to this debate today .
I tend to interpret your invitation as the recognition of the political importance of the areas of Justice and Home Affairs and Information Policy , and definitely not of its budgetary importance , because comparing my budget with those of my colleagues , I feel like a beggar who is invited to a Christmas party in Wall Street .
As far as budgetary issues are concerned , in order of presentation , I wish to thank the LIBE committee , Mr Ceyhun in particular , for the non-stop support this Commission has been given in establishing the area of freedom , security and justice .
Once again , the LIBE Committee proposes the increase of the budget lines thought to be politically more important .
The PDB was prepared by the Commission based not only on political considerations , but also on the financial framework approved for each of the programmes , or on past experience in the running of the preparatory actions or pilot projects .
Moreover , it presents a difficult balance between the human resources needed to ensure the correct management of the credits and those needed to ensure the creation of this area from a legal point of view .
For these reasons , the proposed amounts represent a certain stability concerning the total amount , but with a re-centring of activities , a recast of the cooperation programmes , and an intensification of the actions in the area of asylum and immigration , including the external border control and the establishment of Eurojust .
The Commission welcomes the very constructive opinion of the LIBE Committee , which brings into the PDB the major political developments which have occurred since its presentation - such as the conclusions of the European Council of Seville - which obviously could not have been considered at the time our PDB was presented .
Nevertheless , I will make a plea for careful examination , bearing in mind such difficulties as human resources .
I now turn to the Cultural Committee , Mr Perry in particular , and also to the Economic and Financial Affairs Committee , particularly Mr Bergman .
In terms of information and communication to the public in general , over the last few years we have seen great progress in cooperation between our institutions , in the provision of information to citizens , at political level between our relevant services and most importantly , on the ground , in the Member States .
Recognising that the challenge of communication with 370 million citizens is immense , and the means available are definitely limited , we are now working increasingly with the Member States so that they share the responsibility for informing their citizens , engaging them in a dialogue that is a prerequisite for good governance and increased public support .
The adoption by the Commission , in July , of the communication on an information and communication strategy for the European Union , and the warm welcome it received , both by the Culture Committee and the Interinstitutional Group on Information , provide tangible evidence of our shared political will to be proactive in generating awareness , combating ignorance and apathy and improving perceptions about the Union .
Returning to budgetary aspects , I must underline that , as in all other aspects of the budget , the Commission took a very realistic position in relation to information and communication .
We recognised that , whilst informing and communicating with citizens must be a priority , we have to ensure that we have the capacity , especially in terms of human resources , to manage the expenditure of the funds .
The PDB is therefore the firm basis for our consideration of amendments , with one exception that relates to the new priority topic proposed in the July communication mentioned above .
I am referring to the role of Europe in the world .
If the Interinstitutional Group on Information confirms this proposal at its meeting later today , we will suggest that an additional EUR 1.5 million should be committed for the PRINCE programme .
This will be for a campaign which specifically relates to the role of Europe in the world and our actions to regulate globalisation so that it can bring benefits to our citizens and the wider world .
The Commission welcomes the constructive opinions of the Culture Committee as well as the Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Constitutional Affairs Committee .
At the meeting of the Interinstitutional Group on Information later today , we must reflect on the amounts proposed in the amendments and the practical implications .
I will of course emphasise the need to ensure that we have the necessary human resources available to spend those amounts in an appropriate and proper way .
On the subject of expert assistance and the priority campaigns , we particularly welcome the specific proposal that the budget line for financing of PRINCE correspondents should also be increased .
Without such an increase , we will not be able to engage Member States in developing the priority PRINCE campaigns .
We also strongly support the amendment to restore a cut of EUR 500 000 made by the Council , in the line that provides for the use of information correspondents to work with the media in the Member States and for the use of Eurojust experts to answer citizens ' questions relating to European law .
On the euro campaign , I must re-state what the Commission has already said in the past .
The information to the candidate countries on the euro is included in the enlargement campaign , and the Commission believes that , in the case of the countries which are not yet part of the euro , the necessary funds will be proposed the day that each of these countries decides to join the euro .
Finally , in the new basis of cooperation between the Parliament and the Commission and engaging the Member States , we will be able to improve our information and communication policy and therefore make better use of taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a PPE member of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , I would first of all like to express my regret , as has Mr Ceyhun , that the budget does not truly reflect the priority that the Commission and the Council claim to give to the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
It is all well and good to affirm a priority , but this priority must also be followed up by concrete action .
Yet , the appropriations for the area of freedom , security and justice are increased by less than the average level of increase for internal policies .
Why is this , Commissioner ?
I would like to say that the PPE Group supports the amendments by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms proposed by the rapporteur in the crucial area of immigration and asylum policy .
I would like to know if the Commission and the Council are prepared to support us in this direction .
It is the first time that all the instruments of an active and balanced policy for managing migratory flows have been identified and strengthened by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms .
We want to improve the ways of predicting migratory flows more accurately by providing increased subsidies for the European Migration Observatory .
We want to improve control at external borders .
We support the increase in resources for cooperation with third countries .
We support the increase in appropriations designed to support integration efforts for immigrants who have settled legally in Europe and we also support the increase in resources set aside for the European Refugee Fund , although we regret that , in the draft budget and preliminary draft budget , these resources have been reduced in comparison to last year .
I would like to know if the Commission and the Council are prepared , in these matters that are strategic not only from a point of view of the development of the European Union , but also from the point of view of the way in which our fellow citizens perceive them , to increase the resources set aside in these different areas .
I have one last question to put to the Commissioners and the Council .
Last year , the European Parliament put aside EUR 5 million in the budget for use by Europol in combating terrorism .
Why has the Commission waited nine months before proposing a legal basis ?
Is the Council prepared - yes or no - to accept this legal basis and to ensure that these appropriations can be used effectively ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , the European Union 's information service has all too often seemed like propaganda passed down to the masses from above .
The language of communication is also often cumbersome and not enough attention is paid to cultural differences .
However , now it would appear that there is hope for better things to come .
In the plans drafted under the guidance of Commissioner Vitorino we can read of the aim to base communications on the public 's need for information .
That is how it should be too .
The Commission 's four priorities concerning information - enlargement , the future of the Union , establishing the area of freedom , security and justice , and the EU 's role in the world , are absolutely crucial .
That is why it is unthinkable that the Council should make cuts in its own draft budget in the area of appropriations for the information service .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which supports Commissioner Vitorino 's information policy , has unanimously proposed there should be additional resources for the budget headings concerned with information .
The social democrats in the Committee on Budgets adhere to the same policy .
We cannot ask the people to become interested in our work if they do not know what is going on here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we too would like to express some concerns regarding the preliminary draft budget , some of which relate to issues which have already been raised during this debate .
I would like to focus , in particular , on two issues .
Firstly , security and enlargement .
It has already been stated that we need to be more aggressive with these active policies , but clearly , considering that we have not increased appropriations despite the fact that the concerns linked to terrorism and enlargement - including the extension of our borders with all the problems that will bring - are known to and in the minds of all , greater awareness and greater political aggressiveness should have been demonstrated with regard to these issues and a commitment should have been made to increase the budget .
Secondly , as regards information policy , I agree with Mr Perry , who pointed out that 30 cents per citizen is an absolutely ridiculous proposal if we are to achieve an effective European policy in this field .
Mr President , the debate on the flood disasters has shown Europe to the public in a new light - as a community of solidarity .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a bonus that we should not carelessly fritter away .
Great changes and challenges are ahead of us .
The crucial issues are evident - to us , but not to the European public .
The man in the street in Vienna would say that there is something missing from our information policy .
It is precisely on this area that a large number of amendments have been submitted .
The pressure to inform is huge , and that information must be one-sided - glossy brochures , ivory-tower conferences and websites - no matter how inventive , brilliantly conceived and really informative .
It reminds me of something I frequently experienced in my professional life .
If the public don 't come to the theatre , the theatre must go to the public .
We have to go out to people , to universities , into schools , and the Member States cannot be discharged from their obligations in this respect .
We are all open to that criticism .
We should inform each other better , as the lack of information gives rise to misunderstandings , and it is precisely those that we have least need of .
That brings me back to cultural policy .
You always hear it said , in a cynical tone , that in Brussels there is money lying all over the streets , and you just have to pick some up .
Well , when it comes to culture , you can 't talk in terms of collecting money and certainly not of just picking it up - counting the pennies is more like it .
Bureaucracy in this area is simply unmanageable .
Although we have only limited competence in it , I wonder what became of the three institutions ' will to do something about cultural policy .
It is far too weak .
Rather than promote European content in this globalised age in which we live , we are supporting the big boys - big countries , big co-productions .
That way , the little guys , the smaller countries , and the lesser-used languages lose out .
What I want to ask the Commission is this : a legal basis for the financing of the A-30 lines is being planned , but what conception does the Commission have of it ?
Is there to be a multi-annual plan ?
Is there to be an interinstitutional working party , in order that the criteria in the individual areas can be defined jointly and more exactly ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises - SMEs for short - has hitherto always been one of the European Union 's major concerns .
I am , then , all the more astonished to note that , in the preliminary draft budget , the Commission is reducing the amounts for this over against last year and the years preceding it .
What it boils down to is that this programme has an implementation rate of between 97 % and 100 % .
The development of small and medium-sized enterprises is the cornerstone of the internal market , it being beyond dispute that this area accounts for over 90 % of the workforce .
It is an area that we must promote and develop , especially as regards new technologies .
I would like to ask the Commission to support our motion that these amounts be augmented .
I would like to use my remaining speaking time to call on the Council to at last come up with a ruling on the seats of the new agencies , so that this House does not end up getting through the legislative procedures in no time , with the Council then needing years to come to any decision on the seat issue .
Mr President , having listened to Commissioner Vitorino and several of my fellow Members , I can see that we share a concern to provide information to our citizens , and I listened with great interest to the Commissioner asking us for more resources than those which were set aside in the preliminary draft budget and the budget .
We were , in fact , extremely surprised to see the reductions which had been made to these lines , at a time when so many doubts are being harboured by European citizens who still do not seem to be receiving the right information .
Commissioner , I would like to emphasise the fact that we tabled many amendments in order to give the Commission another chance to complete this essential task , namely the communication on the work of the European Union institutions .
But I would also like to stress the fact that this communication must be , as Mrs Iivari said , targeted towards the ordinary citizen , the average citizen , who , when working or going to the market , does not understand what the European Union is doing for the future .
We must undertake a thorough review of the strategy used by our institutions to communicate with the public .
Let us go to meet the inhabitants of our fifteen countries and try to understand them .
I believe that , as we did for economic measures , we must move from macrointervention towards closer intervention .
As we do for SMEs , let us go and look for the citizens one by one !
Mr President , I shall begin by responding to Mr Deprez , who is an expert in budgetary matters , justice and home affairs .
As far as Europol is concerned , Parliament did indeed set aside 5 million in the 2002 budget .
Yet , we came up against an issue that you are very familiar with , that of the legal basis , since Europol was set up by an intergovernmental convention , and the only funding available under this intergovernmental convention is that derived from Member States ' contributions .
We began by asking Europol what it would do with this 5 million and , after some time , we finally received a response whereby Europol , realistically and pragmatically , told us that it wanted to use EUR 3 400 000 out of the 5 million in order , as part of the fight against terrorism , to create a database and improve the communication systems between the security forces and intelligence services .
Based on this information , we prepared what we believe to be a legal basis which is currently being examined by the Council .
I share your hope that the Council will find a solution to the issue of the legal basis so that the EUR 3 400 000 can be used before the end of the year .
As for the amount of time that has passed in between , I shall now explain the reason for this .
I mentioned the issue of the 5 million to illustrate that I do not fully agree with your comparison of the figures .
The 5 million was not proposed again this year .
This amount has not been reproduced in this year 's budget .
We must compare the JHA budget less the 5 million from 2002 , in other words EUR 114 million , with the EUR 119 million that we want to propose .
I understand that this may not seem very much to you , but I am speaking under the watchful eye of Mrs Schreyer , who will not allow me to agree with you .
As far as the budget for asylum and immigration is concerned , I think that the budgetary line for cooperation with third countries was devoted , in 2002 , mainly to aid operations for Afghan refugees and to the return of Afghan refugees .
No one can question the priority given to Afghanistan .
My intention for the future is to grant the appropriations from this budgetary line , for which no increase is planned , primarily to third countries which are currently negotiating or have recently been negotiating readmission agreements with us .
This will allow us to finance measures to accompany the execution of readmission agreements .
That said , I support your idea that we should have at our disposal a general overview of the budgetary situation of funds that the European Union is already providing , at the current time , for cooperation with third countries in the area of asylum and immigration .
These funds do not only appear in the JHA budget ; they also appear , and to a great extent , in the Relex budget , in the Country strategy papers , in the regional programmes such as MEDA or CARDS .
That is why the Seville Council asked us to draw up a report on the effectiveness of financial resources that we provide for cooperation with third countries .
We shall do this within the timeframe laid down by the Seville European Council and I shall take this opportunity to present to you the first mid-term assessment of the use of the European Refugee Fund over the period 2000-2002 .
Regarding the issue of enlargement that Mrs Sbarbati has just raised , I must tell you that 60 % of all funding granted in recent years from the justice and home affairs budget to candidate countries has been used to improve controls at the external borders of the candidate countries and that the programmes concerned , which are part of the PHARE initiative , will continue until 2006 .
We have an assessment of the results of these programmes compared to the results obtained by the candidate countries each year .
I can tell you that this is the number one priority as far as the candidate countries are concerned .
Let us now move on from justice and home affairs and discuss information and communication .
I can only support the idea that an information and communication policy must be a policy of proximity .
That is why we proposed a new approach .
I cannot promise you that the new approach will succeed .
No one can .
But I can assure you that the only solution is to form an interinstitutional partnership and work very closely with the Member States .
If the Member States do not engage in an information and communication policy of proximity , we cannot do this from Brussels .
In my view , this evidence cannot be contested .
You also know that the commitment from the Member States is totally voluntary .
This means that the Commission and Parliament , in an interinstitutional framework , shall invite the Member States to become involved in this exercise , because we believe that , ultimately , it will be in everyone 's interest , not only the interest of the European institutions , but also of the Member States ' governments , to have a general public that is better informed of what is going on at European level .
But , to do this , we must have the necessary human resources .
That is why I called for the amounts which are included in the preliminary draft budget and which refer to the Prince and MEDIA correspondents working in the Member States ' capitals to be retained .
Without these intruments , we will not be able to succeed in establishing this partnership with the Member States .
I would like to thank you for your support in this respect and I hope that we will be able to develop , on the basis of this partnership , a more proactive , clearer and better targeted information and communication policy .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
We will now have the debate on the areas of external action .
the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy is of course interested in international development and especially the opportunity to play a part in shaping policy within the WTO .
We have two problems here .
On the one hand , our Committee 's resources do not permit us to monitor and influence the debate to the extent that would be genuinely useful .
On the other , we have many parliamentarians from other countries - primarily from developing countries - who cannot meet the costs , even for travel and accommodation , in order to attend these debates and play a role in this decision-making process .
Firstly , we want Europe to commit itself to playing a leading role in global affairs .
The WTO and the capacity to make decisions on matters of WTO policy are extremely important , especially for our small and medium enterprises .
Secondly , we want to press ahead with standardisation , because what we want to push for first and foremost , in terms of legislation , is mutual recognition , rather than harmonisation within the European internal market .
In this context , standardisation is essential and fundamental .
Thirdly , in the energy field , we want to ensure that the intelligent energy programmes , but also the ALTENER , SAVE and SYNERGIE programmes , are used intensively and that the Commission sets priorities here , especially for our energy self-sufficiency , where the aim , after all , is to achieve an increase from 50 % to 70 % .
In this context , more intensive measures need to be adopted as a matter of urgency to safeguard and secure our energy supply .
Let me make one further point , which originates from Parliament alone : we want Basle II to have its own action programme .
We are concerned that the equity capital requirements for our SMEs will not be achievable by 2006 , and that this will precipitate a massive number of foreclosures and bankruptcies . So let 's do our homework here first .
Mr President , once again this year the increase in funds committed to pre-accession in category 4 means an overall decline in Europe 's external action devoted to development .
Sadly , the only real long-term solution to this problem lies in the revision of the financial perspective in 2006 .
I shall concentrate today on two issues where we can make a real difference this year .
Firstly , the global health fund against AIDS , TB and malaria .
The Committee on Development has proposed that all regional budget lines contribute to achieving the sizeable recurrent contribution needed .
AIDS is a global problem .
India is the country with the second-highest level of infection after South Africa , and the biggest increase in infections is in Eastern Europe and Central Asia .
Already the fund has committed 13 % of its money to the Americas .
But if the Commission and Council disagree with this approach , let them tell us where the money will come from .
Let them admit that the EUR 35 million budgeted for does not achieve Mr Patten 's own commitment made on 16 September in order to keep the Commission 's own seat on the Global Health Fund board .
This is right for Europe as a leader and innovator in the field , and it is right for the 3 million people dying of AIDS worldwide to make sure that the money works .
I have been given a clear understanding that the Global Health Fund 's transitional working group meeting in Brussels agreed USD 100 million for a board seat , that the Global Fund secretariat has already budgeted for a USD 120 million European Community contribution for next year , and that approved projects will be cut if we fail to match that figure .
I have given the Commissioner advance notice of these questions .
If I am wrong , let him put this on the record today , and if I am right let him support our amendments .
Secondly , the quality of aid .
It is regrettable that agreements made since the reform of external assistance still mean that three times as much European aid is spent on transport as on health and education , combined , for the poorest people in greatest need .
That is why Parliament this year is seeking to earmark this spending and promote it as part of the deconcentration of staff and in the new country strategy papers .
Commissioner Nielson will be aware that on 15 July his services promised a firm proposal on this point and that I received his reply by fax only at 3.40 p.m. this afternoon after this debate had begun .
I conclude by saying that I hope the Commissioner will therefore defer the proper concerns he may wish to raise in relation to Parliament 's proposals this afternoon , and commit himself to the further discussions where I agree with his wish , and I quote ' to press ahead together in achieving our common goals ' .
I look forward to hearing his response .
the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Titley , is unable to attend the debate and has asked me to make various comments on the Committee 's behalf .
The Committee has set itself three objectives : firstly , to make clear which foreign policy priorities the European Union intends to set in the new financial year without wrecking the stipulated financial framework .
Secondly , we want more transparency .
A number of amendments to the budget 's nomenclature are designed to increase the flow of resources .
These proposed amendments also have no financial implications , but will lead to more budget transparency and thus facilitate budgetary control .
The third issue , which is a particular priority for the draftsman of the opinion and the Committee , is to improve the security of our delegations around the world .
Remedial action needs to be taken here and we want to support this process .
Let me take each of these three points in turn .
On the first point , we are planning some increases in funding to reflect political priorities for the cross-border programmes under TACIS .
The European Union 's new external borders require more funding for cooperation across these borders , which is why we have proposed a number of increases .
The second issue is nuclear safety .
This too is a priority for this House , and we want to see this reflected in the budget figures for next year .
Anti-personnel mines and the rapid reaction mechanism are also areas where we have proposed budget increases .
Then we have a scenario reminiscent of the film Dinner for One at New Year , with the ' same procedure as every year ' , when the Commission cuts the funding for human rights and democracy budget lines and the Parliament bumps it up again .
We intend to do so this year as well , and we would ask the Commission to take note for once next year that Parliament is setting these priorities and that this should be reflected in the draft budget .
In the interests of transparency , we would like Afghanistan to be a separate budget line , not a sub-item under Asia .
A great deal of money will flow to Afghanistan over the coming years , so this is very important .
Finally , the draftsman has also urged us to ensure that there is , in future , regular disclosure of the budget lines for Palestine so that it can be ascertained from the outset where the money is going .
In my view , better budgetary control is needed here . These are our priorities .
Let me conclude by addressing a request to the Council .
This House asks to be involved more closely in future when making new political promises in the foreign policy field . Otherwise , if the Council continues to make a succession of new promises without the money to back them up , we will forfeit our credibility .
Since my colleague Chris Patten is attending two summits simultaneously today , I would like to respond to some of the points on his behalf .
Firstly , in the foreign policy field , we face , after all , the most substantial new requirements for many years , without any scope to expand the budget .
The Council and Parliament have already used the flexibility instrument several times here in order to meet the new requirements .
On the issue of Afghanistan , I would like to extend my thanks to the Council and especially , in advance , to this House for agreeing to the very rapid release at this time of EUR 70 million which are still in reserve for this year in order to provide assistance here , and especially also for granting the necessary direct subsidies to the transitional government .
On the issue raised by Mr Howitt , which also relates to the Global Health Fund , I would point out that we have earmarked EUR 35 million for the Fund in the budget .
After all , we have already contributed EUR 120 million to the Global Health Fund from the EU and EDF budgets .
The decision was only taken recently , so we assume that these funds are adequate .
My colleague Mr Nielson , in particular , has various budget lines available .
He will make a statement on this issue shortly .

As regards Mr Rübig 's question on energy , the Commission has proposed a new multi-annual programme for action in the field of intelligent energies , which also provides funding for these energies in third states .
I think the Johannesburg Summit made it very clear once again that we should be giving special priority to this area .
Let me first address the issue mentioned by Mr Howitt , of the amounts targeted towards health and education .
Most Members of Parliament will recognise that , since we have discussed this again and again , it is not easy to say anything new .
That is also the reason why Mr Howitt has not missed anything , even though I did not have the opportunity to reply to his last letter in time .
That does not , of course , prevent us from continuing to discuss the matter amicably .
The agreement last year on a 35 % benchmark on health and education is an input indicator for our commitments to social infrastructure .
The Commission will provide the breakdown of figures against the various DAC codes from the OECD showing commitments in 2002 and 2003 for health and education .
The level of commitments will depend mainly on the results of the programming exercise in our partner countries .
There is no need to re-open the agreement of last year , and there is nothing to be gained by it in terms of additional information .
The systems of tracing and categorising more clearly what we do is under implementation - according to what we have promised Parliament - and that will create a basis for a more enlightened discussion on these issues .
On the funding of the Global Health Fund , as my colleague Mrs Schreyer has already said , the Commission will ensure that it will do what is expected .
This is all we really need to say at this point .
I agree very much with Mr Laschet that the increase in TACIS is important , inter alia for reasons of stepping up our presence in general in that region .
On what was said about involving Parliament more closely when making political promises , I understood that to mean that Parliament should be involved more before making political promises , otherwise I do not see why we need to discuss it .
This is certainly a good and correct way of working and , in general , I feel this is the way things are being done .
Remarks were made about staffing and security in delegations .
We welcome the amendment by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy underlining the difficult security situation of many of our delegations .
However , the Development Committee amendment relating to the recruitment of specialists - the other point raised by Mr Howitt - puts very rigid and complicated conditions on the release of EUR 10 million of these funds .
It would seriously undermine the deconcentration process , since we need to know the funds available in order to recruit and train staff .
It will also unnecessarily penalise some of the poorest beneficiaries , since the main impact will fall on delegations in 30 ACP countries .
What we do , and what we prefer to do , is to strengthen the handling of the different sectors by means of networks of specialists both in headquarters and out in delegations .
However , a very rigid system , as proposed by the Development Committee 's amendment , will not help us in getting things done in an efficient manner , so we do not welcome that proposal .
Mr President , my point concerns the next four hours .
Commissioner Nielson was not here when I made my opening remarks but one of them concerned the Global Health Fund .
One question we need answering before we take a decision next week on category 4 is : what is the amount of money that the European Union has to pay to get a seat on the board of the Global Health Fund ?
We are getting conflicting comments from the Commission and from our colleagues in the Committee on Development .
The Committee on Budgets needs to know a figure .
Mr President , my reluctance to answer is based on the fact that we do not have a figure .
If we look at what it took to get a seat in the first year , following the establishment of the Fund , the mathematics tell us that it was around EUR 84 million , but the United States says that it is paying for about four seats .
We would not like to see a larger Health Fund board .
That would not be efficient .
Other actors are trying to get seats on that board , so there is some pressure .
As you know , we came up with EUR 120 million for the first year .
The actual use of that money and the overall availability of funds compared to the actual spending in the first year makes for a very open discussion as to the actual funding need for the coming year .
It is against this background that the Commission finds it advisable not to come up with a figure today .
We want to have a picture of what other donors are doing to make sure that we feed money into the fund in a prudent manner to make it work as expected , but also to maximise value for money whatever we do in this area as a whole .
We do not have a figure right now .
Also , we are not under pressure at this stage to clarify all the details of how we find the money , so we advise waiting a little .
That is why you do not have a clear answer .
Mr President , I would just like to raise four points .
Firstly , the G8 recently reached agreement on the need to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy in developing countries .
Mrs Schreyer referred to this ( to the intelligent energy programme ) earlier .
My question to Mrs Schreyer is : Would she say that EUR 19 million over four years is adequate for preparatory work in over 80 - 90 countries ?
My question to Mr Nielson is : It is recognised that energy is a factor in poverty for the developing countries , so could he tell us how he proposes to coordinate his work with other DGs to tackle this ?
My second point is that Commission Patten has made statements that the EU should have a poverty focus in its development aid .
Therefore , would you agree that it is inconsistent to increase funding , as foreign affairs amendments have done , to Latin America and MEDA lines , and actually take away money from Asia lines ?
What do you think of Mr. Elles ' statement today that Afghanistan should be funded from the flexibility instrument ?
I would like to return to the Global Health Fund .
I am not really satisfied with the response and the answer we have had from Commissioner Nielson .
What I want to know , with regard to the EUR 35 million that we are proposing , is whether that is enough to get us a seat on the board ?
Is that adequate in terms of the EU leading the debate and fighting AIDS in the world ?
Finally , I would like to ask the Council their opinion on the U-turn in the PPE position , and the proposal to break the gentleman 's agreement .
In the July conciliation , the PPE agreed to the Council 's budget , but this afternoon we were informed by Mr Elles that they will put EUR 6.3 million from their basics budget in the reserve .
They are breaking their word , and if this amendment is accepted , what would the Council 's response be ?
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all agreed that the budget should be a reflection of Parliament 's political wishes .
This is mostly the case , but not always when the so-called special delegates are involved .
For example , the EU has one such delegate for the Middle East .
Parliament has repeatedly said that it would be desirable to have such a special delegate for the Southern Caucasus or Tibet , for example .
We are now facing the problem that the coffers are technically empty for this purpose , for these special delegates fall within the scope of the Council 's budget .
This is not to our liking , but the agreement is that we are not to touch the Council 's budget .
It now therefore looks like a widely shared political aspiration is set to wind up in the cogs of Parliament 's budget machinery .
I should like to draw both the Council 's and Commission 's attention to this , with the very specific question to the Council whether it would be prepared to make room in its budget for a special deputy for the Southern Caucasus and Tibet and if not , to make this known promptly and clearly so that the Commission can plug this hole .
My question to the Commission is whether it is prepared to do that .
After all , it is unacceptable for European presence in crisis regions to be restricted simply because a widely shared political aspiration is at risk of falling between all the financial stools .
Mr President , Commissioners. ladies and gentlemen , enlargement is just around the corner and we continually speak of finance and various programmes for the new Member States , but we forget that action is also needed in the border areas of our new neighbours and for these new neighbours themselves .
For that reason , my group and I want future border areas to receive more attention .
That could be done , for example , by strengthening cross-border cooperation under the TACIS programme .
If that is not done there will be tension , and a good example of that is Kaliningrad .
It is not just a matter of the region 's isolation : the social and economic differences between it and its neighbours are enormous .
For this more money is needed right away .
Another good example is the Northern Dimension .
We must vigorously support it , and , for that reason , my group has proposed an extra EUR 10 million for cross-border cooperation under the TACIS programme .
This has had the full support of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
A third example is nuclear safety .
For that we are proposing EUR 25 million .
We all understand why .
I have a question for the Commission .
Implementation of action under TACIS has produced some very poor results .
You must agree that it will be an important project for years to come .
Could you say how you intend to improve the situation and describe to us the development strategy the Commission has for transboundary cooperation ?
I then have a question for the Council .
It is not acceptable that from one year to the next the European Union undertakes new commitments under Section IV of the budget , without putting more money into it .
That weakens the credibility of our foreign policy .
Can you give us your opinion on this ?
If the Council makes promises with regard to every crisis without considering the financial implications , we will reach a dead end .
What is your solution ?
Mr President , first of all , I would like to come back to Mr Laschet 's question regarding Parliament 's proposal to set up a separate budget line for Afghanistan .
We welcome this for reasons of visibility , but suggest that in return , so to speak , East Timor be reintegrated into the ECHO budget line so that the overall number of budget lines does not increase .
As regards the issue of the Global Health Fund , which has again played a major role in this debate , I should point out that of the pledges made by the various donors , almost two-thirds come from Europe , in other words , from the European Union and from the Member States direct .
This is a high proportion .
The proposal we made in the budget plan - and we really gave this matter very careful thought - to include 35 million in the budget line at this stage is , in our view , adequate .
However , we also said that if it is not enough to keep our seat , we will have to see what measures need to be taken .
So far , there has been no sign from the other donors to suggest that this figure is inadequate at the present time .
Nonetheless , it should be stated clearly once again that securing the seat on the board was a major priority .
Let me turn briefly to Mr Lagendijk 's question regarding the Special Envoy .
This is indeed an issue which concerns the budget for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
As you know , the Commission has already proposed increasing the funding by one-third , specifically to finance the shared costs of the International Police Task Force in Bosnia .
However , we appeal very strongly for adequate funding for measures from the rapid reaction mechanism to be included once again in the Commission 's budget plan .
The Council had cut this area , and we would welcome it if Parliament could restore the funding here .
Now to the issue of TACIS .
In view of the fact that in category 4 , i.e. foreign policy , we only have a very small margin available overall , we must decide whether there will be further cuts here .
However , I would also like to appeal for us , as part of the enlargement process in 2004 , to focus particularly on ways of boosting cross-border cooperation with our new neighbours in the East post-enlargement .
Finally , a brief word on the implementation of the budget .
I should point out that for this year too , we have achieved a higher rate of implementation in category 4 than was the case last year .
The numerous measures adopted by my colleagues Mr Nielson and Mr Patten at administrative level , namely the adoption of new structures to facilitate more rapid implementation , are genuinely having an impact on the budget figures .
I think this shows that the reform efforts are proving very successful and the assistance is reaching its target more quickly .
Mr President , let me give a single set of figures to illustrate this in responding to Mr van Dam , who mentioned correctly the low level of implementation of TACIS and other programmes .
When we took office at the end of 1999 the overall time it would take to work our way through the existing commitments at the level and the pace of spending at that time was 4.5 years .
The following year this figure was down to 4.1 years and at the end of last year we were down to 3.66 years .
This is a rough , primitive but correct measure showing that we are in fact reducing the gap between the decisions on commitment and the actual implementation in terms of spending per year .
We are moving in the right direction but I have not been silent in trying to clarify to this Parliament what kind of a problem we had , the size of that problem and the complexity of it when we took office .
I normally characterise our foreign relations and development cooperation work by saying that it is nice that the Commission is big .
We do have a critical mass but when we look at the legacy of the past it is also true that we have a critical mess .
We are changing this gradually .
The figures mentioned by Mr Wijkman in this ongoing discussion on how much we do on health and education , the money devoted specifically to the Global Health Fund , is of course not the whole story .
We are also discussing the totality of the money being spent and I need to come back to this figure of 35 % as the target expenditure on the social sectors , which we agreed to with Parliament and which I still think is something we can deliver .
The use of the flexibility instrument for Afghanistan has already been addressed by my colleague , Mrs Schreyer .
We should normalise our development cooperation and support to Afghanistan .
The best solution would be to put it into the budget as a whole .
Still , money is needed regardless of the source , and we need to more or less mop up resources to do what needs to be done in Afghanistan .
The figure quoted by Mrs Gill on renewable energy only regards a special initiative .
The total figure for what we do in the field of energy also , especially with regard to renewable energy in development cooperation , is much bigger .
I would also point out that in Johannesburg we launched the energy initiative together with the Member States .
We have backed this up by the information that , in total , Member States and the Commission have an annual level of spending for energy-related development activities of about EUR 0.7 billion .
I note with deep satisfaction that Mrs Gill quoted my colleague , Mr Patten , on the need to focus on poverty in what we do in this whole area .
I could not agree more .
On the Global Health Fund , I can tell you that the 15 EU Member States have pledged a total of 64 % of all the pledges made in support of this fund .
We must also take this into account when taking the final decision on how much we consider adequate from the Commission for each year as we move forward .
To Mr Dell 'Alba , I would say that the aspect of human rights and the inclusion of clauses referring to human rights matters is a standard element .
If you look at the whole new generation of country strategy papers that guides what we do and creates the basis for it , country by country for the whole world - this not only applies to the ACP countries but also to Asia and Latin America , etc. these papers clearly give a strong , prominent role to the issues of governance , democratisation and human rights .
We do not yet have the same kind of mechanisms as those embedded in the Cotonou Agreement , where we have a negotiated relationship , but this whole discussion is clearly an important element in the ongoing dialogue with all our partner countries .
Finally , to Mr Paasilinna , on how to improve the TACIS programme .
In the light of the experience of Afghanistan over the last year , we are determined to step up the focus on this group of countries for reasons of conflict prevention , but certainly also because of a stronger sense of a closer neighbourly relationship with these countries .
All this is emerging , and we have long spoken about the need for redefining and updating the character of our development cooperation with these countries .
I feel confident that we will see increased activity , and I hope stronger financial activity .
As has already been mentioned , an increase of 5.4 % , giving a level of EUR 502 million , now makes this group of countries a main partner , including from a financial perspective .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
We now come to the horizontal aspects of the budget and other policies .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I shall single out two separate points which I believe are the two key points of the document .
Firstly , with regard to the equal opportunities budget itself , it is important in my view that the money intended for initiatives to promote women 's equal opportunities - initiatives taken by the NGOs - should indeed be able to be allocated in a simple manner .
The conditions now prescribed by the Commission are far too tough and far too difficult .
For example , it stipulates that the initiative should be tabled by five countries , and also that it must have a very high budget .
This is not feasible for quite a number of women 's organisations .
Hence the suggestion to admit initiatives if they involve three countries , where the budget can also be a little more restricted .
I insist that this change should be made so that the budget can be used more efficiently .
The second point of crucial importance to us is gender policy .
This should not remain confined to the equal opportunities budget ; it should be present in all of the Community 's areas of policy .
I would draw your attention to one point in particular , namely the conditions for cooperation with the developing countries at a political , economic and cultural level .
Commissioner Nielson said a moment ago that the conditions for cooperation in the field of human rights with the ACP countries , Asia and Latin America , are very stringent .
Nevertheless , I notice that when human rights are discussed , this does not always include women 's rights .
This is why we absolutely insist - and this is for us in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , and I believe also for all the women in Parliament a real must - that cooperation with countries be suspended if they fail to take measures to prevent violence against women , stoning , public chastisement , genital mutilation , cremation or rape .
We would therefore ask for aid to be abandoned in those cases .
Mr President , I have basically left it open to all members of the Budgetary Control Committee to suggest amendments in the sectors that they tend to cover .
Mr Bösch has tabled a number of amendments from the point of view of a critical friend , regarding OLAF , the Anti-Fraud Office .
We are now beginning to see the problems of the office not being completely independent of the Commission .
Accordingly , Mr Bösch 's amendments which have been adopted by the committee include questioning the mission expenses of OLAF , questioning their information and communication measures - having received a reasonable amount of money for this purpose , the office put out less than twelve press releases in both 2000 and 2001 - and indeed questioning both the Commission and OLAF over a cut .
The PDB actually cut the budget for OLAF by a substantial figure and we had no answers as to why that money had been cut .
The committee has reinstated the money cut , but has put this money into the reserve pending the answers from both those institutions .
The committee has also taken a strong view on export refunds .
There are many experts on export refunds on the committee .
I am definitely not one of those , but essentially the amendments aim for transparency and to help people like me understand the purpose , scope , cost and implementation of export refunds .
Other amendments include those on the Economic and Social Committee , cutting funds to reduce its dependence on external experts , increasing appropriations for the measures to combat counterfeiting of the euro - something I as a British Conservative have some trepidation in suggesting - and reinstating part of a cut in budget line B1-361 which seeks to improve monitoring and preventative measures in candidate countries concerning agriculture budgets .
Those are the amendments that the Budgetary Control Committee has submitted .
On behalf of the Committee Legal Affairs and the Single Market , I want to draw attention to those items affecting the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance .
It is not possible to sit through this process without realising how many desirable projects for expenditure the European Union has and that , with finite resources , all budgets have to be trimmed here and there , but Members must give very particular attention to the problem of our two courts .
The EU succeeds in being a Union under law only to the extent that it has an effective set of judicial tribunals .
This Parliament has the ambition that the Charter of Rights shall become judicially cognisable .
This is a highly desirable project but one which will put heavy demands on the judicial resources of the European Union .
The Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance both believe that they have reached the limit of their resources and that without adequate funding they will cease to be able to provide what the European Union needs .
The European Union needs efficient , well-working courts without undue delays , without delays in court dockets .
Because we are a polyglot , multilingual union , there must be speedy , clear and accurate translation of the courts ' judgments into all the languages of the European Union in order that citizens and their legal advisers throughout the European Union are up-to-date on the law of this Union and how it is properly interpreted .
If we do not reinstate the estimates that the Court of Justice itself made , we will fail more and more often .
There are very specific points : we need referendaires in the Court of First Instance because the European Union has failed to fill vacancies for judges , we need upgraded posts and we need improved translation services .
That is what the amendments by the Legal Affairs Committee amount to .
Mr President , as draftsman for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioners and my fellow Members to two fundamental aspects of the amendments we have tabled , which I hope Parliament and the Committee on Budgets will be able to accept .
The first aspect concerns the Prince programme .
This was Parliament 's main priority , which we quite rightly imposed on the Commission .
I believe this programme proved its worth in the assessment and popularisation of a number of our priorities , European priorities : the euro and other subjects have subsequently been addressed .
This year , the programme has been drastically reduced by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget , which is baffling considering that 2003 is the year in which the work of the Convention will end and that this great joint work will need to be given all the publicity and importance it deserves .
We have therefore asked for substantial funding to popularise the work of the Convention , while giving those who are against this Convention or its results the opportunity to make themselves heard - which theoretically speaking is not my case .
I am speaking out like this because I believe this programme to be important .
The other aspect concerns the Internet .
We have Europe by Satellite , our citizens already have some means of access to our work , debates and press conferences .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs is proposing to make the Internet a proper tool that enables citizens to say : ' Let 's see what they 're going to say at the Commission briefing this lunchtime ; let 's see what the Court of Justice judgement will be today ' , etc .
This programme must therefore ensure that soon , in time , the Internet becomes an important vehicle for publicising the work of all the institutions .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on Sunday 's election results in Germany .
I know this is a national event , but all of us are members or one party or another at home .
Sometimes this provides fresh impetus and then it should benefit everyone .
Of course , the framework to be set in the budget for the Committee on Petitions is relatively small .
Nonetheless , this framework is still quite important .
After all , we had more than 2100 cases last year , which the Ombudsman had to deal with .
We regard this still relatively new institution as a major step forward in guaranteeing the quality and control of the administration and citizens ' access to it .
We therefore fail to understand why our few requests relating to the coming year 's budget , which primarily concern staffing , have obviously fallen foul of the restrictions and tight constraints governing administrative expenditure .
Indeed , I have the impression that in the past , the Commission pegged future costs for the administration at an extremely low level , far too low , and that we are now having to live with the consequences of this mistake .
Ultimately , it is down to us , as Parliament , to allocate the scarce resources as fairly as possible .
I think this situation is open to severe criticism .
Our colleagues have presented their cases for their areas - the small institutions - and I hope that in future budget procedures , despite the error that arose at the advent of this financial perspective , we will be able to find a solution in our area as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me respond first to Mr Bösch 's question about the Ombudsman .
This is after all a separate plan , and one which must , of course , be managed within the constraints of category 5 if new requirements exist .
In response to Mr MacCormick 's urgent call for more posts at the European Court of Justice , let me say that the category 5 ceiling applies here too , and I would point out again that you mentioned this in connection with enlargement as well .
With enlargement , according to the financial perspective and according to Agenda 2000 , we will have more resources available in category 5 .
Our joint task at that time will be to allocate these resources appropriately .
This means that with enlargement , these restrictions will ease to some extent , taking account of the fact that in a European Union with 25 Member States , many new posts will be needed in Parliament , the Council , the European Court of Justice and , not least , the Commission .
In response to the questions and comments made by Mrs Smet , I fully endorse her view that women 's policy and equal opportunities policy must flow into all policy areas .
This is not simply a voluntary statement , although I make it quite voluntarily .
It is a binding commitment under the Treaty , and one that is taken into account quite explicitly in many policy areas .
On the issue of human rights violations , especially violence against women , let me point out that Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement also reaffirms that the equality of men and women is an integral element of human rights .
Of course , this is also a guideline for all measures in the area of category 4 .

In response to Mr Heaton-Harris 's question on the OLAF budget , and why the Commission has introduced a cut in the PDB of around EUR 700 000 compared with 2002 , this is actually a technical adjustment .
In 2002 , Parliament amended the establishment plan , compared with the Commission 's proposal , resulting in more ' B ' posts instead of ' A ' posts .
Naturally , ' B ' posts cost less than ' A ' posts . This was not accounted for in 2002 , but it has been accounted for in the preliminary draft for the year 2003 .
In other words , this is not a cut but an adjustment , although I would point out to the President-in-Office that during its first reading , the Council has now introduced a real cut which will have to be discussed .
Let me add that in our call for additional posts in preparation for enlargement - posts which are not yet secure , although I greatly appreciate Parliament 's efforts in this area - additional posts are envisaged for OLAF as well .
With your permission , Mr Heaton-Harris , I will refer your questions on export refunds to my colleague Mr Fischler later .

Mr President , Commissioner , the different effects of our budget decisions on women and men have scarcely featured in our debate today .
For years , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has put forward proposals during the budget procedure to take account of the different impacts of our decisions on women and men .
We have been successful in the field of employment policy and the Structural Funds , where gender mainstreaming is now enshrined as a principle .
In foreign policy , too , gender sensitivity is increasing .
In the context of aid to Afghanistan , targeted measures have thus been introduced to reintegrate women into public life and restore their human rights .
We have achieved successes in combating trafficking in human beings , which is a modern form of slavery .
Violence against women has also become an issue in the budget .
Nonetheless , the STOP and DAPHNE programmes must not be used simply to carry out representative events .
Ultimately , just 13 % of the projects can be funded , which is why the NGOs must be given direct assistance .
Gender budgeting must become even more of a theme than is currently the case .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities is working on an own-initiative report on this issue .
A word of criticism on the practice governing the allocation of funds as well : all too often - for example , in town twinning or the NGOs - it generates a great deal of resentment .
There is much frustration among active Europeans .
If on the one hand , we ensure that we do not spend any more on tobacco cultivation and we dismantle bureaucratic hurdles in this area , we cannot then put up similar hurdles in the way of the NGOs .
I ask for your support .
Mr President , I would still like to raise a couple of points .
Employment is an important issue .
Unemployment is on the increase in the EU .
It is in small and medium-sized enterprises in particular that jobs are created .
Unfortunately , fear of distorting competition often hinders even rational action .
For that reason , competition law should be interpreted more freely in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises .
This would mean , for example , that the Structural Funds could be used more effectively to prevent unemployment .
The Northern Dimension is a major premise in the political field .
The Commission has mainly focused on two issues : environmental protection and nuclear safety .
We would like to extend this list .
The Northern Dimension offers immense potential in the area of energy policy .
The natural gas deposits in the Arctic Ocean will be of vital importance to the EU in the future .
We should just ensure that the links that are to be built should , as far as possible , pass through EU territory .
The Northern Dimension also offers immense scope for cooperation in the field of cultural and research policy and higher education .
The ELDR is strongly in favour of reforming the Commission 's administration and pruning bureaucracy .
The importance of that was reflected in the debate on the Structural Funds .
Administrative costs should be in reasonable proportion to the operating appropriations used .
Mr President , Commissioner , unfortunately , you have not had the opportunity yet - and I am pleased to give you this opportunity now - to reply to my earlier questions about the 500 new positions , the lack of manpower to monitor compliance with environmental legislation and also to the question of whether candidate countries should get the bureaucratic red-tape underway as early as 2003 to apply for Structural Funds so as to guarantee the highest possible level of implementation in 2004 .
My other question in this area , and also my concern , relates to small projects , to which Mrs Smet has already referred .
Everyone will agree that tax money must be spent wisely .
It is true that the evaluation of small projects requires a relatively great deal of manpower for relatively small amounts of money .
However , these projects are often important , for example , for society in the developing countries .
This is why I am hoping for a proposal from the Commission for such things as the transfer of more operational powers to the external offices , less bureaucracy , less stringent requirements and , for example , for parliamentary delegations to have political control over the choice of those projects .
Is this a proposal that you will be looking to develop further ?
Mr President , thank you for amending the list of speakers so that I could rise as well .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is very concerned about the fact that at the European Court of Justice , there continues to be a massive backlog of translation work .
What does this mean in practice ?
Let 's assume that in a specific case , proceedings have ended and a judgment has been handed down .
As the Court of Justice - unlike other Community institutions - does not publish its decisions until they are available in all the Community languages , the backlog of translations means that the finished judgments stay in a drawer at the ECJ for between one and two years until they can be published .
This is an untenable situation , in my view .
It is also increasingly viewed as a problem by the national courts in the Member States , since in the case of preliminary rulings , the proceedings in the European Court of Justice are merely interim proceedings in the successive stages of appeal through the national courts .
This means that these two years do not complete the proceedings ; these two years are in addition to the duration of proceedings in the Member State .
We therefore call for adequate resources to be made available in order to bring this untenable situation to an end .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is also responsible for issues relating to the internal market and enlargement .
We have always focussed particularly on the specific challenges facing the internal market as a result of enlargement , especially for border regions .
We therefore fully endorse the amendments which aim to ensure that in line with last year 's pledge , the funding for the pilot programme for SMEs is pegged at EUR 15 million .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as early as the part-session last May , I expressed my concerns during the debate following the presentation of the 2003 PDB about a budgetary procedure which was proving , yet again , to be utterly inadequate to meet the needs of our Union .
In May , my criticism of the Commission was based on two considerations : the level of RALs and heading 5 .
In July , Parliament and the Council came to an agreement on heading 5 which rejects the Commission 's request for more staff to deal with the challenges of enlargement in an attempt to balance the accounts .
I would rather not return to the subject of the RALs because time is lacking and because none of us wishes to hear information which we know to be completely unviable financially but which , nevertheless , is produced year after year in the budgetary procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , at the risk of repeating myself , I have to say once again that all this is quite ridiculous .
Here I am yet again , calling upon this House and , through this House , upon the Council and the Commission to give due consideration to the possibility of revising the financial perspective , which , on the basis of my relatively little experience , appears to be the only conceivable sensible and responsible political move we can make .
Article 19 of the 1999 Interinstitutional Agreement states clearly that the financial perspective can be revised on the proposal of the Commission in the event of unforeseen circumstances , and what could have been less foreseeable than the impending enlargement of the Union to include 25 Member States in 2004 ?
I must stress : over the next three years , up until 2006 , we will have to establish the budget for a 25-Member-State Union according to a financial perspective calculated on the basis of the needs of a 21-Member-State Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , where is the sense in all this ?
Why are we continuing along this absurd path ?
My proposal is , therefore , as follows . After the December Council , which will have to establish which and how many States are to enter the European Union in time for the European elections in 2004 , the Commission should present a proposal for revision of the financial perspective , a proposal which the two arms of the budgetary authority will have ample time to adopt - in accordance with Article 20 of the Interinstitutional Agreement - before the start of the 2004 budgetary procedure .
I feel that this is the only path we can take , the only path which , with due regard for budgetary rigour , will allow us to continue to do our job properly .
I do not feel that the solutions hitherto adopted have yielded sufficiently positive results , and whereas , thus far , we have only had to explain them to citizens who are , at heart , well-disposed towards us , whereas , thus far , we have only had to uphold them before voters who are , paradoxically , almost more European than we are , in a few months we will have to explain them to people who have suffered just to be part of this Union and who will view us with an extremely critical , vigilant eye , with even closer scrutiny than the current Member States , to see whether or not we have done a good job .
Mr President , Commissioner , when we see the Commission produce a proposal for which we in this Parliament have been fighting , such as the creation of a solidarity fund for communities affected by natural disasters , we must of course offer our most sincere congratulations .
Some items in this proposal , however , are somewhat confusing , and I should like the Commissioner to clarify them .
Firstly , why did the Commission decide to extend the coverage of this type of disaster in its proposal , to disasters of an environmental and technological nature ?
Secondly , the Structural Fund must under no circumstances be confused with this solidarity fund .
This makes it hard to see on what basis the Structural Funds fall under this regulation .
Would a general rule that cautioned against the dual use of the solidarity fund with measures already funded by any other instrument not suffice ?
Thirdly , the reference to absolute costs of disasters makes no sense , because this of course most benefits the large economies and , furthermore , it is hard to understand why no reference is made to the financial capacity of each State as a criterion for the aid to be granted by the Community .
Lastly and most crucially , we fail to understand why the regulation gives no consideration to a clear typology for the situation of outermost regions that have been most badly affected by natural disasters and I would ask the Commissioner how they can , in fact , be covered by this proposal .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me quickly run through just a few points regarding the 2003 budget procedure .
Topic number one - since it occupied our minds yet again this week , as the President-in-Office can testify - is the European Union 's aid to ameliorate the damage caused by the catastrophic floods in Europe .
This House agreed what was really quite a good strategy a few weeks ago .
Sadly , we have been unable to push this through in the negotiations with the Council .
However , I have a specific request to the President-in-Office : please ensure that all the pledges you made to us yesterday in the trialogue , especially as regards the timetable , are upheld in practice . After all , the emergency assistance which we are seeking to provide will lose its impact if - due to your failure to keep your promises - we cannot pay out the money until Christmas .
This would be unfair to the people and the victims of these floods .
The PPE group 's other idea has already been presented to you by the chairman of our working party , James Elles .
I shall pick out just a few of the points here .
Commissioner , I recall very clearly that at the start of its term in office , the Commission made various promises about all the things it wanted to do better , especially its plans to reform and improve the Commission 's functions and working methods .
Three years down the line , it is clear that this reforming zeal has now subsided somewhat .
This being the case , it is down to Parliament to provide something of an incentive and motivate you to keep up the pace of reform .
We therefore say ' yes ' to additional posts , but initially in the reserve , and we expect a detailed timetable to be presented , showing how you intend to use your remaining two years in office to complete the reform of the Commission .
This was what you promised three years ago , and alongside all the other matters which must be dealt with during your term in office , you must carry this through , for it was a key element of the mandate given to us by citizens at the 1999 European elections .
In the area of the trans-European networks - to turn to my second topic - we would particularly like to ensure that the bottlenecks with the Central and Eastern European countries are removed .
I therefore ask you , Commissioner , to devise proposals for the Member States which are directly affected as countries bordering the candidate countries , so that the resources from the budget lines can be used specifically to remove these bottlenecks .
I think it is very important for enlargement to take place on a real and practical basis by establishing an appropriate cross-border infrastructure with the Central and Eastern European countries .
Topic number three : let me briefly address the issue of the Palestinian Authority .
We have tabled an amendment which states that funds should be put on reserve here .
We want to ensure that European taxes are used in a proper manner .
As yet , the International Monetary Fund has been unable to confirm that in terms of control of expenditure , it is doing all that we expect to be done as a matter of course when European funds are being used .
Lastly , a key priority area for us is the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The President-in-Office is already aware of my request .
It is rather depressing to hold a conciliation procedure at the end of July while everyone else was on holiday , only to find that the Council then fails to honour the agreements we made .
I find this very disappointing .
My request is that as set out in the statement adopted during the conciliation procedure , there will be ' appropriate involvement of the Parliament in respect of such matters under the CFSP ' .
We have tabled an amendment which is designed to point a way forward here , and I ask for your support .
From next week , we will have to discuss in detail what we want to do during the 2003 budget procedure .
The PPE is prepared to engage in constructive cooperation with the other groups .
I hope that we will then be successful , through our joint efforts , in achieving progress on these important issues .
Mr President , A-3021 - what is that all about ?
In Volume IV , Section III - I have great understanding for Commissioners who have to deal in billions - we find budget heading A-3021 : grants for European study groups and organisations advancing the idea of Europe .
What a daft idea !
Why ?
Because , I believe , it is symptomatic of the processes which result in many European citizens assuming that you have to have a friend who has a friend in order to get money out of Brussels .
One of the previous speakers said that people think that the streets of Brussels are paved with cash .
People who genuinely try it know that this is not the case , but that , if you do know the friend of a friend , you are getting close .
Budget heading A-3021 bears ample witness to this .
It lists some organisations but not others .
An amendment by us , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which was intended to guarantee transparency by ensuring that the Commission applies the guidelines on assistance and subsidies and safeguards equal treatment of applicants and organisations , has been rejected .
That is a tragedy .
I wish this situation could be changed , for there can be no democracy without transparency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start with the questions and statements from Mrs Gröner regarding the perusal of the budget . She asked how many measures are targeted directly at women and to what extent programmes include specific equality-oriented elements .
Let me point out once again that we have taken this into account explicitly in many of the budget figures and included it explicitly in many of the programmes .
You referred to ' gender budgeting ' and I would like to take this up .
Indeed , my plan for the future is that we will also use our own very precise rules , which we have established for the accounting process , to provide further answers here .
It is the case , of course , that payments can only be made to a beneficiary if he or she is recorded in the appropriate register .
Up to now , we still have no record of gender , but this is a step that should be taken .
I hope that on International Women 's Day next year , I will be able to report on progress here !
Now to the issue of staffing and personnel expenditure , which was just raised by Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Escobar .
Firstly , with regard to Mrs Buitenweg 's question concerning the proposed use of the additional posts for the year 2003 , I can say that this is correct .
These 500 posts that we have applied for are to be allocated entirely to preparations for enlargement .
However , there are to be personnel increases for the other priorities too - such as sustainable development and security - and this should take place through reallocation of staff in-house , within and between the services .
In line with the Commission 's proposal , this means that we can then ensure , through administrative measures , that 149 posts can be made available additionally for the ' sustainable development ' priority .
For the area of environmental protection , together with the posts for enlargement , the proposal now provides for 33 more places for the Directorate-General .
I think this shows very clearly , yet again , where the priorities are being set .
As regards the use of the 717 posts which you approved for us in the last two years , the focus here has been on foreign policy .
Almost 300 posts have been created in this area in order to improve implementation of the external assistance programmes .
From the figures on implementation which are circulated to you each week , you can see that real and substantive improvements have been made here , with the 300 posts in this area having a clear impact .
This is also apparent in other areas , such as competition etc .
I would like to respond to Mr Virrankoski - and the appeal to improve the situation of SMEs came from several Members of this House - as follows : we have earmarked EUR 66 million specifically for this budget line , but SMEs can of course also secure funding via the Structural Funds and via loan programmes for which assistance is provided from various budget lines .
Mr Würmeling , you called for appropriate resources for the European Court of Justice and drew specific attention to the fact that the European Court has to work in many different languages and that its judgments must also be translated into the relevant languages .
There has been a strong increase in resources for the Court in recent years , thanks to the efforts of Mr Ferber , the rapporteur for this area , who has lobbied hard and very successfully for an increase in funding in recent years .
Mr Turchi , you stated , in the context of enlargement , that there must be an adjustment of the financial perspective .
This will indeed be our joint task for 2004 since the adjustment of the perspective must then be shaped in such as way as to ensure that we distribute the resources from category 8 appropriately to the other measures .
After all , the negotiations on the enlargement budget are now well under way .
The budget authority must then undertake the appropriate adjustment for the year 2004 , so we will all be looking at this issue during the course of 2003 .
I would like to thank Mr Garriga Polledo once again for his comments on personnel .
With regard to the reform of the Commission , we will of course be very pleased to submit a report to you again on progress made with regard to the implementation of the various measures agreed in the White Paper and which are supported by Parliament .
The President-in-Office will doubtless make a statement on the disaster fund in a moment .
However , I should like to reiterate that we are in an unusual situation here because the task is to create a completely new instrument .
If we do succeed in establishing all the legal bases for this new instrument by the end of this October , this really will be a record performance .
I think I have answered Mr Medina Ortega 's questions in connection with the European Court of Justice .
As regards the implementation of the various measures , I think we should also discuss the report on the Structural Funds in more detail in the Committee on Budgets .
I would just point out that in 2002 , we will not have the surplus which we had in 2001 , since far more resources are being used in the area of agricultural policy than was the case last year , and also because my colleague Mr Fischler responded very quickly by adopting the measures necessary to provide prompt assistance to the regions where farmers suffered losses as a result of the floods , or to other areas .
The EUR 900 million to be used for this mean that the budget surplus here will be lower .
It will be lower in the structural policy field , and we will also be using part of the surplus to finance the disaster relief fund .
Mr Casaca , you and other speakers this evening have raised this issue , and the President-in-Office will underline this once more in a moment : in the debate about the legal basis - in other words , when do we refer to a disaster , when will assistance be provided , and what conditions will apply - the President-in-Office has agreed that there will be a conciliation procedure in due course here too .
There is just one further point to be mentioned : Mr Martin , you called for the subsidies to institutions which promote the European idea to be distributed in a different way so that there is no earmarking here .
All I can say is that this is a decision for the European Parliament .
The Commission has put forward a different proposal here .
We will also have to decide on a legal basis , but in this respect , I interpret your appeal as a call to your colleagues in this House .
Thank you very much for your attention .
Thank you , Commissioner Schreyer .
We now come to the reform of the agricultural policy .
Mr President , I am pleased to see Commissioner Fischler here , but some of the comments I have to make will also refer to Commissioner Byrne 's portfolio .
I was astounded to read a letter in the Financial Times yesterday , from Hervé Gaymond , the French Agriculture Minister , and six other agriculture ministers .
It was entitled ' The CAP is something to be proud of ' .
I was one of 400 000 countryside marchers in London on Sunday who would not agree .
Subsidies have not delivered prosperity and security for British farmers ; in fact , often subsidies and quotas are being capitalised into the high cost base of our industry .
The letter reminded me of a drug addict in denial , addicted to subsidies .
Rather than trying to kick the habit , they want to offer pills to the Eastern European countries waiting outside the school gates to get them hooked too .
The CAP needs reform before enlargement , in particular , we should stop the hypocrisy of subsidising tobacco to the tune of over EUR 1 billion per year .
The Environment Committee has also asked for 50 % of the budget for the European Food Safety Authority to be put into the reserve .
I hope this will be recognised by the Council as a clear signal that they should end the uncertainty about its location , which is making it so difficult for this embryonic institution to recruit staff and develop as an effective agency .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when we are debating the revision of the common fisheries policy , the budget for 2003 assumes particular importance , and so we hope that the Commission will provide the budgetary authority with information on the budgetary impact of the revision , as the Committee on Fisheries recommends in the opinion that it adopted for the Committee on Budgets .
In any event , we must now guarantee the use of a flexibility instrument for the EUR 27 million that will be used to fund the specific measure of promoting the reconversion of the ships and fishermen that until 1999 depended on the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco , covered by the heading on the structural measures of the financial perspectives under heading B2-200 of the draft budget for 2003 .
In its opinion of 11 September on the budget for 2003 , the Committee on Fisheries declared itself in favour of protecting the use of flexibility instrument for the PTE 27 billion for this funding , but as to the proposal to use the EUR 32 million for the funding of additional measures to destroy fishing boats in line with the Commission proposal on the revision of the common fisheries policy , the majority of Members of this House declared themselves against , since the entire issue is currently being debated and since the information we have is incomplete .
The disagreement about any attempt to reprogramme or redistribute FIFG appropriations was also reaffirmed as was the principle that new means must be provided for new needs in order to protect the importance of the strategic sector of fisheries for the Community in general and for certain countries and regions in particular , given the deep-rooted link certain local and regional communities have with fishing .
Other proposals crucial to the fisheries sector were also adopted , amongst which I would highlight the following : the creation of a Community support programme for coastal and small-scale fishing ; increasing aid to the outermost regions ; aid to aquiculture and to the processing industry , principally the canning industry ; support for improving the monitoring of products that are placed on the market and support for improving and standardising control and monitoring systems and the increase in inspections and monitoring of fisheries activity .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , Commissioner Fischler , it is apparent yet again from today 's discussion that some people are keen to feather their nests from the agricultural budget .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - and I myself - do not believe that too much money is flowing into agriculture and Europe 's rural regions .
The money may not be flowing into the right channels , but that is why there is a need for reform .
We therefore oppose linear cuts because we believe that what is required are not linear cuts but qualified measures .
Of course , a key element in this context is to dispense with export subsidies in a region which is one of the largest importers in the world .
We would like to see the option of a transfer from the first to the second pillar .
To this end , it is essential that we have co-decision rights in respect of the obligatory expenditure as well .
That is an urgent requirement .
We have specifically adopted amendments which go beyond the Institutional Agreement because we want to force a new agreement and debate .
Mr Fischler , these needs are also identified in your reform proposals .
The financial perspective must be amended .
We would therefore like to support this .
We will undoubtedly get bogged down in discussions again later , but we think this is acceptable in principle .
With regard to the transfer to the second pillar , let me point out again that we have re-introduced our INPART programme .
The name has been changed .
We are now calling it LEADER-EAST , since we have progressed further along the road to enlargement .
However , we still endorse the concept of establishing a bottom-up programme for the new Member States as well .
Finally , we would like genetic resources to be transferred to the non-obligatory part .
You are familiar with the issues .
I think that the Commission will go along with this .
We simply have to try and find sufficient funds here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to express my warm thanks to the honourable Members for making it possible , for the first time , for us to debate next year 's budget in Parliament even before the formal procedure begins .
As far as agriculture and rural development are concerned , I am pleased to see that a series of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development call for the appropriations in heading 1a to be restored to the level proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget , and that there is a desire to reverse the cuts made across the board by the Council .
I explicitly welcome the reinstatement of these appropriations and should like in addition to underline that the Commission 's PDB had already provided for a margin of EUR 2.26 billion below the financial perspective ceiling that was set in Berlin .
As you know , at the end of October the Commission will be tabling a letter of amendment to the PDB for the EAGGF Guarantee Section so as to take account of the very latest macroeconomic forecasts and recent legislative developments .
Today it is certainly still too early to quantify precisely the changes that could be proposed , but I can tell you which factors will be taken into consideration .
Firstly , the devaluation of the US dollar compared with the euro will mean an increase in commitment appropriations , in particular for export refunds and some other payments .
Secondly , the market situation in a number of sectors has unfortunately not improved since the preliminary draft budget was presented .
This is the case in particular for milk and milk products , which is precisely the sector that has not yet undergone reform .
Thirdly , and conversely , funds for direct payments in the arable crops sector will be cut in 2003 .
This follows on from the decisions we took in the summer in connection with the regions in Italy that were hit by severe drought and then the areas affected by the catastrophic flooding in Germany .
In these cases , as you know , we have brought forward advance payments to the 2002 budget year and this is , after all , over EUR 900 million which will , as a result , no longer be needed in the 2003 budget .
I would repeat , however , that this can only be a general indication of the content of the letter of amendment ; it is too early to anticipate what it will say .
For the purpose of the first reading of the draft budget the assumptions on the basis of which it was drawn up will obviously still apply .
Allow me also briefly to address the question , which I am asked so frequently , of the extent to which the proposals made in the context of the mid-term review will impact on the 2003 budget .
To be quite plain , not at all , because the mid-term review can only come into force in 2004 and no legislative changes will therefore be made in the coming year which will make it possible to change the budget .
In its motion , the Agriculture Committee calls for funds to be made available to European farmers in compensation for the extreme weather conditions by , for example , using the surplus in the current marketing year or by creating a disaster relief fund in heading 1b .
I have already mentioned that we have brought forward significant payments in the arable crops sector .
This actually ought to have the effect of substantially reducing the anticipated margin in the current agriculture budget .
As far as a disaster relief fund is concerned , the Commission has already proposed the creation of a solidarity fund , of at least EUR 500 million this year , but of EUR one billion in 2003 , and a decision should be taken quickly on this .
I would support the point made by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that greater effort should be made to safeguard and improve the quality of agricultural products .
However , this is not a matter that can be resolved in the context of the 2003 budget ; it requires a longer-term strategy , the very strategy that we have set out in the mid-term review .
It ought to be possible to achieve this in particular by changing the form and orientation of the support given to agriculture , for example by applying the principle of cross-compliance and by striking a better balance between the two pillars of the common agricultural policy .
I should also like very briefly , since Mrs Figueiredo addressed this , to mention three issues in connection with fisheries policy .
The first is the need to keep the budget for external fisheries policy , which mainly consists of estimated costs of fisheries protocols , at current levels .
At its first reading , the Council retained the figures in the preliminary draft budget .
This is also absolutely essential if the Community is to be able to continue its fishing activities in third countries .
The letter of amendment in the autumn will go into more detail on how the funds are to be split between the budget line and the reserve .
In this context , I also welcome the support for our external fisheries policy , and in particular the fisheries agreements , that was voiced by the rapporteurs of the Budgets and Fisheries Committees .
The second issue is the payment of the second instalment to the Spanish and Portuguese fleets that used to fish in Moroccan waters .
This is the EUR 27 million .
The Commission made an initial proposal in its preliminary draft budget , but so far this has not received the support of the budgetary authority .
For the time being , however , the Commission does not see any alternative to using the flexibility instrument either .
The third issue is the impact of the reform on the budget , which will , by and large , be modest .
The only proposal was to increase the scrapping fund by EUR 32 million .
This would have an impact on the 2003 budget .
The main problem with this fund is not its size but the budgetary framework .
Here too the Commission has made a proposal in the letter of amendment to use the flexibility instrument .
On the issues raised by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf in connection with export subsidies , I can only make proposals on the basis of existing legislation .
I cannot work on the basis of possibilities that might arise at some point in the future .
As far as codecision for compulsory expenditure is concerned , this question first needs to be referred to the Convention .
It would require the Treaties to be amended accordingly .
Only then would it be possible to meet your request , but I should like to stress that the Commission shares the view that in future , agricultural policy and fisheries policy should be included under the codecision procedure .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , Commissioner Fischler , it is undoubtedly a great opportunity to take part in this new debate and also to take the floor under the sub-heading of reform of the common agricultural policy in the context of the 2003 budget .
In my view - and this is a view shared by the majority of the Agriculture Committee - the 2003 budget , which is the subject of today 's debate , is not the right context in which to discuss reform of the common agricultural policy .
Neither is a debate assessing Commissioner Fischler 's proposals on the mid-term review on today 's agenda .
Instead we should focus on the actual budgetary figures for the coming year and here there are two essential points which most definitely require a clear decision from us .
Firstly , the Council is proposing a general reduction of 0.8 % or 0.6 % across all 1a lines , which amounts to a cut of EUR 275 million .
Secondly , in the Agriculture Committee , our colleagues from the Greens proposed a drastic cut in export refunds ; to be more precise they wanted to reduce all export refunds to zero .
Neither of these proposals can be right today .
It would send out the wrong signal .
Accordingly , in a vote on a proposal tabled by the PPE Group , the Agriculture Committee rejected both proposals by a majority .
I am quite happy - and this may be a perfectly sensible course of action - to consider moving funds from the first to the second pillar , but only in the context of a dedicated debate on the mid-term review and on a codecision basis .
Every year , to the great delight of the Member States , huge sums of money flow back to them from the agriculture budget .
At present , the utilisation rate of the 2002 agriculture budget lines is around 80 % .
The reality of the situation does indeed support the call for better management and optimal use of agricultural funds .
To mention the example of export refunds once more , this is another area where a great deal more could be done .
For these reasons we , along with the majority of the Committee on Agriculture , are against anticipating the results of the mid-term review .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , let me make it clear from the outset that on the whole we support the proposals on the mid-term review ; even though they will not affect the 2003 budget , they appear to be the right steps in the right direction .
Of course there are still a number of points that would merit further discussion .
This is after all unquestionably a proposal for debate .
What will be decisive for us , however , will also be the extent to which we will be able to transfer funds that have not been used in the first pillar to the second pillar in forthcoming budgets , and that also includes the 2003 budget , because the development of rural areas is something that we are of course all concerned about and it will certainly be an absolutely decisive factor in the future .
The question is whether there is already any prospect now of going beyond the Interinstitutional Agreement and implementing this .
A further question is of course : how much progress has been made with implementing the SAPARD programme , Commissioner ?
What is the position with this LEADER-EAST programme , formerly known as INPART ?
I should also like to mention this once more .
It is also interesting for farmers to know - and you have only given vague hints about this in the mid-term review - what the future holds for the tobacco , sugar and milk sectors .
What is going to happen about quotas in the milk sector ?
This too is a very important question .
As far as cofinancing is concerned , I should like to ask you to comment on this once more : this is an area where we certainly need greater flexibility .
Mr President , stock exchanges have crashed , reversing the apparent miracle of the new economy and decimating workers ' savings to the advantage of big business .
Leaving aside for the moment the fact that it is inhumane , the threat of war with Iraq is pushing oil prices up and boosting inflationary pressures .
Economic results , especially in the manufacturing sector , are disappointing to say the least .
Capitalism is in a state of deep crisis ; all it can do now is cling to the stability pact and anti-labour policies , chip away at workers ' rights and their standard of living and pensions , cut farmers ' incomes and choke the life out of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The European Union budget for 2003 is yet another example of this anti-grass roots policy in practice .
Instead of redistributing any income , given that it accounts for less than 1.01 % of Community GDP , it throws even more money at monopolies and at imperialist plans to suppress and exploit the people .
A typical example is the agricultural economy : not only does the Community budget do nothing to reverse the decline in income of poor average farmers , who are being driven from the land in droves , but the system of prices and subsidies guarantees cheap raw materials and higher profits for the tobacco and other industries which process their products .
The common agricultural policy and quotas have created a huge , EUR 25 billion trade deficit in the European Union , jobs are being lost and unemployment is rising .
The objectives of big business for 2003 are obvious from the relative reduction in the amounts proposed , at a time when peoples ' needs are increasing , unemployment is rising , the environment is being destroyed and so-called globalisation is giving rise to new forms of exploitation and spreading poverty and hunger across the planet .
The limited sums available for structural policies , the reduction in agricultural spending and the funds earmarked for the common foreign policy , defence and security typify the aggressive attitude of capital towards the people and the role which the European Union is being called on to play as the sidekick of the USA as it polices the world .
We are opposed to this policy and to the methods applied by big business .
We reject the modus operandi of the monopolies , we are fighting with the workers to overturn these plans and we demand a different sort of policy , a policy which will bring about economic prosperity for the workers and secure their rights .
Mr President , Commissioners , I have five very specific questions to ask .
Why is the Commission proposing the reform of the CFP , which , as everyone knows , is planned for 2002 , without a budget of its own ?
It should be rejected for this reason alone ...
Why is the Commission attempting to devote the entire FIFG fund to the reduction , which has no legal base , when the legal provisions on the change in the socio-economic situation of the labour market are not being complied with , despite having been agreed on , and even put forward by the Member States ?
Why is the Commission banning fleet modernisation , whenever this is required , as in any other economic sector ?
Why is there no budget for economic and social measures to compensate for the effects of the reform ?
Why is the Commission thinking of reducing the fleet by eight thousand vessels when the reform 's effects on the Mediterranean , which is home to a large part of the European fleet , are still not known ?
Mr President , I would like to commend the various rapporteurs and draftsmen on their excellent work on the 2003 budget .
As regards the proposals for agricultural spending in the coming year , I note that the preliminary draft budget adopted by the Commission leaves a margin of EUR 2.3 billion under the ceiling agreed by the financial perspective .
We are all aware of the current difficulties faced by farmers .
Many colleagues come from Member States which were this summer struck by floods and landslides .
Many farmers lost crops , animals and even their homes .
The emergency aid voted through will go some way to help alleviate the problems faced .
However , we should not be thinking of cutting back on farm expenditure and need to avail of the ample margins available to us .
In my own country , Ireland , there has been an almost 20 % drop in farm incomes this year when inflation is factored in .
In the industrial and service sector such a cut would never be accepted but farmers are expected to put up with the vagaries of world market prices which are currently at rock bottom across a range of commodities .
In this respect , it is totally unacceptable that the Council has proposed an across-the-board reduction in agricultural spending in comparison with that which the Commission has proposed .
The attempt by the Council to shave EUR 275 million off market expenditure in such hard-hit sectors as arable crops , milk , beef and mutton and lamb is completely out of order under the current climate .
As far as my own group is concerned , we have tabled a series of amendments which seek to undo some of the potential damage .
I would highlight the number of lines where we believe there is a need to strengthen existing schemes .
The school milk scheme , for example , has proved itself to be highly effective and must be continued and expanded .
Similarly , installation aid for young farmers is a key component in ensuring the future of farming , particularly in the more isolated regions which have a structure of small family farms .
Farming needs to be made an attractive career prospect and if we are to bring young qualified people into the profession , a failure to do so will lead to further depopulation of rural areas to the point where certain rural communities will no longer be sustainable .
This has negative consequences also for urban areas .
I also strongly support information actions on the common agricultural policy .
It is important to get the message across to European citizens that we are all beneficiaries of the European model of farming .
What we are paying for is an agriculture that is environmentally sound , guarantees the highest levels of food safety and traceability and upholds standards of animal welfare .
Mr President , this year , once again , the agriculture budget has been subject to a certain amount of rigour which I believe reflects certain political views rather than the true situation of the agriculture sector .
Apart from this reservation , maintaining a margin of EUR 2.3 billion below the financial perspectives could be justified .
But is the Commission prepared to mobilise these funds swiftly should the markets become stagnant ?
Let us take as an example the appropriations allocated to eradicating epizootic diseases and to the Emergency Veterinary Fund .
These were severely reduced even though so much remains to be done , both in the field of prevention and in terms of research .
The year 2003 will be characterised by an evolving CAP .
Half way through , the Commission turned the review into a proposal for fundamental reform , which appears to ignore farmers and their wellbeing and turn them into mere tools .
I believe this departure , which consists of divesting the CAP of any substance in the name of a so-called rural development policy , is a mistake , and I would like to hear the Commission 's reply to the following questions .
Given that we originally chose a common agricultural policy , do you not think that it is the Union 's responsibility to pay at least as much attention to this sector as the United States , by allocating the corresponding financial means , rather than aiming to match world prices ?
How can we ensure that the ambition of European rural development does not encroach upon national and local competence in the field of land use planning ?
Is this not a way of promoting environmental concerns which are addressed under another budgetary heading ?
I wonder if this is really the role of the CAP .
Do you think we can simultaneously try to bring our prices into line with world prices and increase production costs , while contenting ourselves with applying a ' communicating vessels ' policy to the first and second pillars ?
On the subject of CAP reform , I would like to speak out against the all too frequent tendency of this House to criticise the size of our EU agriculture budgets .
It angers me to hear that it is scandalous for the Union to devote 45 % of its budget to agriculture .
In fact , this 45 % only represents 3 % of the public budgets of the Union and the Member States .
3 % of public budgets allocated to 5 % of the population , 3 % of public budgets allocated to 60 % of EU territory , 3 % of public budgets allocated to our food , our food safety , maintaining agricultural revenue and to the orientation of agriculture markets .
3 % of public budgets allocated to agriculture is less than the percentage in the United States .
According to the OECD , US agricultural policy costs USD 338 per taxpayer in comparison with USD 276 in the European Union .
So , just as our US counterparts , in view of the failure of their previous agricultural act , the Fair Act , have decided to increase aid to agriculture by 70 % at a time when some countries have the advantage of large areas of land , using advanced agricultural technologies , benefiting from extremely low labour costs , and implementing dumping policies that destabilise prices world-wide , we should not call into question the Berlin agreements by wanting to impose a reduction in our agriculture budgets within the EU .
Nor must we let it be said that our agriculture budgets are an obstacle to progress in developing countries .
Our CAP and the associated budgets offset the social and environmental restrictions we impose on our farmers , and aim to provide them with a comparable quality of life to that of the rest of the Union 's population .
The developing countries , and in particular the poorest among them , have a high proportion of poor peasant farmers , and what these poor farmers need is not increased liberalism placing them in competition with largescale high-tech farming throughout the world , but , on the contrary , to be able to increase their productivity by selling their food products on regional or national markets .
We must not aim for the wrong target . It is not our so-called protectionism that is causing poor third-world farmers to starve , but , on the contrary , dogmatic free trade aimed at placing farmers with vastly differing levels of technology and productivity in competition with each other .
This , appropriately , was what the Senegalese and Indian Ministers for Agriculture were saying at Johannesburg .
Lastly , if we really want to reduce the public budgets allocated to agriculture , it is perhaps time to reopen discussions on Community preference , by defining a new , updated Community preference system that would allow the extra cost imposed on our agriculture sector by our high food safety , social , environmental and animal welfare requirements to be absorbed internally into the agriculture prices on the Community market .
In order to do this , Mr President , Commissioners , we must firmly turn our back on the aberrant dogma of world prices .
Mr President , we have a Commissioner for Agriculture and Fisheries who - and I am now talking as my group 's shadow rapporteur for the fisheries budget - is at any rate decisive and , if you will allow me a personal comment , has guts , courage and a proven vision in terms of the EU 's enlargement .
As for fisheries , this Commissioner has also launched far-reaching proposals aimed at sustainable fisheries , that are also in line with the agreements made at the Johannesburg Summit finally to reach true sustainable fisheries .
At the same time , there is something lacking there ; I note with regard to the fisheries budget that this decisiveness is not translated into major shifts or priorities in the fisheries budget up to 2003 .
You could , of course , claim that the fisheries policy is only partly being launched , but I should nevertheless like to mention a few points concerning the fisheries policy .
Parliament and the Council have indicated that we consider it important , as a result of the failure in Spain of the fisheries agreements with Morocco , that money be set aside for the regions in question .
The Committee on Fisheries insists on this being done .
Secondly , we are facing far-reaching decisions .
This means that the responsibility of fishermen is considerable and that producer groups in the fisheries sector deserve extra support in this .
We have tabled specific amendments in this area too and would greatly appreciate it if the Commission were to adopt them .
Thirdly , far-reaching decisions in the fisheries sector also means that a number of regions will actually be affected .
I would refer to cod fishing in Scotland , but also to areas along the North Sea .
This means that employment , namely indirect employment in the ports and indirect employment in the fish-processing industry , will be badly affected in those regions .
In this respect , Europe needs to invest to create replacement employment , also in terms of sustainability in those regions .
We would , in this connection , like the Commission seriously to consider , and subsequently adopt , a number of amendments tabled by the Committee on Fisheries .
Mr President , Commissioners , have no fear , I am neither a fisherwoman nor a farmer .
Neither do I wish to comment on the reform of agricultural policy .
My contribution will be confined to reiterating yet again my request for cofinancing .
I have been asking for this for three years now .
That should be enough !
I am here as a Member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and as a shadow rapporteur .
The person I am shadowing , Robert Goodwill - who is the rapporteur for the budget - has already left .
All of the areas of agricultural policy on which I have questions or which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has tackled have already been addressed by him or other colleagues .
The first is tobacco subsidies .
This issue has been raised time and again since 1994 .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is calling for tobacco subsidies to be abolished .
Obviously the Committee on Budgets cannot accommodate this request because we have a market organisation and we have to work within the legislative framework .
Hence my very specific question to you , Mr Fischler : when is the Commission finally going to table a proposal explaining how it will contrive gradually to convert the areas under tobacco ?
I know that there is any amount of discussion about this .
And I do not mean these half-baked ideas which are envisaged for the tobacco fund .
Neither is it acceptable for you to answer that it is all far too expensive because converting jobs - in whatever sector - costs anything from EUR 31 000 to EUR 391 000 .
My next question concerns the Food Safety Authority .
When are you finally going to put pressure on the Council to let us have the Food Safety Authority ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , in my opinion , Commissioner Fischler has a vision for the future , since he has already answered a number of questions on the mid-term review and about the supplementary and amending budget of October .
However , I have a question on the period that follows .
In the Böge report on enlargement , which we adopted in May of this year , Parliament asked the Commission to outline agricultural policy after 2006 and what the expenses would roughly be .
The mid-term review does not include the milk quotas reform , but options are given instead .
What are the costs of those options ?
Are there , within the framework of changing the sugar policy , plans in connection with Everything but Arms , and what are the costs involved ?
My next point concerns next year 's budget and also , to some extent , this year 's .
Parliament had tabled a number of amendments to examine how we could protect ourselves against the outbreak of infectious animal diseases , such as foot and mouth disease , and how more funding can be made available for the development of marker vaccines and ancillary testing methods .
As far as I know , it is nearly October and the Commission has shown no intention of launching these initiatives .
Some preparatory work has been done , but neither of the studies has been started .
It is , in my view , extremely serious that approximately nine months following the adoption of the budget , not even a start has been made on two issues that are so important for public opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like - quite briefly given the advanced hour - to respond to the questions that have been raised here .
I do not think that I need to return to the last question , put by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , about these 32 million and the 27 million , as I already dealt with this in my first intervention .
Several Members have indicated that they are opposed to these across-the-board cuts of 0.8 % and I too am against a systematic cut of this kind ; furthermore I believe that generally speaking this is a book-keeping exercise and not a political act .
Policy-making is after all actually about deploying resources selectively and not simply applying the same iron-fisted approach across the board .
Several Members asked why there are no proposals on tobacco , sugar or milk in the mid-term review .
I should like to remind you that a study is underway on tobacco ; this study will be completed at the end of the year .
From the outset - and we have also discussed this several times here in this Parliament - the intention was that we should table a proposal for a new type of market organisation for tobacco next year .
The same , incidentally , applies to sugar .
It is quite clear that the market organisation that we have for sugar at the moment will not be able to survive in its current form , particularly if you take into account the impact that the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative will have once the transitional period has elapsed , and that changes will therefore be necessary .
Here too , however , I have already informed Parliament several times that we intend to work on these next year .
As far as milk is concerned , in principle this is contained in the mid-term review , which also makes it clear that the Commission is prepared at any time to make a legislative proposal adjusting the common organisation of the market in milk , but only if it is clear that the Member States are prepared politically to go in a particular direction .
At present we actually have no chance of getting anywhere near the necessary majority in the Council .
That then is also why it makes little sense to table a legislative proposal .
Cofinancing - and I know that for many of you this is a pet subject - is not an appropriate topic for discussion in a debate on an annual budget ; it is something for the next financial perspective .
That is the context in which it needs to be discussed because it does of course go far beyond agriculture alone .
Incidentally , the provisions on cofinancing will in any case be changed or extended to some extent if we transfer funds from the first to the second pillar because cofinancing is automatically guaranteed in the second pillar .
In this regard I can only agree with all of those who referred here to yesterday 's article in The Financial Times , because although on the one hand in this article it is stated that the common agricultural policy is better than its reputation - a sermon that I preach around once every week - it is also clear that people want to see rural development given a boost and that they wish to have better quality and food safety .
The only thing is that when it comes to practical implementation we also have to say where the money to boost rural development is going to come from .
There is only one source of money available here and that is the first pillar .
Anyone who tries to deny this fact does not exactly help us to make real progress with this policy .
I should like , incidentally , to make one more comment on this article , namely that , as I see it , it is becoming clear that agricultural policy has taken a turn for the better in those areas where there has been a willingness to implement appropriate reforms .
An unwillingness to reform does not do either agricultural policy or farmers any favours .
Turning to the question about modernising the fleet and why we are blocking this , I do not wish to provoke a debate on fisheries reform now - we have sufficient opportunity to discuss these issues - but I should simply like to remind you that the Commission 's proposals do not contain any provision on compulsory scrapping of a particular number of vessels in a particular segment in a particular Member State ; we simply open up possibilities .
Each shipowner continues to have the right to decide and no individual or Member State is being ordered or forced to scrap .
It is time that these allegations stopped , because they only help to perpetuate bad feeling amongst fishermen .
We really must discuss this on the basis of the facts .
If you say that the bad weather in Ireland has had such a serious effect on farmers ' income , then I can assure you that we are also prepared to help Ireland .
In this case , of course , we are not talking primarily about advance payments for arable premiums , but mainly about premiums for cattle .
We are prepared to transfer the advances as early as 16 October , the first day on which the money is available .
I will just comment briefly on the question of research into animal diseases .
Research has to be addressed within the research budget .
Research into animal diseases also takes place in the research framework programme and not in our own budget .
We have to ensure that this is a focus of research work , and we have done so .
Mr Maat is right to say that there can be no particular shift in the financial priorities in the year 2003 , but in both sectors - agriculture and fisheries - we have a little chicken-and-egg problem .
Some say that policy can only be designed on the basis of a budget , which means that you first have to enter more resources in the budget or transfer funds from elsewhere so that you can choose to reform within a sound legal framework .
Others say that we first need to know what the policy looks like before we can talk about the financial resources that will be required .
This is the practice that has been observed by Parliament hitherto .
That is why it is important for us to take further steps towards reforming fisheries and agriculture .
Only then can we actually determine the specific sums involved in detail .
If you do not know the policy it makes the calculations very difficult .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it has been very useful to attend the debate on behalf of the Council .
Both Parliament and the Commission have touched upon important themes concerning the 2003 budget . I have taken note of the various points of view , and I can assure you that I shall pass them on to my colleagues in the Council .
I should nonetheless like to add a number of observations to a couple of the speeches that have been made .
Like the European Parliament , the Council is particularly alert to the large surplus in respect of the EU budget , amounting last year to EUR 15 000 million .
Today 's debate has indicated both the Commission 's and the Member States ' responsibility in this area , and this needs to be followed up .
With regard to the mid-term review of agricultural policy , I should like to emphasise that the Danish Presidency will do what it can to further the negotiations on reform .
Another important topic on which the Council and the European Parliament must find common solutions is that of setting up the special fund for dealing with the consequences of the floods in Central Europe .
Yesterday evening , we had an extraordinary trialogue on this subject , and I am pleased to be able to say that the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council are agreed that the necessary decisions can be taken and legal acts adopted before the end of October .
I anticipate the Council 's being able to make the necessary contribution to this process .
There is now already in theory an agreement to establish a fund of up to EUR 1 000 million per year , and it is important for the EU as quickly as possible to be able to step up its aid to the victims of the floods in Austria , Germany and the candidate countries affected .
On 3 September , my colleague Bertel Haarder , Minister for European Affairs , presented here in Parliament the result of the Council 's first reading of the 2003 budget and took the opportunity of emphasising the agreements and the common understandings resulting from the meeting for consultation on 19 July .
I am very pleased with this result .
It means a lot to the Danish Presidency that we have full backing in the Council for discussing crucial topics with Parliament at an early stage .
It was agreed on 19 July that the administrative preparation for enlargement is a main priority that the institutions will be able to address from now on and throughout 2003 , and I should like to emphasise that the administrative basis for enlargement has been secured by means of the agreement on administrative expenditure for 2003 .
This early agreement also gives the institutions the best possible basis for planning in connection with the preparation for enlargement .
There has also , here today , been a very thorough debate on the EU 's external tasks .
In that connection , it is encouraging that a common understanding has been reached of the need to work towards securing funding for the Common Foreign and Security Policy in the light of essential new tasks .
As I mentioned to begin with , an important priority in this connection is the EU 's assumption of responsibility for the UN 's policing mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
We are also agreed about trying to reach an agreement on involving Parliament in the CFSP arrangements within the framework of the Treaty .
The fact that the emergency aid reserve for humanitarian assistance can now also be used for civil crisis management is also a significant result .
In June , a common understanding was also reached about the need to fund the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets and about the need to keep the overall payment appropriations as low as possible .
I am of course aware that that there is still a way to go before we can enter into a final joint agreement on the 2003 budget .
Today 's debate has helped clarify Parliament 's and the Commission 's ideas and attitudes , and I am certain that we can continue the sound cooperation between the institutions and , together , find the necessary solutions so that , in December , a budget can be adopted based on a detailed prioritising of EU funds within the financial estimates .
In this way , we shall be able jointly to meet the challenges of the next few years .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I just want to thank everybody , because , as I said at the beginning , this was a unique event .
We have never done anything like this before .
In the main it has been successful .
Granted , some Members just made standard speeches , but there has been some good debate and we have had some good responses .
We have also had some confusing responses , especially on the Global Health Fund .
I should like to thank all those who have taken part , especially the individual Commissioners , and Mrs Schreyer for being here all the time .
I should also like to thank the President-in-Office .
During this presidency , the Danes have achieved several firsts in the budget procedure and to sit here for four and a half hours is a massive first .
It has never been done before .
I must also note that Mr Elles ' speech in which he set out six priorities of the PPE-DE Group was very good .
Three of them seemed to have more to do with getting British Conservatives onto the list , which is going ahead at present , than with budgetary rigour or budgetary sense .
I am sure Mr Elles will take that in the manner in which it is meant .
All in all it has been a good debate and I should like to thank all those who have taken part .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Written declaration ( Rule 120 )
The Commission can accept over half of the tabled amendments ( 35 out of 60 ) , as such ( 16 ) or in part or principle ( 19 ) .
· - The Commission can accept amendments 2 , 6 , 8 , 11 , 20 , 28 , 35 , 37 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 43 , 46 , 50 , 51 and 55 which improve the quality of the original Proposal notably by aligning its wording with Biosafety Protocol .
· - In addition , amendments 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 34 , 36 , 42 , 52 and 54 can be accepted in principle and 21 , 56 and 60 in part .
These amendments clarify important points , notably on the definitions , the notification procedures and the access of the public to the information .
However , some redrafting needs to be done , notably on amendments 19 , 21 and 52 where the Commission would prefer a wording more in line with the Protocol for cases of absence of decision by the Party of Import .
· - The Commission cannot accept the rest of the amendments ( 25 ) , namely amendments 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 16 , 17 , 22 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 38 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 53 , 57 , 58 and 59 .
Mr President , as announced in the Commission 's Transport White Paper of 12 September 2001 , the Marco Polo Programme will provide Community funding to new international transport solutions which offer a viable alternative to road-freight transport .
More specifically , the programme should help shift the expected increase in international road freight of 12 billion tonnes per km per year from congested roads to short-sea shipping , rail and inland waterway services .
The programme will be operational by 2003 and will last until 2010 .
For the five-year period from 2003-2007 , we propose an overall budget of EUR 115 million .
Marco Polo is an ambitious and pragmatic programme , geared to concretely improving services and logistics in the short-sea , rail and inland waterway freight markets .
At the same time , it provides for appropriate monitoring and control to exclude unacceptable distortions of competition in the market .
Marco Polo is thus more than a single continuation of the PACT Programme , which came to an end on 31 December 2001 .
Marco Polo will be able to co-fund actions leading to modal shifts and better practices in all segments of the short-sea shipping , rail and inland waterway freight logistic markets .
It will not be restricted to the combined transport sector as PACT was .
Marco Polo will also support actions involving countries outside the European Union and candidate countries , in particular the applicant countries , whereas PACT excluded them .
The programme also gives clear policy directions to industry on what changes the Community expects and needs in the freight market .
In this context , it proposes funding for three different types of actions : modal shift actions , catalyst actions and common learning actions .
A few words on each of them .
Modal shift actions : these involved start-up aid for new services in the non-road freight market .
Catalyst actions : this aid is also limited in time and should lead to viable non-road freight services .
However , these actions are more ambitious than modal shift actions .
They should change the way that non-road freight transport is conducted in Europe .
Common learning actions : these seek to improve cooperation and share know-how in an increasingly complex transport and logistics industry .
In order to achieve a real European added value , the Commission proposes to support only projects of significant impact on the market , which implies sufficiently large contracts .
I have outlined to you the Commission 's objective in setting up the programme and I now look forward with great interest to the debate .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her opening comments on the general aims of the Commission 's proposals .
I have several important points to make on my report concerning the Marco Polo Programme .
Firstly , this programme must strike a proper balance .
It would be extremely counterproductive to bury business in yet more red tape , notwithstanding the need for efficient scrutiny of how money is spent and how effective the programme is proving to be .
Secondly , in my view as rapporteur , it is essential that the programme remains market-driven .
This provides an excellent opportunity to show that the EU is prepared to help , not hinder , business , as is so often the accusation .
I especially welcome the committee 's decision to lower the thresholds involved .
This is something I have been adamant in fighting for , not just on behalf of numerous small and medium-sized enterprises in my own region , but also for SMEs in general which , if it were not for these low thresholds , would miss out entirely on funding which is there to help them achieve the goals of the programme .
Thanks to the new proposed new thresholds , companies could work together or alone in putting forward innovative projects that will benefit the industry as a whole .
Keeping the original thresholds would mean that small businesses had once again been ignored by the European Union , which would seem to be merely interested - from the Commission 's own comments - in showcase schemes .
This , whilst looking good , does not benefit the people who pay for them - the taxpayers .
In order to advance the immediate aims of the Marco Polo Programme - those of improving the environmental performance of freight transport and reducing road congestion , albeit in a relatively small way - this lowering of subsidy thresholds is crucial .
I also view as a welcome addition to this report , and one that well accompanies the reduction in these thresholds , the simplified definitions .
This may not sound much to those of us who have been working on the report since March , but to the already overburdened managers of companies in the freight transport system all over Europe it would prove a great help in making applications for assistance for projects much easier .
Indeed , these definitions could well prove to be the difference between companies not fully understanding the system - and hence not bothering to apply - and SMEs having much greater confidence in approaching the Commission with bids for their own innovative projects .
My last point reiterates one of the main aims of this proposal : that of reducing bottlenecks .
I agree with the Commission that congestion threatens both the environment and the operational working of the whole freight transport sector .
It is therefore imperative that we concentrate , in practical ways , on how to defuse these bottlenecks , especially around sea ports .
With regard to some of my earlier points , I feel that the lowering of the thresholds and the simplified definitions also apply here .
It would be wrong to infer that only large-scale projects can reduce bottlenecks .
I believe that innovative projects , on a smaller scale , can have just as much practical use - indeed if not more so - than those costing many millions of euros .
Thus , given the final outcome of the report in committee , I reiterate the necessity of our open approach - the carrot rather than the stick - designed to encourage the participation of the business community .
Success will very much depend on enterprises coming forward with their ideas , not those thrust upon them by regulation .
I would commend the report to the House .
Mr President , I am very much in favour of this programme .
Mr Bradbourn has made very sensible suggestions and has a feel for the needs of the travelling public , in particular those in cars who are delayed by heavy freight vehicles .
I applaud the entire Marco Polo Programme , which is badly needed to stop congestion .
I am a civil engineer by background .
I served on the Transport Committee in the House of Commons in London for eight years and know only too well by travelling up and down to my north-west region from London how very difficult it is to do something about this problem .
I applaud the fact that new initiatives will be encouraged by this programme , ensuring that traffic is phased into junctions by using light-emitting diodes etc . , things which are cheap but which are very effective and absolutely vital .
We must ensure that this scheme is properly monitored .
That is the idea behind the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
We emphasise that , half way through the period up to 2010 , there should be a thorough audit and investigation of what has been achieved .
I agree entirely with Mr Bradbourn that we should not just go for large schemes , because out there the logistics industry - and I applaud its efforts up and down the country and across all countries in the European Union - has a lot of ideas that it wants to start up .
That is where much improvement can take place .
I understand that the Council is anxious to reduce the amount of money being made available for this project .
However , I hope that even if that does take place , we will show by the mid-term review that we are getting excellent value for money and that the budget should be raised in future years .
I applaud everyone involved in this very forward-thinking scheme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly my many thanks go to Mr Bradbourn for his sterling work and his report .
The purpose of the Marco Polo programme is to reduce the social costs of traffic and , obviously , this basic idea and aim are very much worthy of support .
But as the old saying goes , ' All that glitters is not gold ' .
Unfortunately , I see Marco Polo as being part of the Commission 's programme to forcibly shift traffic from the roads to the railways .
For this reason I cannot agree with what it says in the White Paper , that shares between the various transport modes should be retained and frozen at their present level until 2010 .
This cannot be a natural development , because we are barking up the wrong tree .
It is true that road transport is responsible for a lot of congestion and pollution , but that is due to the fact that there simply is no other means of transport that compares to it .
Freight transport is forced onto the roads because it is the most effective option .
It is the fastest , the most flexible , and , most important of all , the cheapest form of transport for the end user .
The citizens of Europe pay for transport and if it does not run efficiently and cheaply in Europe , we all suffer the consequences .
In fact , believe me , those who always suffer most are those who have no alternative - those whose means are the smallest of all .
We should establish good incentives for different modes of transport and consider their overall costs , their benefits and their disadvantages to society as a whole .
If we start off that way , it is all the same whether the share of road traffic is 1 % or 100 % .
We need sufficient investment in the whole transport infrastructure , but the EU cannot be primarily responsible for finance , as we do not happen to be a money-dispensing machine .
Although this idea of the Commission unfortunately has a somewhat faulty basis there is also much that is positive about Marco Polo .
The interoperatability of different transport modes , where we get something that works very well from the whole , is important .
We must constantly remember that we are using the taxpayer 's money , and we have to use it as efficiently as possible , and certainly not in any populist way .
I would like to repeat that there should not be an aim here to reduce road transport but rather reduce its adverse effects , because if a patient is sick you will certainly not cure him by killing him off , but by giving him the proper medicine .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Marco Polo is a well thought-out instrument that is designed to promote a shift in freight transport from road to more environmentally friendly modes of transport , and this at international level .
It is a practical instrument that will help us to achieve the aim that we have in transport policy , which is , as you know , to stabilise the modal split at its 1998 levels , or restore it to those levels .
Hopefully it will be operational as early as next year .
Other measures that we envisaged in the White Paper - for example , the first railway package , which we have already adopted , and the second , which we are now working on ; cross-financing from road to rail ; charges for heavy goods vehicles ; internalising external costs - will all only have an effect in the long term or at the very earliest in the medium term if we really get them on track .
The Commission 's three proposed actions in the programme have clearly been inspired by its experience with PACT .
After all , this was a very successful programme , which achieved a great deal over many years , even if the focus is now rather different .
Although we now have more money than under PACT , the challenge is also greater , and that is why we need to ensure that the programme 's scope is very precisely delimited .
In the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , in a coalition of common sense in transport policy , we managed by and large to identify the main focus of the instrument .
In the plenary , however , we are having to work together to fend off two attempts to render this programme of assistance powerless by extending it .
The first is a proposal to extend the scope to include intermodal transport .
My group opposes the rapporteur 's Amendments Nos 8 , 10 and 12 , because they again seek to contribute , indirectly , to subsidising road freight transport .
I do not have anything against intermodality , but that is not the aim this time round ; this time it is first and foremost about modal shift .
Secondly , we must reject an extension of the scope to transport prevention actions .
My group opposes the amendments re-tabled by the Greens , seeking in addition to carry out actions on transport prevention on this tight budget .
I would be happy at any time to support a new programme on transport prevention , but its inclusion here would overstretch the programme and after all we want to implement it strategically .
Here , less is more !
Together we agreed in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism that we do not want any distortions of competition between the environmentally acceptable modes of transport .
We have lowered the minimum subsidy thresholds for the actions , as the rapporteur has explained ; we have judged cooperation between operators involved in cross-border transport projects - for example in corridor conferences - to be worthy of support , and we want a budget increase to be reconsidered as part of the mid-term review .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will respond to our ideas quickly so that the programme can start next year , because the increasing problems with road freight transport mean that delay is not an option .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bradbourn , for his thorough work .
The need to improve the freight transport system in terms of the environment is a vital one , with the amount of traffic continually growing .
The enlargement of the EU will also bring with it new challenges as transportation routes get longer .
Our group supports the Marco Polo programme and is satisfied with the Committee 's proposal .
The EU can bring added value to this area by supporting innovative , new technology projects .
No mode of transport should be excluded from the programme .
Transport chains that may also involve transportation by road must also be included .
If a project , in which road haulage companies are included , is good , it must be possible to apply for aid for it .
The aim must be to move from a more polluting mode of transport to more environmentally friendly transport solutions .
In my opinion , it is important that we can also lend our support to improving the existing situation .
Improvements can often be made by means of a better cost-benefit ratio rather than by starting on an entirely new project .
In concentrating only on new projects there is a clear danger of distortions of competition in relation to the old ones .
It is right that the regulation should include a separate mention of sea transport and keep the reference to ' motorways of the seas ' .
' Motorways of the seas ' is also given a separate mention in the White Paper on Transport ; it is therefore only natural to include it in this regulation .
As the rapporteur said , threshold values for all types of action in the Commission proposal are too high .
The threshold values for modal shift projects , catalyst actions and common learning actions must , as the Committee is proposing , be halved .
Parliament 's amendments will not radically alter the essentials , but will make certain points in the Commission proposal clearer .
We support Amendment No 29 tabled by the Group of the Greens and other amendments which aim to prevent and reduce unnecessary traffic .
The programme 's budget is fairly modest and the objectives are very ambitious .
We think , however , that it is important to set targets that are as ambitious as possible .
In the longer term we hope that Marco Polo will prove worthwhile and attract additional funding .
We must in addition investigate the possibility of additional finance for important infrastructure projects that supplement the Europe-wide traffic networks .
Mr President , the effects of ' die Wende ' in Dutch politics are slowly beginning to take shape .
This is certainly no cause for celebration in the area of transport .
Road transport takes centre stage in the plans of the new Dutch Government .
Railways have a rough deal in the investment plans , and inland shipping even more so .
In our opinion , such an attitude is not conducive to a transport system that can stand the test of time .
Considerable investments in infrastructure for the benefit of road transport will not only promote supply , but also demand .
On balance , this means that the existing problems are not being addressed .
This is why we welcome initiatives such as PACT and Marco Polo as incentives that encourage investments in true solutions and alternatives for ( the problems of ) road transport in the areas of research , development and operation .
The fact that we enthuse about the Marco Polo programme does not mean that we would not like to make a few minor observations .
Not only alternative modes of transport deserve incentives .
Initiatives within road transport that lead to a reduction in road miles should also be supported by the Marco Polo programme .
In addition , the programme must be tailored to the situation in the sector or sectors .
Large projects are bound to have a greater impact , but given the size of most businesses , it is questionable whether such projects will get off the ground in large numbers .
Subsidy thresholds must be lowered in order to reach the entire sector , whilst the current budget level must be maintained .
This lowering of subsidy thresholds is also important for extending sustainable transport services .
Indeed , extending capacity has virtually the same effect on transport flows , while the costs are down compared to when a new service is launched .
I should like to finish off with a remark about the effects of this programme on the various sectors .
It strikes me as inevitable that a subsidy for a certain transport sector will affect relations with the other sectors .
In my view , the conditions imposed on actual support by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism are fair and logical .
Subsidies should not result in effects that go against the Community 's interest , particularly against Community policy .
In addition , it is undesirable for subsidies to lead to a cargo shift between rail , short sea shipping and inland shipping .
In short , we are largely satisfied with the proposal as it is now before us and will endorse it accordingly .
I hope that our governments will follow suit .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the granting of Community financial assistance to improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system has much to recommend it .
However , there is also much - if not even more - to criticise .
The objective is positive .
In the future more freight is to be shifted from road to other more environmentally friendly modes of transport .
Ideally , this should check the growth in road freight transport resulting from enlargement of the Union .
For my country , Austria , this is an absolutely fundamental political issue .
The instruments provided to achieve this are also sensible : start-up support for new , non-road freight transport services , which should however be economically viable in the medium term ; support for launching freight services or facilities of strategic European interest , and common learning actions to foster more cooperation in the freight logistics market .
Working together makes us strong , instead of everyone being against everyone else and opposing anything new .
The individual amendments proposed by the European Parliament in the Bradbourn report are also good .
The more SME-friendly minimum subsidy threshold deserves a particular mention here .
That , however , is the absolute limit as far as the praise is concerned .
All of the measures that are intended , in the truest sense of the word , to be put in train here are long overdue .
For far too long we have talked about more environmentally friendly forms of transport without taking appropriate measures .
It should come as no surprise , therefore , that our roads are full and congested while rail and inland waterways have not for some time been performing at the levels of which they could and should be capable .
A critical question mark should also be placed over the funds allocated .
EUR 115 million may be a lot of money , but it is spread over five years and the Marco Polo programme is a different situation yet again for all of the measures that were mentioned just now .
Last but not least , I would lament a further serious shortcoming at European Community level .
The way that Europe drafts its legal texts , the public will never understand us .
With this in mind , I quote from the fifth recital , as also amended by the European Parliament : ' The Marco Polo programme features three types of action : ( 1 ) modal shift actions , which should focus on shifting as much cargo as possible under current market conditions from road to the more environmentally acceptable short sea shipping , rail and inland waterways ; such actions must not lead to a shift of freight flows from short sea transport , rail or inland waterways to another of these modes , unless the share of freight transport by road in the transport chain is thereby substantially reduced . '
Does anyone here understand this language ?
I find it hard going even when I am reading the text !
Mr President , I welcome Marco Polo in principle and in practice .
Its predecessor , PACT , was very popular in the United Kingdom with both the public and the private sectors .
I am sure Marco Polo will be even more popular in the United Kingdom .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur for ensuring that Marco Polo will be even more business-friendly than PACT was .
I agree with the Commissioner that is important that Marco Polo does not lose sight of its main objective , which is to encourage modal shift .
Why must we do that ?
Firstly , because we must tackle pollution .
Transport is the fastest-growing source of global warming gases in Europe .
Secondly , we must tackle congestion .
We must , for example , help switch high-volume , long-distance freight away from the road onto the railways where it belongs .
Action is also clearly needed at EU level , not just at a national level .
After all , only by encouraging the 15 railway companies to work together can some of the artificial national barriers to free movement be removed .
Action is also needed to encourage greater use of our ports , seas and inland waterways .
40 per cent of freight already goes by sea .
That is an area where we can - and because of Marco Polo will - see more growth .
Marco Polo will make a difference there .
Finally , and most importantly , let us not get carried away with our own rhetoric .
Marco Polo is a positive move but , on its own , it is clearly nowhere near enough .
The PSE Group urges the Commissioner to encourage more actions like this and encourage the Member States themselves to take on board their own responsibilities to encourage modal shift in a much more dramatic and radical way than we have seen in the past .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Bradbourn 's report .
He can certainly count on my vote in tomorrow 's plenary .
I particularly support his view that modal shift should not be the programme 's only goal .
The programme should also look to reduce congestion , lower thresholds and increase accessibility .
The goal of the Marco Polo programme should , in fact , be extended , so that the programme can also contribute to the search for and development of more sustainable transport systems .
I therefore value this line of approach .
Sustainable transport systems cannot be achieved by modal shift actions alone .
We must extend these actions to other forms of transport , including not only inland shipping but also short sea shipping , and of course rail transport .
Roads remain of crucial importance , with a reduction of traffic congestion by more efficient use of them being the starting point .
This is extremely important .
This brings me straight to the next point , which is savings in transport .
I am pleased with the amendments that the Greens have tabled before the plenary and I will endorse them .
A great deal is to be gained from transport saving techniques .
These are worth investigating within the framework of the Marco Polo programme .
In addition , the important point is made that we must stay one step ahead of developments in transport .
My objection is that only rather limited resources have been made available over a five-year period .
The amount of EUR 150 million has already been mentioned , and this is precious little to follow up PACT , a programme that already proved successful .
I had expected the budget to be higher , and that may , in fact , turn out to be necessary .
Also , the Member States themselves need to make efforts in this area and must commit themselves to solving problems , so that new opportunities can present themselves for the economy .
I hope that the Commission will ensure that good communication is established with society , so that it is possible to seize the opportunities that present themselves .
Mr President , honourable new Members , I will cut straight to the point .
Lorries are at their most environmentally friendly when they are off the road .
We must therefore focus more on transport prevention .
The Marco Polo programme only deals with other transport , not less transport .
A programme such as Marco Polo must be more ambitious than the current draft .
This ambition must also translate into projects geared towards preventing transport .
The European Union 's aim is to grow annually in economic terms .
However , this economic growth goes hand in hand with a growing demand in transport , and what is worse is that this demand for transport now even exceeds economic growth .
The correlation between economic growth and transport growth is tragic on different levels The European economy will in this way become increasingly less transport efficient .
We drive more miles to achieve the same economic results , with more traffic jams and accidents to boot .
Secondly , the sudden increase in mileage requires an enormous amount of fossil fuels and causes ecological and social damage .
I take issue with the rapporteur 's remarks about the doubtfulness surrounding the calculation of external costs and the increasing eco-efficiency of road transport .
It is true that the performance of individual lorries is improving , but they are doing more miles .
This increase in miles negates the profit gained from using an economical and clean engine .
Journeys must be avoided and economic growth must be disconnected from transport growth .
We therefore insist that projects aimed at transport prevention also be given scope within a programme such as Marco Polo and should not be discounted from the outset .
Marco Polo is a very important project to us .
We would like to see Marco Polo become more ambitious and it should , therefore , also offer opportunities to projects in which transport of this kind is avoided , for that is true innovation .
Mr President , experience has taught me that when bureaucrats and politicians resort to jargon , citizens should guard their wallets .
What is one supposed to make of the phrasing used to proclaim that one of the aims of the Marco Polo programme is to maintain the module repetition of freight transport at its 1998 levels by promoting a modal shift from road to other transport modes ?
Another gem was the heading ' optimism in infrastructure capacity and logistical concepts ' .
This sort of mindless gobbledegook means as much to the ordinary citizen of Europe as a text in ancient Sanskrit .
The Commission needs to learn that transparency is not about putting things on the website .
It is about writing in clear , jargon-free language that ordinary people can understand .
As to the substantive issue of reducing road congestion and improving the environmental performance of the transport system , I note that this ambitious aim is to be funded to the tune of EUR 115 million over 5 years .
That is just EUR 23 million a year to be spent Europe-wide between 15 Member States - or is it to be 25 Member States ?
Frankly , even if this aim could be achieved by the Commission 's financial instrument - and I share Mr Bradbourn 's scepticism on this - the amount of money allocated would hardly begin to dent the problem .
As always , the Community 's ambitions are bigger than our pockets .
Therein lies the problem .
The money being spent belongs to the taxpayers of Europe , it is drawn from national governments , each of which has its own unique problems .
Thus , as always , the Commission is looking for a European problem that does not exist on a European level and then failing to address it .
Mr Bradbourn 's traffic-light solution , however , hardly seems appropriate .
The problem in eastern England , the region I represent , is that we have neither decent roads nor decent railways .
Yet improving infrastructure would cost more in my part of England than the whole of the budget allocated to this scheme .
Given such a pathetic response from the Commission and the clear evidence that this House does not have any better solutions , it would be better to leave transport improvements to national governments .
Our government in particular seems well capable of making its own mess of our transport policy without any help from the Commission and its jargon .
Mr President , I welcome this programme to shift freight transport from road to short sea journeys , inland waterways and rail , and also the aim of holding the amount of freight on roads at the present level until 2010 .
I particularly welcome the lower threshold for subsidies and the simplified definitions .
These measures will be of significant help to SMEs .
Regarding SMEs , I hope that the Commission 's aim of funding large projects , while understandable , does not mean the exclusion of smaller projects which are more likely to be placed in smaller , peripheral Member States which are nonetheless in great need of help and support in this area .
I think of my own country in this context , with its poor road , rail and inland waterway infrastructure .
Ireland suffers doubly from safety problems , road congestion and environmental damage .
I welcome this programme , but it should not exclude smaller innovative projects which are deserving of support .
Mr President , I welcome this excellent initiative .
We need to ensure as far as we can that freight is removed from our roads and is placed onto alternative means of transport .
Ireland has benefited greatly from EU funding to develop its rail and road infrastructure .
It is currently in receipt of monies to develop a new tramway system in Dublin and a tunnel to take freight from the north side of the city - the M50 in the airport area - to the docks , thus keeping unnecessary freight from the city 's streets .
I want to raise a serious problem that has arisen in relation to the completion of the M50 in the Carrickmines area of Dublin .
Around EUR 74 million has been allocated to this project .
It has been found that an environmental impact assessment study which has been necessary to qualify for EU funds is seriously flawed .
It did not identify an internationally important archaeological site , Carrickmines Castle , which contains , amongst other things , the remains of a 13th century Norman castle .
The motorway , as currently planned , will bury this site before an archaeological dig has been carried out .
It is not appropriate that European taxpayers ' money should be used in this way to destroy our heritage .
It is not just Irish heritage , it is European heritage .
I am calling on the Commission to intervene urgently to have the construction of this road stopped until a full review is carried out as to why the environmental impact study did not identify this major archaeological site when it was identified by a state-sponsored organisation , An Foras Forbartha , in 1983 .
This is a major issue that needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency by the Commission .
Mr President , I am delighted with the Commission proposal on the Marco Polo programme which should contribute towards a shift in the transport of goods from road mainly to short sea and inland shipping , and soon also to rail .
At present , the White Paper is before us in Parliament and if there is something we are all agreed on , it is that something should be done to prevent a total standstill .
Nit-pickers criticise us for interfering with the free market forces in an unacceptable manner , but this is somewhat laughable if one considers the amounts involved .
As if this small amount would make any difference to market forces !
Let us not get carried away here .
We are already very happy if , with Marco Polo , we can persuade the sectors involved to be more resourceful in thinking of ways of transporting goods from A to B. Road transport should therefore not fear an exodus .
In fact , within a few years , the sector will want more goods to be transferred to other modalities in order to maintain mobility and cut down on traffic delays .
With regard to the amendments , we also tried to cater for small investors in the programme , while keeping the programme intact .
Parliament wants to give the sectors involved a clear signal .
We are quite happy to help clear obstacles to reach the modal shift .
We do not want to impose any rules , but we do expect the sectors to use their common sense , for doing nothing leads to inertia and an enormous drop in dynamism and competitiveness .
The sectors I have talked to have , in fact , interpreted the programme in this way and have appreciated the gesture .
Rail transport must , in my view , make a greater effort , cut down on red tape and work in a more customer-friendly manner .
Failing this , I fear that citizens and governments will not be prepared to invest in new or modern rails .
Can you detect any improvements yet , Commissioner ?
For I cannot .
I fail to understand why the Council wishes to cut the programme 's funding .
Europe will make an utter fool of itself .
More funding would be a more reasonable suggestion .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Parliament for its excellent work on the Commission proposal as shown in the report of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
I am delighted that both the Commission and the Parliament share largely the same vision on how to actively promote sustainable transport .
In particular , I am happy to see that the Parliament supports the Commission with regard to the overall budgetary envelope of the programme .
You surely know that this is a matter of discussion in the Council .
The Council may propose a lowering of the amount .
This would risk rejecting a disproportionate number of good proposals and endangering the very goal of Marco Polo .
Coming to the proposed amendments , you will not be surprised to hear that the Commission can accept a large number of them , possibly with redrafting or even unchanged in so far as they improve or clarify the Commission 's texts .
However , there are some amendments which , in our view , would not be conducive to the overall goals and management of the programme .
The Commission rejects these amendments or parts of them .
Let me briefly explain the position .
Amendments 14 , 15 , 21 and 24 aiming at lowering the contract thresholds will not help us to generate projects which by their size are of real European added value .
We need fewer but larger projects with real impact .
This will also help the Commission to manage the Marco Polo programme effectively .
I agree with the concerns of some Members of the Parliament regarding the role and participation of small and medium-sized enterprise , but in fact SMEs do have the opportunity to join trans-national consortia in which any kind of companies can participate .
The Commission also has a problem with bringing forward the date of its report on the implementation of the programme , as proposed by Amendments 3 and 27 .
While I understand the concerns of the Parliament , the date proposed will not give us enough time to gain experience with the programme .
Using the term inter-modal action as proposed in Amendments 8 , 9 , 12 and 28 may carry the risk that we narrow the scope of Marco Polo and exclude important segments of the freight transport sector such as bulk and conventional traffic , which are not inter-modal .
The Commission must also reject Amendment 10 and part of Amendment 17 aiming at including road transport actions in the programme .
This is against the modal shift nature of the programme and may render it unmanageable .
As for the second part of Amendment 28 , modal shift between non-road modes is not within the scope of the programme because it would lead to unacceptable distortions of competition and does not focus on the main overall programme objective .
Moreover , the concentration on maritime transport as such , as proposed in Amendment 16 , would narrow down the ' regional motorways of the seas ' wording , since the latter includes inland waterways .
We cannot accept the reduction of the central steering role of the Commission in complex logistical projects as proposed by Amendment 18 .
The detailed financial rules requested by Amendments 25 , 26 and 31 seem superfluous as general financial instruments provide for enough control and monitoring .
Finally , the Commission cannot support part of Amendments 2 and 28 , referring to the formation of a common political will in cross-border transport projects as political decision-makers are not targeted by the programme .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication being debated today is based on the evaluation by the Commission and the Member States of five years of the employment strategy in practice .
The results are important and I should like to reiterate a number of them .
Ten million jobs have been created in Europe , as the result both of economic growth in previous years and efficient reforms on numerous job markets .
We have seen important structural changes in most Member States , qualitative changes in employment policies and numerous countries have made progress in energising the job market , preventing long-term unemployment , introducing the most employment-friendly tax systems yet , gradually adapting education and training systems and introducing more flexible labour standards .
What is important about the employment strategy is that the driving force behind it was the management of basic objectives .
The Member States had common objectives and used the open method of coordination .
Much still remains to be done and this is set out every year in the Commission 's common report and guidelines .
Your motion contains some very interesting ideas on how we need to proceed and we need to draw on what we have learned to date so that we can make a number of changes .
I fully endorse the three priorities which you have set : first , the need to increase the rate of employment in relation to the Lisbon objectives , secondly , the question of the quality of work and , thirdly , the need to reduce inequalities on the job market , and here I would highlight the question of inequalities at numerous levels , the gaps on the job market , be they skills gaps , inequalities at regional level or inequalities between the two sexes .
As far as inequalities between the Member States and the new countries after enlargement are concerned , I disagree with the proposal in the explanatory statement that we should operate with two parallel strategies .
We need a single strategy and common objectives , although naturally we shall use national recommendations to differentiate our message and accommodate the peculiarities of each country .
The European Parliament and the Commission also appear to agree on the need to rationalise the procedure .
One important priority is to ensure the strategy continues to be efficient and discriminating .
The philosophy we propose is fewer guidelines and a stronger medium-term strategy , more stable guidelines ; to put it simply , fewer guidelines which are valid for a longer period of time .
Again , one question which arises when we talk of updating is the scope of future guidelines .
What will their scope be ?
Will they relate specifically to the job market or more globally to all the basic factors which influence employment policies ?
We take the view that they should have a broad scope which covers the main factors which influence the level and quality of employment in our economy .
As far as the management model , the method used to manage and administer the employment strategy is concerned , I totally agree that we need to incorporate the employment strategy at all levels of national planning .
We have seen interesting examples of regional and local employment strategies over the past 5 years , local action plans on employment have been submitted , and this was a successful initiative .
The commitment and contribution of the two sides of industry is very important .
Of course , our initial evaluation is that not every means of involving them has been exhausted and that important efforts are needed .
And as far as the involvement of civil society is concerned , it is still early days as regards any decisive involvement of civil society in employment policies .
I agree that the national parliaments have a vital role to play .
The parliamentary Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has already organised events with national parliaments on exchanging experience and information and we believe that this should continue but that , in future proposals , starting with the debate in the Convention , the national parliaments should play a more important part in national action plans and the European Parliament should play a more important part in the European procedure .
My last comment has to do with bringing the European Employment Strategy into line with the general economic policy guidelines , as proposed in our communication of 3 September .
We hope that , in adopting this proposal , which I presented to Parliament the day it was adopted , we will achieve greater cohesion between the two strategies , without calling the independence of the employment strategy in question .
The purpose of the communication taking stock of the strategy , together with the communication on rationalisation , is to start an open debate on the future of the European employment strategy .
After five years in practice , I think that your report has made a valuable contribution and that the Council will do likewise at its meeting on 8 October , when one of the basic issues of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs will be the debate on the evaluation and the future of the employment strategy .
As you know , the official proposal on the 2003 guidelines on employment will be submitted next April , together with the proposal on the general economic policy guidelines .
In the interim , there is time enough for everyone to take part in this procedure and express their opinion .
In order to broaden and facilitate this debate , the Commission intends to publish a further communication in January which , as far as the timing of specific proposals is concerned , will come halfway between the communications already approved and the proposal for the 2003 guidelines .
This means we shall have two-and-a-half months in which to conduct an in-depth debate .
We eagerly await your proposals and , if we draw on experience from the past five years , we shall be able to improve the employment strategy dramatically .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the European Employment Strategy was adopted five years ago it was seen as an important step towards combating unemployment .
All in all , its four pillars have passed the test .
The first , employability , includes developing skills and qualifications .
The second concerns the adaptability of the individual to the ever-increasing demands in companies and society .
The third is entrepreneurship with the aim of job creation , and the fourth , equal opportunities , is one of the most important pillars , which , like the others , needs to be developed further .
The very ambitious aim is to make the European Union into the most dynamic knowledge-based economic area in the world , but this is not only significant in terms of the economy ; there are also clear implications for social policy .
In 1997 there were 17 million people unemployed in the European Union .
Last year there were 13 million .
This year , however , the figures are clearly rising again .
This is particularly noticeable in my own country , Germany .
We must not become accustomed to these high figures .
In some countries , however , there has been an increase in employment and women in particular have benefited from this .
Nevertheless - and here is the rub - the jobs concerned are mainly part-time and lower qualified jobs .
The Member States must , by creating the appropriate conditions , by policy-making and by negotiating constructively with the social partners , create higher quality jobs , in particular in the full-time sector .
We are still miles away from achieving the ambitious goal set in the Lisbon Council Conclusions of an employment rate of 70 % or 60 % for women between 2000 and 2010 .
In my opinion , which was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , we criticise the fact that the Member States still have not set any employment rates for women in their national action plans .
In the NAPs no significant suggestions are made for improving performance in the equality initiative .
On average women earn 76 % of the hourly rate for men .
The social partners are called on to implement the principle of equal pay for equal work or work of equal value .
To create jobs , women also need to be encouraged to found firms or become self-employed through targeted support .
What does this involve ?
Reducing the burden on business , simplifying the formalities , particularly at the start-up phase , and setting up funds .
It also involves securing access for women to education and vocational training .
Gender-specific discrimination must therefore be combated energetically .
We call for these steps to be included in the national action plans in the future so that their results can be monitored .
In the Committee on Equal Opportunities and Women 's Rights we addressed one further interesting issue : how better to reconcile work and family life .
Progress has definitely been made in the Member States .
However , in many cases working conditions are not sufficiently family friendly .
There are not enough facilities for the care of children and other dependents and in general there is a lack of flexibility .
The main points in my opinion were accepted unanimously by the lead committee , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Herman Schmid for his concise report and for his ability not only to seek compromises but also to put them into practice .
My work in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities was not the only say that I had in the Schmid report , because I was also the shadow rapporteur for my group , the PPE , in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Despite a willingness to establish common ground , there were quite a few differences of opinion .
That is why we will be tabling amendments again tomorrow in the plenary .
Let me give you an example .
Since the Luxembourg employment summit , which was initiated by the highly successful Council Presidency of Jean-Claude Juncker , we have all endeavoured to achieve better coordination of economic and employment policy .
Agreed !
However , we must not ignore the fact that it is the responsibility of the Member States to take the practical measures .
That is where investment is made , but unfortunately all too often withheld .
That is where the competence for taxation , social security and other charges lies .
There social policy is at home with different national traditions .
We do not agree that the open coordination method needs to be extended to all areas of social policy .
Although it is necessary to strengthen democracy and involve as many stakeholders as possible , we must not have it extended haphazardly to any number of players in civil society , because there is a risk , Commissioner , that Members of Parliament , at both national and European level , and the social partners will be sidelined in the process .
That would be wrong .
I hope that we are successful in winning the support of other groups for this and other important amendments .
If so we will have a majority not only in the committees but also in the plenary tomorrow in favour of Herman Schmid 's otherwise expert report .
Mr President , I am delighted that we are having a debate on this vitally important subject .
It is clear that many Member States still have much to do to reduce high levels of unemployment .
It is very easy to set targets and to make promises - as Chancellor Schröder has found out - but the jobless need action and not words .
I agree with the rapporteur that job creation is a major challenge .
I disagree with his conclusions that we need the Commission to examine anew the causes of low economic growth and to submit suggestions to reverse it .
The causes are clear , the actions required are clear .
What is needed is the political will to make it happen .
There is , however , no solution to unemployment in strengthening the role of the social partners to quote the rapporteur ' in all matters ' regarding the organisation of work and working conditions - though I am sure the trade unions are always looking for such an opportunity .
The social partners may well have a very useful role in some countries and in some cases but , given that the majority of employment growth is coming from SMEs whose employees are beholden neither to big business nor to big unions , it is hard to see how such a move would be positive for job creation .
Certainly we must all put job creation at the top of our own agendas .
I earnestly hope that colleagues from all sides of the House , and indeed the Commissioner , will reflect on this when we are voting on the Atypical Workers Directive in a few weeks time .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking Mr Herman Schmid for his extremely valuable cooperation in preparing this report .
He has been very constructive .
I share the Commissioner 's view that the employment strategy has been successful , as far as we can see .
During the five years that it has been applied , unemployment has gone down , the number of jobs has increased and , for example , the active labour market policy , which was previously being conducted at a very low level in Europe , has now been considerably improved , partly through lifelong learning .
Big improvements have taken place .
Nevertheless , there remains a lot to be done , just as the Commission 's document states .
Unemployment is still too high .
There is a big gap when it comes to education and lifelong learning .
Those who already have a high level of education also help themselves to most of the education offered in the labour market , and those who have least education do not obtain as much .
There are also big regional differences within Europe .
The overhaul and improvement of the employment strategy are necessary therefore .
I myself think that the pillar structure has been valuable as a structural instrument , because some parts of the pillar structure have been more successful than others .
The employability pillar has been relatively successful , and the equality pillar has also been successful in the sense that female employment has increased , even though a lot remains to be done .
On the other hand , the adaptability pillar , which is a little more difficult to understand , has not been as successful .
This is nonetheless an important area we must continue to work on , for it is this which has an influence upon working life , the working environment and lifelong learning out there in the workplace .
All these factors must be improved in the future .
It is good that the Commission is now proposing to coordinate employment policy and economic policy , but I share Mr Herman Schmid 's view that social security too , in relation to which we also have a European process , must be involved in this coordination .
When coordination takes place , no area must be given precedence over another .
It is easy , both at national and European levels , to allow economic policy and the economic process to take precedence over the socio-political dimension and considerations relating to employment policy .
That must not happen . They are equally valuable processes which must be treated equally when coordination takes place .
I regard open coordination as a complement to legislation , not as an alternative to it .
We must , however , improve the actual way in which the open method of coordination is applied .
Since there is no qualified majority in the Council on the issue of the objectives , it is reasonable for the European Parliament to have the right of co-decision concerning these objectives .
When it comes to the national action plans , I share Mr Herman Schmid 's outlook .
It goes without saying that they must be debated and decided upon in the national parliaments .
It is only fair that we should have democratic control , both at European and national levels , where these important issues are concerned .
It is also important to involve other actors .
Of these , the two sides of industry are perhaps the most important of all .
It is important for them to be involved in devising policy , both at European level and at the other levels .
It is also important , as mentioned in our proposal , for the candidate countries to be integrated into this process at an early stage .
There are a number of differences between the candidate countries and our own countries , but there are also similarities .
Demographic developments and the demands they make upon the labour market are similar in the candidate countries .
Consequently , the candidate countries need to be involved in this process soon .
Moreover , we want to see a clearer link between employment policy and existing economic instruments , namely the European Social Fund and Equal .
The employment strategy underlying those instruments must be made clear ; clearer , that is to say , than it is at present .
In general , we are encouraged by the developments in this process but , as mentioned earlier , institutional changes are needed : better coordination and a strengthening of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments .
We must not forget , however , that economic policy , employment policy and the respective councils must be accorded equal value .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to begin by sincerely thanking Mr Herman Schmid for the very expert way in which he has overseen the preparation of this opinion .
Thanks to his knowledge , expertise and focus , we have obtained a very stringent report .
I also very much agree with his observations to the effect that the European employment policy must be organised to a greater degree from the bottom up rather than from the top down .
That is a matter on which I agree with him , in spite of the fact that our political starting points are otherwise very different .
We have all of us raised the issue of whether the European employment policy has worked , and we have of course genuinely obtained a situation in which countries are speaking more of a common language in some areas .
Unemployment is nonetheless still high in many countries , and it has almost become a persistent feature of countries that set the trend .
There is a lack of structural reform and not enough ability to comply with the employment strategy .
What ought therefore to happen ?
The answer is that we must strengthen the employment strategy by making it more open , because it is important for governments to commit themselves to the strategy on behalf of their electorates .
It is important that we simplify the employment strategy and make its objectives clearer , and the Commission and the Council are both thinking along those lines .
It is the correct path to go down .
Rather than draw up a long list of quantitative objectives covering every conceivable aspect and then measure success in terms of the amount of reports and paper generated , we must clarify the objectives and ensure good communication .
It is important that we involve the local and regional authorities and both sides of industry .
That is something for which Parliament has fought , and it has now become an integral part of the European employment strategy .
As pointed out in this opinion , it is both desirable and important for us to involve the national and regional parliaments so as to broaden the public debate and enable national politicians to assess the employment strategy , see what is being done in other countries and learn from their experiences .
On the other hand , I think that open coordination should continue to be intergovernmental , and it must be flexible .
Employment policy is a national competence , and that is a fact that must not be changed by the back door .
It is therefore important that no change be made by the back door to the character of employment policy by , for example , giving Parliament the right of co-decision .
That is not something we can support .
It is also essential to ensure coordination with economic policy .
Success in employment policy will of course be synonymous with success in economic policy .
Many countries struggle with large budget deficits which they would not have at all if they were to abolish large-scale unemployment .
There must therefore , of course , be better coordination , and I am able to welcome the initiatives the Commission is working on in this area .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his tremendous work on this report .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for some of the hints she has given us on what she hopes to achieve in the coming year with regard to these guidelines and strategies .
No-one has yet mentioned that people create jobs .
Any model where a forced system of state employment or superstructure artificially creates employment is doomed to failure .
This is because underlying economic development , which ensures that long-lasting , quality jobs can be created , is not there .
There is , however , a necessity and an urgency for the state to be involved in the protection of workers and the social protection aspects .
However , when the role of the entrepreneur or business in creating jobs is taken away , then the reality of the employment-creation quandary is undermined .
When the overall aspects of the different economies within the European Union and throughout the world are considered , those which have created the best and most numerous jobs are those which focus on five key issues . Firstly , a strong social partnership model whereby all the actors at a national level are involved in determining broad economic policy , as well as social policy .
Secondly , where incentives are given to entrepreneurs and to businesses to invest in new jobs , in new infrastructure and in research and development , giving a longer-lasting guarantee to the creation of manufacturing in other service jobs .
Thirdly , a very solid and continuously evolving education and training system , because the real tools we should use to adapt our workforce to the present , as well as future , conditions are those of education and knowledge .
We often hear in this House and other establishments about the idea of lifelong learning .
What does it really mean ?
Mr Bouwman mentioned that middle-aged workers had asked him at a fair what he could do about work for them .
There is a depth of knowledge within the European Union , amongst people between the ages of 45 and 60 , that is going untapped , a resource that is being lost because of ignorance , because of a lack of innovative thinking or simply because of a lack of a properly-structured training programme to allow them to adapt to the new market forces and employment opportunities available .
There is an old saying : give a man a fish , you feed him for a day ; teach a man to fish , you feed him for life .
That must be the underlying basis of our strategies with regard to the quality of jobs , work and employment opportunities available - the kinds of skills that we give to people .
The fourth point concerns competitiveness .
It may not be a popular thing to say in this House , particularly when we are discussing social affairs , but unless an economy is competitive , it is not going to be able to deal with the fractures of the market in which it is operating .
It is not going to attract inward investment from companies and it is not going to be able to prevent the relocations of industries from that economy to other economies where there is more competitiveness or better conditions .
My last point , which is not often mentioned and which is not paid due recognition , is flexibility - the ability to adapt to changing circumstances .
Who would have thought five years ago when this strategy was first started that the numbers of people in employment in the European Union in the information technology sector would be as high as they are today ?
Likewise , who would have thought five years ago when this strategy was first implemented that the number of long-term unemployed would still continue to be the same five years later ?
If anything , we have failed those people who are the most vulnerable - the long-term unemployed - by what we have put in place over the last five years .
We have failed them , failed to give them the proper tools of knowledge and information to be able to cooperate and deal with the new opportunities that are available .
When we look at the overall strategy a number of things jump out - colleagues on the other side of the House may disagree with this interpretation , but this is my opinion .
Firstly , we need to narrow down the guidelines .
We need to ensure that they provide the ideal focus needed to attack the areas that we recognise as being the most important .
Secondly , we need to give a longer timespan for the guidelines to work .
Instead of revising them every year , why not make it every three or four years to ensure again that they can be seen to operate within the mechanisms and systems that they are emerging from ?
Next , as many speakers have mentioned , there is a need to coordinate the broad economic policies with regard to employment strategy , to ensure that the two match .
Some people say that there is a tension between these two ideals .
However , in reality , unless they are working in parallel and in coordination with each other , maximum results will not be achieved , i.e. maximum economic growth and development and maximum employment of those ideals .
My last point is that we need to continue investing in people , because no matter how many figures and statistics are put before us the bottom line is that we are talking about one single individual person who has lost out on an opportunity within the European Union .
If , by our discussions here tonight and our work over the next year each of us could get one single person into a quality job we could achieve a lifetime 's work because we have helped our fellow human beings to help themselves and they in turn can be the trainers , educators and ambassadors of the future .
Tomorrow we must give this report a ringing endorsement , but we must also ensure that we do not tie our hands .
Future ideas must be flexible and able to adapt to the new society .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in implementing the European Employment Strategy , the European Union is seeking to establish the medium-term objectives of full employment , integrated into a context of political coordination , for every Member State .
Mr Schmid , whom I shall take this opportunity to congratulate , highlights the positive effects and also some of the less successful aspects of the European Employment Strategy in the last five years .
One of the problems that needs to be resolved is the poor transposition of the Strategy at the decision-making level in the field of employment .
The open method of coordination is an important instrument for the implementation of this strategy .
As everyone knows , this was designed for sectors in which the Member States retain their autonomy .
Differences still remain , however , between national interests and European interests , hence the suggestion that every government should incorporate the national action plan into the development of common policies in the field of employment .
The active support of the social partners and their contribution to the implementation and the integration of the Strategy 's priorities into their annual programmes is particularly relevant in areas such as lifelong learning , active ageing , equality between men and women and the modernisation of the organisation of work .
Account must also be taken of the consequences of enlargement for the current labour market in the European Union .
If we are going to be able to improve the current situation between the common global policy at European level and the adoption of policies at national level , adjustments must be made to economic development , by harnessing human resources and creating new institutional structures , but also by strengthening the entrepreneurial spirit .
In Portugal , the National Employment Plan transposes the content of the Strategy to the Portuguese situation in an attempt to respond to the new challenges .
In recent years , the Portuguese labour market has generally performed well .
Structural weaknesses still remain , however , which only a coordinated medium and long-term strategy , with the active participation of the social partners , will enable us to overcome .
Amongst these weaknesses I would highlight :
the low level of training ,
the significant effects of long-term and extremely long-term unemployment ,
the existence of a group with special difficulties in rejoining the labour market , comprising young people , older workers , women , ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities ,
a sectoral and entrepreneurial structure with serious shortcomings ,
low productivity ,
considerable regional inequalities .
Lastly , I should like to emphasise that , in order for economic and national employment policies to be effectively coordinated and coherent , and to guarantee the effective achievement of the European Employment Strategy , the possibilities of the open method of coordination must be improved and exploited , without losing sight of the requirement for this method always to make transparency its top priority .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating a successful European project which five years ago still had a host of detractors and which has earned the right for its fame to spread beyond a handful of experts .
Since 1997 , around 10 million new jobs have been created .
This is not enough , in terms of either quantity or quality .
We agree , however , that the Employment Guidelines need to be made more efficient ; they must not be extended , but they need to be more transparent and they ought to have more binding force .
We do not wish , for the time being in any case , to change the pillar structure .
However , we do think that it ought to be overhauled .
In previous years , Parliament has often offered new suggestions with this in mind and also pointed to shortcomings .
We also want the guidelines actually to be implemented .
We are aware that some Member States put up so-called passive resistance to the Commission .
For once this too needs to be clearly stated .
The assessment of the first and fourth pillars was favourable .
With your permission , I should like nevertheless to examine this with a more critical eye .
On the basis of my own experience in the Member States I would say that the first pillar - employability , which deals above all with further education and training - is still far too haphazard , arbitrary and shortsighted .
We need continuous professional training , and at the end of the day this means employees having a right to further training , and not only when they are 50 or 55 years old , but also when they are only 30 or 35 .
The fourth pillar - equal opportunities - has been warmly praised .
I believe that the considerable success we have been able to see here is also due to the fact , Commissioner , that equal opportunities policy has been supported on several occasions by anti-discrimination legislation .
Entrepreneurship and adaptability are still judged to be deficient .
It seems to me that many employers still have not even realised that they too are expected to show flexibility and make changes .
The European Social Fund is certainly an effective instrument , but we Europeans should also link it to the fulfilment of certain obligations by the Member States .
We will probably not be able to manage without European sanctions in the long term .
Commissioner , my group stands by your side .
The national employment plans are often still seen as secret government documents , their contents unknown to national Members of Parliament and the public .
That is why , for the sake of democratic legitimacy , we need codecision at EU level and legislative proposals to provoke debate and decisions at national level .
As social democrats we will be happy to support you in this quest .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , employment is the key instrument in counteracting social exclusion .
That is why this is , in my view , such an important item on the EU 's agenda .
I should like to thank Mr Schmid and Mr Mann warmly for the critical eye they have cast over five years of European employment strategy .
It is of crucial importance to us in Parliament to have our voices heard now , particularly because it is reported that the Commission will be producing a proposal for employment guidelines in 2003 .
I , for my part , should like to make the following observations .
In its report , the Commission admits unhesitatingly that the European employment strategy cannot take all the credit for the increase in employment over the past couple of years .
This worries me greatly , because at present , we are clearly heading for a recession , and this is exactly a time when we need an effective strategy .
If , therefore , it is not clear whether the policy works , is it useful to retain this strategy ?
The question also arises as to what exactly the European Union 's role is .
Is it a matter of subsidiarity ?
It is therefore high time sound indicators were developed and the statistics were updated more effectively .
Only then can we really discern what works and what does not .
In the meantime , it is a fateful sign that the Court of Auditors will , on Friday , have very critical things to say about the EU 's local employment projects in terms of the objectives , how they are monitored , and the inspection of financial resources .
And then there are women .
From the Commission communication , it appears that older employees and women still get a rough deal in the area of employment .
Although over the past five years , employment for women has increased by 4.3 % to 54.9 % - a very minor increase after all - the jobs involved are mainly part-time and without any real prospects .
The glass ceiling may have become a little more fragile , but it is still in place .
However , it is of course completely unacceptable that wage differences still amount to an average of 16 % .
In addition , one of the main headaches for the working woman is combining family with work .
Although Member States have paid increasing attention to parental leave and childcare over the past few years , I think that more is needed .
In many Member States , the public is struggling with the notion that the husband can also apply for parental leave .
The househusband is viewed with suspicion .
I think it is up to the Union to try to change this .
In terms of best practices , I believe that a country such as Sweden can certainly be held up as an example .
Finally , the older employee too is still given too little consideration .
Lifelong learning often passes them by , while this is , in fact , very important .
It is extremely important , in my view , to develop a sound , effective and verifiable strategy , certainly in the light of the pending enlargement .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the balance-sheet of five years of the European Employment Strategy demonstrates that major shortcomings remain in the creation of quality jobs with rights .
Most of the jobs created during these years have been precarious , part-time or very short-term , and which fail to guarantee that equal rights and opportunities will be complied with .
As stated in the report by Herman Schmid , whom I wish to congratulate on his work , unemployment remains at high levels , and long-term unemployment in particular is one of the main causes of social exclusion in Europe , to which we can add precarious and poorly paid work .
Women are still the worst affected , with average salaries still being considerably lower than those of men , and women still experience considerable difficulty in being promoted to more senior and executive positions .
The continuance of the restrictive monetary policies of the Stability Pact , the cuts in public investment , the insistence on privatisation , specifically of public services , relegate social and job creation policies to second place , and this is the current situation .
Priority is still also being given to Community policies in the fields of competition , fisheries and agriculture that fail to take account of small and medium-sized enterprises or family-run smallholdings and of small-scale and coastal fishing , which contribute to exacerbating unemployment and prevent quality employment from being maintained . The same thing is happening with the restructuring and relocation of undertakings , specifically of multinationals , in a flagrant breach of respect for workers ' rights .
It is particularly significant that there is widespread lack of knowledge in the Member States about the European Employment Strategy and that their national plans do not contain quantitative objectives , specifically employment rates for women - as defined at the Lisbon Summit - and nor are these plans being presented in the national parliaments or debates held on their content .
Account must , therefore , be taken of these issues if we are to achieve positive results in the creation of jobs with rights .
Mr President , this debate is nearing its end and I think that we are all agreed that the employment strategy has not borne fruit everywhere , or at least not the same fruit .
But what is important is that all the Member States are starting to change the way they design their national policies , mainly by shifting their priorities from managing unemployment to managing an increase in employment .
Mr Schmid 's report highlights a series of issues which our committee voted in favour of , the purpose of which is to supplement and enhance the Commission communication so as to strengthen this strategy which started in Luxembourg .
I should like to focus in my speech on a number of issues which other honourable Members have also raised this evening .
First of all , the involvement of local regional authorities and non-governmental organisations is less than satisfactory .
The Commissioner referred to local action plans submitted and implemented by local agencies which might set an example , but they are , I think , the exception rather than the rule .
I think , as Mr Andersson said , that we need to study these examples and find out exactly how and why they benefited some regions and not others .
I should like to mention something that has happened in my country , which has made me sit up and think .
Greece is preparing for local and regional elections and absolutely no-one has highlighted the part which local agencies can play in creating jobs .
Everyone trumpets how important they are in keeping the place clean , creating green spaces , with the odd allusion to social policy for good measure ; but never that they can mobilise local forces and create jobs .
And as for non-governmental organisations , they are even worse off and , unless they are officially involved in social dialogue , local society will not , I fear , look on them as serious , efficient partners .
Another issue is unemployment among women , which the spokesman for the Committee on Women 's Rights , Mr Mann , highlighted .
I think that here too , despite the increase in the number of jobs , the Member States need to show serious commitment and consistency in adopting quantitative targets for making qualitative improvements to women 's jobs and creating new jobs .
This relates directly to the issue raised this evening , an issue which I too vigorously endorse , namely the need to coordinate employment policy and social policy .
It is here that the serious question of creating the conditions needed in order to reconcile work and family life raises its head .
This is a question of social policy , for which the Member States are responsible ; but it is also a question of social responsibility , an issue of concern to the European Parliament and for which the social partners are responsible .
So , as we can see , huge efforts are needed to ensure that the employment strategy operates at several levels , not forgetting the serious role which national and - where they exist - regional parliaments should play ; because employment policy really is an issue to which they have paid scant attention .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's stocktaking exercise illustrates very clearly how important it has been even to reflect on strategies at European level because , although responsibility for labour market policy lies with the national governments , when it comes to economic policy and social policy it really is time that we recognised that the internal market has contributed to making our national economies interdependent and at the same time to creating interdependent living and working conditions , with the result that we are quite simply compelled , as the European Parliament , as a European institution , also to find an adequate response to this challenge .
That is why this stocktaking exercise actually does nothing other than invite us to join up procedures even more closely , and to support the Commission 's streamlining initiative in economic , employment and social policy so that we gain even better instruments in these fields .
We have to make it quite clear that we agree that if we wish to respond successfully to the challenges coordination has to be a European task .
After all , these challenges are greater than ever before when we see that successes in employment are being cancelled out by weak economic growth and that poor labour market figures are in turn dampening growth .
We must finally get used to the idea that we need to have an economic policy at EU level that also has to meet employment policy objectives , and that we need to pursue a modern EU employment policy that secures sustainable and high-quality growth for everyone .
This bond needs to be emphasised as we look towards the future .
I have to say that quite honestly I really hope that the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference will succeed in making a breakthrough in this regard , so as to enshrine the Lisbon process in a constitution , in particular with the aim of full employment .
Allow me to make three further comments on practical and comprehensive actions which seek actually to increase employment intensity in the European Union and which are in particular also very important from an economic policy point of view .
Firstly , employment intensity can certainly also be increased further through taxation measures , for example by applying low rates of value-added tax to labour-intensive services .
It is disappointing that so little progress has been recorded here .
In addition , it should also be said that initiatives to promote entrepreneurship and small and medium-sized enterprises need to be more closely interlinked than has been possible in the past .
Thirdly , and this concerns the Employment Guidelines in particular , we should also consider whether we might establish a link with the guidelines in competition policy , that is in policy on state aids , where we of course have specific rules , so as to have exemptions to the ban on state aid when small and medium-sized enterprises are being promoted or jobs created .
The approaches found there are , however , not necessarily reflected in the Employment Guidelines and the Employment Guidelines are not necessarily reflected in these rules either .
In my view this is really vital , because aid is also a significant aspect , just as competition policy as a whole is an important policy area for promoting employment .
Mr President , at a time when unemployment is high in the countries of the European Union , it is vital to draw up a European employment strategy .
First of all , however , such a strategy should prohibit all large companies from making mass redundancies along the lines of those currently being implemented by the extremely wealthy trust , Alcatel .
Everyone knows that the responsibility for unemployment lies principally with these large companies , which are not only failing to create the extra jobs they should , but are eliminating jobs purely for the benefit of shareholders .
Furthermore , any employment strategy should commit the Member States to taking the initiative in creating the hundreds of thousands of jobs lacking in all the Member States of the European Union , in hospitals , the public transport sector , the postal sector , or in education .
It would also be in society 's interests for the Member States to set up large-scale projects to build low-cost , high-quality accommodation .
The current policy , however , which consists of privatising public sectors left , right and centre , is exactly the opposite .
Under these conditions , talk about an employment strategy is nothing but pious hopes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank my colleague , the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , and congratulate him on the guidelines he has proposed in his report , with which we largely agree .
In fact , like many of my fellow Members , I consider that the European employment strategy we have known over the past five years has , to varying degrees , perhaps , depending on the regions , been effective and has benefited the citizens of Europe .
However , I believe the time has now come to review its structure and also to propose a new strategy that takes full account of the coordination of macro-economic , social and employment policies .
From this perspective , we have just reviewed every aspect of European employment strategy during the last five years and proposals have been made regarding the guidelines to follow .
I would like to focus on three points .
The first point concerns the necessary relationship between the European employment strategy and national employment plans and in this respect , I believe it is a question of the relationship with citizens and the understanding citizens may have of European strategies that affect them .
In actual fact , this relationship takes place through the intermediary of the national parliaments , both in giving their consent and in implementing the European guidelines .
In this regard , I believe the situation to be something of a paradox .
The employment situation is deteriorating .
The European Union 's efforts to set up employment strategies should target people in difficulty .
However , those who should be able to benefit from the actions are in fact the most disillusioned , the most critical and those who least understand our positions and the proposals we are making .
I therefore think that if we try to implement a coherent strategy , which fully involves the national parliaments by allowing them to debate national employment plans and make them their own , we will contribute to democratising European procedures , in particular with regard to the European employment strategy , and legitimise our actions in the eyes of the European citizens .
The second point - on which , I believe , everyone agrees - is that , in order to be effective , the European employment policy should really be an integral part , in socio-economic terms , of European policies .
The objectives of full employment , education , lifelong learning , all of which have been cited , are in fact parallel objectives which largely fall outside the scope of the guidelines for each sector alone .
Lastly , in conclusion , I think we need to review the subject of the social instruments used by Europe .
In fact , even if we reach an agreement on the objectives to be achieved , we still need to provide ourselves with suitable instruments with which to implement them .
On this subject , I believe we must reconsider using the codecision procedure and majority decision-making with regard to employment policy .
Although the open coordination method has proved useful , I believe it must be used to complement the other legislative instruments , as was originally intended .
Mr President , I should like very briefly to thank Parliament and everyone who has contributed to this important debate during the course of the Commission 's efforts to present the new , post-evaluation employment policy .
Serious account will be taken of Parliament 's proposals and opinions and I should like to touch on four points which were raised several times this evening .
The first is the basis on which the employment strategy is being developed .
It is a combination of competitiveness and cohesion .
Clearly , the employment strategy takes account of the needs of companies , both large and small , and the needs of the workers .
The doubt expressed by a number of honourable Members as to the extent to which it fosters competitiveness is , I think , somewhat exaggerated , given that , if nothing else , the employment strategy has resulted in what are also business-friendly job market reforms .
The need to achieve competitiveness and cohesion at one and the same time means , as several honourable Members have pointed out , that we need to couple employment strategies and policies and social policy ; in other words , they cannot be segregated and we need to take account of social policy issues every step of the way .
The second point is the framework , cooperation , updating the employment guidelines and the financial package .
Important and serious proposals and approaches have been voiced .
I would point out , as several honourable Members have said , that the employment strategy needs to be discriminating , its scope needs to be clear and it should not be incorporated into the economic guidelines .
The third point is involvement .
One of the basic problems we identified during our evaluation was the involvement of national parliaments , which need to assume a more important role , and of social partners and of local authorities , as regards the regional and local application of the employment strategy .
Finally , I should like to refer to the method itself as a tool , as Mrs Gillig quite rightly pointed out ; a tool which we are using for the first time .
The open method of coordination has no separate entry in the Treaty ; however , it has been a very successful method , which is why we have used it in another two procedures , exclusion and pensions , and we believe that the Intergovernmental Conference will perhaps give us the chance to finalise it and use it more efficiently in other policies .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , this is the second time that social policy and policy on equal opportunities for men and women have been scheduled so late in the day .
This is acceptable once in a while , but I should nevertheless like to ask those who draft the agenda to switch things around and to schedule economic policy and agricultural policy , for example , this late on the agenda , which would allow us to discuss our reports in the afternoon and prevent Mrs Diamantopoulou and us always having to sit here burning the midnight oil .

I shall now turn to the report .
Why has a report been drafted on the representation of women among the social partners ?
Firstly , because there has been an enormous increase in the number of working women .
Women constitute 42 % of the total workforce in the EU .
This same increase is not reflected in the bodies that have a say in policy .
These are the structural bodies of the social partners themselves , their chairmen , their secretaries-general , their executive committees , their general meetings , their negotiation committees , and so on .
Women are underrepresented in these .
Even where social partners function as delegates in advisory bodies , these delegates are very rarely women .
Despite this , the social partners require - and we grant them this with pleasure - a large proportion of the power in Europe and the Member States , for it is , of course , a fact that the collective labour agreements they conclude , and which therefore also affect women , generally have force of law .
Indeed , a large proportion of legislative authority , namely that related to labour , has been passed on to them .
This is permissible , provided that the social partners are representative .
If they are not , then this is not really tolerable .
I maintain that they are not representative .
When , while 42 % of women are in the labour market , not even 25 % of women are represented in the administrative bodies of the unions , a figure dropping below 12 % or 10 % in some administrative bodies , and if , for example , employers ' organisations have 1 % or 2 % of women in their administrative bodies , then I maintain that these social partners are not representative of the labour market .
Hence the report .
We would therefore ask first and foremost that data be collated and that a database be set up that tracks the presence of women amongst the social partners , for it is extremely difficult , Commissioner , Mr President and fellow MEPs , to obtain these figures .
This is not too bad for the trade unions since they themselves keep track of these figures to some extent , but this is practically impossible for employers .
If you were to ask any Member State what the proportion of women is in employers ' organisations , you would not get a reply , any figures or data .
Either this is due to unwillingness , or the data is not available .
It is therefore essential to set up a database .
I know that the Commission is in the course of setting this up and that a research mandate has been issued .
This mandate , however , runs over four years , and I hope , Commissioner , that it will not be four years before steps are taken .
If we have to wait for the figures , it will be a long time before anything happens .
In my view , the Commission , the Member States and the social partners must pursue a policy that is similar to that in the political world .
Fortunately , political parties have gradually been convinced of the fact that the political bodies must be representative of the people in their country .
If 50 % of those people are women , as is the case in all countries - and it is often more - then the political world should be a representation of those women too .
This is policy both in Europe and in the national Member States .
The same cannot be said , unfortunately , of the social partners .
This is why a series of measures is being proposed in this report which must be implemented either by the European Union or the social partners themselves , with a little pressure from the Member States , in order to achieve an acceptable level of representation of women in all negotiating bodies and in the bodies of the social partners , also with the aim of allowing women 's issues to be discussed during the negotiations .
It does indeed speak for itself that those who are around the negotiating table are most sensitive to their own issues ; this is always the case .
This is also normal , for they are most familiar with their own issues .
This is similar to organising a negotiating table with disabled people ; they too would be very sensitive to the issues affecting disabled people , and they would be right .
This is also true of negotiating tables attended only by men .
They are very sensitive to their own issues and not so sensitive to those of women .
Hence our theory .
I urge you , Commissioner , to adopt a policy that addresses this issue as a whole .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Smet for this report , which shows that very little progress has been made as regards the representation of both sexes among the social partners and that discrimination is alive and kicking .
It is a disgrace that huge trade union organisations in Europe , with hundreds of thousands of members , do not even have token representation of both sexes and that there are entire trade union executives made up only of men .
The number of women on the job market has risen but there has hardly been a commensurate increase in the number of women in trade union organisations , where fewer than 25 % hold executive positions , even though over 40 % belong to a trade union .
On the employers ' side , as Mrs Smet said , the situation is even worse , with the lowest proportion in Belgium , with 1.5 % , and the highest in Finland , with just 19 % .
Of course , there has been an increase in the number of working women over recent years , but remember that Beijing concluded ten years ago that , if we continue at this rate , we shall achieve equal numbers in 2500 years .
So what can we do at European level ?
Clearly this is not an issue which can be resolved through legislation or binding measures .
The Commission , as you have already heard , has selected a researcher to monitor statistics and record them throughout Europe , because at present the only records we have are from the national representations ; we have no analytical sectoral representation and no breakdown by Member State .
This statistical exercise will last 4 years , but we shall be able to use the data from year one and it will be especially helpful in finding out where we need to intervene by networking , by exchanging practices , by working together and by giving incentives to trades union .
The second point is that we need to agree on specific quantitative targets and timetables for the involvement of women .
The social partners , who are due to present their common agenda at Christmas , intend , as far as I am aware , to include the question of equality as one of the common issues which they will endeavour to resolve over the next few years .
So if the social partners at European level present a common agenda at Christmas and include the question of gender equality , it is important that we then set specific quantitative targets and timetables .
The Commission is still aiming for equal representation of men and women at all levels , including in the committees it sets up , but , to tell the truth , few women are involved even in the Commission unions .
Before I finish my intervention , I should like to point out that the question of the lack of involvement of women , as Mrs Smet has explained , is a question of democracy , it is a question of representation , it is a question of neglecting half the population , neglecting half the force and half the talent of European society .
We really do believe that , with the employment strategy and social dialogue , we can make progress , but Europe cannot push ahead alone if the social partners themselves fail to assume a large part of the responsibility , which is why we also need their initiative here .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Smet on her own-initiative report and for highlighting an issue which has been more or less forgotten at both European and national level .
It is true that we have little information on the under-representation of women in social partner structures and on their lack of involvement in social dialogue negotiations .
It is also true that this deficit , this problem , is not acknowledged in political circles .
In fact , while we often hear about the absence of women from parliaments , from governments , from local and regional authorities , we rarely hear about the absence of women among the social partners .
So we too need persuading , as European institutions , as national governments and as social partners , that the involvement of women in decision-making procedures within the social partnership will not merely add credentials to their authority and quality to democracy ; it will also , in the final analysis , promote our development objectives , since it will help increase employment , improve the quality of work and increase productivity and competitiveness .
As far as the involvement of women in decision-making processes is concerned , it is the only opportunity to take account of the demands of women , both employed and unemployed , to develop social responsibility for the benefit of working women , to create the conditions needed to develop creativity in the workplace , to take account of specifically female aspects and to deal with wage differentials , which is the most basic problem of all .
So we need a broad information and awareness-raising campaign in every direction and to motivate working women themselves , because they too must take their share of the responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , although the European institutions have in various documents highlighted the need for a more balanced and proportional representation of women in the various decision-making structures and political and social bodies , also where the social partners are concerned , the fact is that profound imbalances and enormous inequalities still remain , as Mrs Smet 's report points out , and as Commissioner Diamantopoulou confirmed a short while ago .
And although where the social partners are concerned only incomplete information is available , the meagre data available on the participation of women demonstrate that at executive level , the percentage of women is low , with women being clearly under-represented in the upper echelons of organisations , which weakens democracy and makes it difficult to achieve real equality of rights and opportunities , which we incorporated into the Treaties and into various Directives to which we refer on a daily basis .
We therefore support the initiatives proposed in this report , both those that seek to obtain a greater knowledge of the current situation ( and the need for data collection has already been mentioned here ) , and those intended to achieve a more balanced representation of men and women among the social partners .
We call for timetabled performance targets to be established - on the quantitative and qualitative representation of women , both in internal decision-making structures and in collective bargaining , including at the forthcoming trilateral social summit - and I now wish to draw the Commissioner 's attention to this matter - and also for reports to be drafted on the progress made and the impact of the measures adopted .
Objective conditions must be established , however , to ensure that the participation of women in the social and political bodies becomes a reality .
The Commission must also create a database and good practices must be disseminated , including in the joint report on employment , sharing information on the participation of women , and specifically in collective bargaining , and also on the progress made in the field of equal opportunities .
This information , this analysis and this approach must be formalised in the various reports on the social sphere and on employment .
Mr President , in all of the European Union 's Equal Opportunities Action Programmes , for example the Fifth Action Programme for 2001 to 2005 , great importance is attached to there being balanced representation of men and women in decision-making bodies .
While good statistics are available in parliaments and national institutions , there are still not any satisfactory surveys of the social partners .
In both the unions and the employers ' organisations women in leadership roles are in a tiny minority .
There is no doubt that this needs to be changed , but please not at a snail 's pace .
In the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , we have unanimously called on the social partners to set precise targets as soon as possible with a view to improving the quantitative and qualitative representation of women .
As part of this , deadlines should be agreed for their implementation .
Databases should be created so as finally to provide a precise overview of female representation in expert fora and decision-making bodies .
A further long overdue measure is the creation of posts for equal opportunities officers in all of the Member States .
Whenever change is initiated , however , intensive awareness-raising is required .
In training courses and at conferences on gender mainstreaming , women 's structures in the social partners should be visible .
Positive measures need to be developed in the form of action programmes within organisations .
Women 's networks should be created and should communicate with each other .
They should exchange experiences and pass on information about projects to each other .
These projects were successful and are therefore worth replicating and the others failed and we should try to understand what we can learn from them .
An important component is responsibility at executive level right up to the boardroom .
There are therefore sufficient reasons for drawing up this own-initiative report .
The vote in the Women 's Rights Committee was unanimous and is testimony to the exemplary work of our rapporteur , Miet Smet .
I too can fully endorse this assessment of her report .
Mr President , the most striking statistic I have heard tonight is the one from the Commissioner when she indicated that it would take 2 500 years for us to reach a position of equality for women if we continue at the same pace .
I wonder how much faster we need to move in order to achieve this equality within the next hundred years , which even then would be quite a long period to have to wait .
It strikes me that while we talk consistently , and correctly , about the need to create equal opportunities in the European Union that in a very real sense that is a secondary objective to treating people with equality , because there is a distinct difference between the question of equality for every single human being and the idea that they should also have equal opportunities .
Without equality there can be no equal opportunity and that has to be fundamental to our approach to this issue of women participating in decision-making .
One of the issues that must be addressed if we are to ensure that women - and in particular working women - can participate and that they get time off work in order to pursue trade union activities , is that of employers being extremely reluctant to allow workers to have time off to pursue either training or trade union activities .
This is increasingly the case , even before one deals with the question of allowing either men or women time off to have babies or to look after children .
I am not surprised by the statistic which indicates that there has been a decline in the number of women participating in employers ' organisations .
The only slight criticism I would have of some of the statistics in the report is that they are out of date .
That is not the fault of the rapporteur , it is down to the fact that we do not have consistent and systematic collection of proper data .
One of the keys to making progress in this area is to have affirmative programmes , action plans and targets .
Critical to it also is a programme of sensitising people in trade unions and in employers ' organisations to the fact that there is another half of the human race who are entitled to equality as of right and not just as a privilege .
Mr President , the only point of the fallacious symmetry established between the under-representation of women in managerial organisations , on the one hand , and trade unions , on the other , is to show that there are still far fewer women in managerial organisations than in trade unions , even though managers face no material obstacles to this other than the misogyny of the managerial environment .
On the other hand , it would be extremely cynical to reproach workers ' organisations for not including women in their number , when female workers throughout the European Union have the problem of insufficient or non-existent crèches and nursery schools .
As the rapporteur is a former minister , she would be better advised to use her influence to encourage the Member States to implement an extensive programme for the creation of crèches , day nurseries and nursery schools , employing a sufficient number of staff .
That would certainly not solve the problems of female representation in the managerial bodies of trade unions , but it would create better conditions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this excellent report , Mrs Smet , whom I congratulate on her magnificent work , highlights the insufficient participation of women among the social partners in the European Union and the consequences of this for the implementation of equal opportunities policy .
In order to remedy the glaringly obvious shortfall in the representation of women in the decision-making structures and bodies of the social partners , three measures , in particular , are to be emphasised .
First : we need to know where we are now and where we want to be .
Hence the need to ensure that we have statistics that give us a true picture of the situation and which can provide a basis for the creation of action programmes and the drafting of evaluation reports ;
Second : knowledge and training are the keys to individual and collective progress .
The preparation of women for leadership duties must , therefore , be a priority .
This aim can best be achieved through the creation of centres for the dissemination of specialist knowledge .
Third : the social partners must provide training actions to raise awareness of equal opportunities and this issue must always feature on the negotiating agenda .
In my country , for example , the rate of women in employment has been steadily increasing and is one of the highest in the European Union .
Nevertheless , such changes are not matched by the level of women 's participation in the decision-making processes and many inequalities still persist .
With regard to access to executive positions , only 2 % of women occupy the posts of departmental heads and managers , which rises to 3.2 % at more senior levels .
We are also seeing the insufficient participation of women in positions of greater responsibility in union life .
Reliable data are difficult to come by , as has already been stated here several times .
Lastly , I wish to remind you that various studies confirm that the presence of women in decision-making bodies and in collective bargaining has a very positive impact on the implementation of equal opportunities policy .
Therefore , the balanced representation of men and women , apart from being a democratic imperative for the social partners , will lead to a more favourable working and organisational environment .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bastos .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.48 p.m. )
. ( PT ) I wish to express my agreement with this recommendation for second reading and with the consequent adoption of the Council common position , which I believe is of crucial importance to the promotion of road safety .
As advocated by Mr Hatzidakis , whom I shall take this opportunity to congratulate on his excellent work , increasing road safety by limiting the speed of the vehicles used in both passenger and freight transport , is to be welcomed .
The Commission 's proposal to extend the scope of the directive in force - Directive 92 / 6 / EEC - and the phased installation of speed limitation devices reflects a constant concern of Parliament , which is the promotion of road safety in the European Union , to which I have always subscribed and which I continue to call for .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur on the need to adopt the Council common position as rapidly as possible and without amendments , given that most of the amendments tabled by Parliament have been taken into account , whilst new elements have also been incorporated , which have helped to improve the clarity of the text under our consideration .
Tourism and the way in which travel agencies operate has changed dramatically in the last 25 years , following the adoption of the special VAT arrangements for this sector .
At the same time , the activity of travel agencies has undergone a profound change .
The special arrangements defined in the sixth Directive are finding it increasingly difficult to match the current needs of this sector .
The myriad derogations from which various EU countries benefit and the privileged situation of third-country travel agencies with regard to VAT has led to unfair competition or to the practice of the most powerful companies setting up branches in third countries - Switzerland , for example - in order to avoid their tax obligations to the European Community .
The Commission proposal warrants our vote .
I therefore propose a practical method of collecting VAT imposed on third-country travel agencies that sell products in the European Union or to individuals resident in the Community ; the same method , in fact , that Parliament adopted for electronic commerce .
I also propose a method of improving the competitiveness of travel agencies when selling tourism products within the Union to residents of third countries .
. ( PT ) My vote against the report does not overlook the fact that the Laeken Summit of December 2001 reaffirmed the need for the EU 's Member States to adopt a common policy in the field of asylum and immigration by 2004 .
I am actually sensitive to the need for coordination procedures to be established in the field of asylum policy and even , for the sovereignty and the competences of the Member States to be respected , with regard to the permanent incorporation of a method of coordination in the field of asylum in order to encourage the convergence of national systems .
I am not indulging in hyperbole , however - especially in an extremely sensitive area such as this - and I regret the fact that both the rapporteur and the specialist committee have opted for a hyperbolic and frankly excessive approach , which goes far beyond what is necessary .
This is why I voted against the report .
And ultimately , this is the underlying reason for my final rejection of the report , which should serve as a warning for the future : in striving to achieve too much , the basic needs may suffer .
This budget is simultaneously delightful , detrimental and disastrous .
Delightful because of the amount : EUR 100 billion .
This is the highest budget we have seen since 1958 .
Detrimental with regard to agriculture .
The percentage of agricultural appropriations in spending as a whole is being relentlessly eroded and , in particular , the appropriations authorised in financial forecasts are never used to the full .
Over ten years , if we add up the annual differences between the agricultural budgets implemented , on the one hand , and the agricultural budgets voted for and the estimated agricultural financial forecasts , on the other , the equivalent of an annual agricultural budget has been spirited away .
The EUR 40 or so billion that have been stolen from European farmers could have been used to save our apiarists , promote our wines and create a European fund against natural disasters .
In the Languedoc area , for example , where flooding in September destroyed 4000 hectares of vineyards .
Disastrous , because 2003 will be the last year before we jump into the bottomless pit of globalisation without a safety net .
It is the year of Cancun and the WTO Ministerial Conference that will seal the world agreement on agricultural free trade .
It is also the year in which there will be real conflict over the CAP review , with a powerful ally for Mr Fischler in Renate Kunas .
It is also the beginning of our descent down the slippery slope of enlargement , with the accession of the Eastern European agricultural countries bringing unknown costs in real terms .
Outcome of World Summit on Sustainable Development
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council and Commission statements on the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development ;
report ( A5-0237 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hulthén , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission communication on the implementation of the first phase of the European Climate Change Programme [ COM ( 2001 ) 580 - C5-0164 / 2002 - 2002 / 2072 ( COS ) ] .
In opening this debate , I am pleased to be able to give the floor to President Haarder , formerly one of our fellow Members and Vice-President of the European Parliament , who will now speak on behalf of the Council as President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , we welcome this opportunity to present the Commission 's assessment of the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg concluded three weeks ago .
It is in a way rather early to make a definitive assessment of the outcome .
Time and our own committed efforts will tell if this summit will deliver where Rio de Janeiro did not .
As we said repeatedly at the end of the negotiations , we have the words and it is now the duty of all of us to turn these words into effective deeds .
I will not over-simplify and try to sum up the summit in one word as either a success or a failure , but overall the Commission believes that we can be satisfied with the results of Johannesburg .
We succeeded in adding new momentum to the cause of sustainable development and the outcomes of the summit take us in the right direction .
Of course people will draw comparisons with the Rio Earth Summit of 1992 .
The immediate assessment of some NGOs and others in the period after Rio was that it had been a failure .
Now it has come to be seen as a defining moment in the fight for sustainable development .
The Rio Summit was very different from Johannesburg in some important respects .
Most importantly , the political climate in 2002 is very different from ten years ago .
Against a difficult political backdrop it fell largely to the European Union to champion the cause of sustainable development in Johannesburg .
We were , you might say , almost the only engine in this whole process .
Let me remind you of how the European mandate was determined .
In preparing for the summit , the Commission issued two specific communications , one in February 2001 entitled ' Ten years after Rio : preparing for the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 ' and a second communication in February 2002 entitled : ' Towards a global partnership for sustainable development ' .
Building upon these communications the Council adopted several sets of conclusions in 2001 and 2002 in which the European Union 's negotiating platform for the World Summit on Sustainable Development was defined .
It is worth noting specifically the Development Council conclusions of 30 May 2002 , which list in detail the EU 's priorities .
The European Parliament also issued its opinion in a resolution adopted on 16 May 2002 .
In substantive terms , we worked to undertake further steps towards the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals , in particular the goal of halving the number of people living in extreme poverty by 2015 .
Poverty eradication was the over-arching theme to which we linked all the concrete issues .
The Union argued that we had to show real commitment by setting quantifiable targets , with timetables and monitoring mechanisms , in the Implementation Plan .
Let me now focus in particular on some key achievements reached in Johannesburg , which Mr Haarder has already mentioned , but which I think are worth noting again .
The first element I would like to highlight is that a set of new targets has been agreed as part of the Implementation Plan .
I will mention five .
First , halving by 2015 the proportion of people lacking access to basic sanitation - this currently stands at three billion people , half of the total world population .
This new target complements the Millennium Development Goal on access to clean water .
Second , a commitment to minimise harmful effects on human health and the environment from the production and use of all chemicals by 2020 .
Third , a commitment to halt the decline of fish stocks and restore them to sustainable levels no later than 2015 .
Fourth , a commitment to begin implementation of national strategies on sustainable development by 2005 .
Fifth , a commitment to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2010 , as earlier agreed by the parties to the Biodiversity Convention .
The endorsement by all Heads of State and Government is a major achievement .
The agreement to establish a ten-year framework for programmes on sustainable consumption and production , with industrialised countries taking the lead in this global effort , is another important result .
On globalisation , as has been said , the summit agreed on concrete actions to enhance the role of trade for sustainable development , for example by encouraging trade in environmentally friendly and organic products from developing countries and by strengthening international action for corporate responsibility .
The EU 's objectives on energy were addressed in the Council Presidency Conclusions of 30 May 2002 , in which the EU reaffirmed its commitment to facilitating the achievement of the millennium development goal of halving the number of people in extreme poverty , and other millennium development goals , by 2015 , through the provision of adequate , affordable and sustainable energy services .
In line with its general position in favour of a focused and result-oriented implementation plan , the European Union also supported , among other things , the establishment of a quantitative , time-bound target to increase the proportion of renewable energy within the overall energy mix .
Although we were ultimately not able to get a specific target for renewable energy sources in the Action Plan , we did reach an agreement to increase urgently and substantially the global share of renewable energy sources .
We also agreed to take joint actions to improve the access of the poor to energy .
Those agreements will be regularly evaluated and their progress reviewed .
In addition , the European Union launched a ' coalition of the willing ' on renewable energy .
This includes countries and regions willing to set themselves targets and timeframes for the increase of renewables in the energy mix .
This coalition maintains pressure on the unwilling , and should give a boost to the development of renewable energy throughout the world .
Significantly , this coalition will set a renewable energy target representing a floor as opposed to a ceiling .
Linked to this , there have been positive developments on climate change .
Those who have already ratified Kyoto have confirmed their commitment to entry into force at the earliest possible date and others are urged to join as soon as possible .
The announcements made by Poland , as well as by the Russian and Canadian Prime Ministers , mean that the Protocol should enter into force very soon .
The European Commission spoke with one strong voice in Johannesburg .
As Commissioner for the Environment , I shared with Poul Nielson ( Commissioner for Development ) the responsibility as chef de file in the preparations for Johannesburg .
We both participated in the high-level negotiation sessions at ministerial level at the WSSD Summit .
Coordination was further enhanced by the presence in Johannesburg of the President of the Commission .
I am now pleased to hand over to my colleague Poul Nielson who will speak , amongst other things , about the need for follow-up and implementation of our WSSD commitments .
Mr President , Mrs Wallström has correctly said that I will be talking more specifically about trade , finance and follow-up , but first a few general remarks .
One needs to keep in mind that Johannesburg was a UN conference .
This means delegations must reach consensus .
Not everybody gets everything .
As Commissioner Wallström said , we are in a different political climate than in 1992 .
It is almost as if NGOs and the Group of 77 had given up expecting constructive multilateralism from the United States ; as if the US is not part of the equation for sustainable development .
That attitude is not possible in the negotiation rooms , where the US , of course , is a real player , as we could see when the US and OPEC members joined forces in resisting targets on renewable energy .
But Johannesburg did result in consensus , and that in itself is positive .
Let me address trade issues in more detail .
I have noted some concerns here .
The negotiations were indeed difficult .
Developing countries focused on trade and on subsidies in agriculture .
This forced the EU to put in a strong effort to safeguard Doha as the place to discuss the substance and to avoid , in general , a derailing of the multilateral agenda .
I have noted point 6 in the motion for a resolution , and I would like to point out that I think this is a correct reading of this problem .
We succeeded in avoiding this derailing of the multilateral agenda , but of course we had to use up negotiation capital defending what everybody had in fact internationally agreed less than a year ago .
What is very encouraging - and you could call this ' EU leadership ' - is that we avoided a repetition of the disorganised ' agenda overload ' that was in fact the cause of the breakdown in Seattle .
When NGOs say that Johannesburg was a failure because it didn 't reopen Doha and Monterrey , this is a self-constructed and unnecessary misunderstanding of what Johannesburg was about .
The fact that some MEPs seem to share this misunderstanding does not help much .
Doha dealt with trade in November 2001 .
Monterrey dealt with financing in March 2002 .
This helped Johannesburg succeed .
The multilateral agenda was better organised for Johannesburg .
This enabled us - despite the difficulties I mentioned - to focus in the end-game on the core issues of the Johannesburg Summit .
The EU will continue to promote its positive agenda on trade for the benefit of developing countries .
There are plenty of things to report here :
First , we are ahead of other major trading partners on market access , thanks in particular to ' Everything But Arms ' .
Second , on Friday , the EU and the ACP countries launch negotiations on Regional Economic Partnership Agreements under the Cotonou Agreement .
I can go into more detail if you have questions about this .
Third , last week , the Commission adopted a communication on trade and development , addressed to Council and to this Parliament .
It sets out what needs to be done to help developing partners benefit from national , regional and global trade .
It responds , within less than a month , to the Johannesburg Political Declaration and the call for increased Trade-Related Assistance .
The relevant Doha provisions are quoted throughout the text .
The Johannesburg text also calls for the successful completion of the Doha Agenda , placing the needs of developing countries at the heart of negotiations , but without interfering with its negotiations on subsidies and tariffs .
On subsidies , the Johannesburg text directly quotes the Council 's conclusions .
The text also reaffirms the text on access to medicines and TRIPs .
In short , the Johannesburg text on trade and finance is in line with the mandate given by the Development Council on 30 May .
That is not a bad result .
The message from southern delegations was nevertheless loud and clear : ' The North must show that it is serious about Doha being a development round ' .
That is a rather useful reminder which we , from the Commission side , welcome and find meaningful .
Regarding finances , Johannesburg fully reconfirmed the millennium development goals , also adding a few new , important targets .
Sustainable development remains the core objective of the Johannesburg political declaration , and this gives us a coherent framework for implementing the outcome of all major UN conferences .
The fight against poverty was given high priority throughout the chapters of the Plan of Implementation .
It is a step forward that the summit explicitly prioritised fighting poverty in pursuing targets such as access to energy , water and sanitation , and equitable sharing of the benefits of biodiversity .
We therefore have sound , common yardsticks for whether the community of nations is doing enough .
The agreed language on finance ensures a dynamic post-Monterrey process , thereby maintaining the pressure for more ODA .
You will not be surprised to hear , however , that I think donors should be doing a lot more .
If you want concrete answers as to where the EU is going , you should look at 2003 fiscal budgets for each of the EU Member States .
That is what I will do .
Regarding the role of the European Parliament - there has been some debate on the role of Members of this Parliament at the summit , and on collaboration with the Commission .
Since some of these remarks have been made in public , I would like to take this opportunity to briefly react .
The Commission was pleased to accept a substantial presence from the Parliament in the Union 's delegation , as has been the case for all major UN conferences .
Members followed the summit actively and interacted with the Commission in briefings , summit events , side-events and so on , all in the interests of representing Europe .
As agreed between the institutions , Members of Parliament participated in delegations as observers and did not take part in negotiating sessions .
There was no deviation from established practice in Johannesburg .
I think I should repeat this .
There was no deviation from established practice in Johannesburg .
The Commission did its best to support the parliamentarians .
They were kept regularly informed of negotiations , and the Commission listened carefully to their views .
Debriefing meetings were held on a daily basis by senior Commission officials .
This demonstrates the importance we gave to a transparent flow of information .
Both Commissioner Wallström and I participated in this process , and I personally met the Parliament delegation three times during the summit , not to mention the Parliamentary side-events I attended , including two events organised by the Green party .
All of this was done within the current framework , a framework referred to explicitly in President Prodi 's letter agreeing to parliamentary participation .
I pointed out to Members of Parliament raising this issue in Johannesburg during the summit , as I had to , that we had not come there with new rules and that it was not in our power in Johannesburg to change these arrangements .
Any such changes require a tripartite decision involving the Commission , Council and European Parliament .
If being a loyal custodian of what has been agreed to makes one ancient , I prefer that , rather than trying to be modern if that means not being able to respect what has been agreed to .
Now a few words on follow-up .
Partnerships between governments , business and civil society will be necessary to deliver the commitments made in Johannesburg .
We welcome the more than 200 partnerships launched at the summit .
These partnerships will hopefully bring additional resources and expertise , and mobilise action at all levels .
But it is the quality and size of the partnerships that matter , not the numbers as such .
The Cotonou Agreement is ' only ' one partnership , but it covers 15 EU Member States , 77 developing countries , and has a financial protocol of EUR 15.2 billion .
We are not starting from scratch .
The European Commission will focus on securing strong EU implementation of the two EU-wide partnerships on water and energy launched in Johannesburg .
During the summit , the EU signed with its African partners a strategic EU-Africa partnership on water and sanitation .
In conjunction with the EU Water Initiative , this is an important step towards the development of concrete actions building on strong ownership and commitment from African partners .
More generally , it is clear that the effective implementation of the outcome of Johannesburg means translating intentions into action through development cooperation undertaken regionally and nationally as well as locally .
The EU must continue to take the lead .
The European Council has already agreed to review , at its Spring meeting in 2003 , the EU strategy for sustainable development , with a focus on putting into practice the commitments undertaken in Johannesburg .
To prepare this review , the Commission intends to submit proposals building on the communication ' Towards a Global Partnership for Sustainable Development ' issued earlier this year .
Internally , one of the main issues to be addressed in the synthesis report for next Spring 's European Council should be how to move towards more sustainable consumption and production patterns in the EU .
I would conclude by saying that the European Union can be satisfied with the role it played in Johannesburg ; and by stressing ' European Union ' .
The cooperation between Commission and Council was also a very positive experience .
The EU clearly came with the longest wish list .
But of course , the higher the level of ambition , the greater the scope for disappointment .
NGOs and the press focus on these shortcomings .
So be it .
But as responsible politicians , we must be careful not to draw the conclusion that we , for this reason , should be less ambitious in the future .
The Commission does not believe the EU - and indeed the world - can afford to be less ambitious .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Danish Presidency and the Commission .
I want to begin in a positive mood and say that I fully agree with the Commission and the Council that we should not be too critical and negative about the result of the Johannesburg Summit .
It is not possible to measure the gain that nonetheless results when we see that more people have access to water , proper sanitation , food and an environment with fewer chemicals .
I think that we should say that this really is a gain and that we should share the credit together , for , had it not been for the European Union , I think that we never would have got as far as we did in Johannesburg .
This is also perhaps where part of Parliament 's frustration lies .
Ever since the period before the Gothenburg Summit , we in Parliament have worked actively for sustainable development .
Many have compared our wish list to some sort of Christmas tree with an overabundance of decorations .
We have nonetheless been agreed on the requirements and on the process we wanted the Union to implement in order to make the necessary changes .
Our frustration stems from the fact that we can see that the results have not yet been achieved .
If our wish list is considered to be an over-decorated Christmas tree , then one could well say that the result from Johannesburg is more like a Christmas tree with no needles - but nevertheless a Christmas tree .
Our frustration also expresses itself when we are not able to make use of our abilities and our knowledge at summits .
I still think that this message is one that the Commission should take note of .
It is a matter of the attitude between Parliament and the Commission .
This fact is , however , worthy of a much smaller degree of frustration than the situation we actually ought to be frustrated about , that is , the situation the world finds itself in .
This is the problem we really ought to discuss today .
The problems that might exist between Parliament and the Commission as to who should say what at the international meetings can be taken up in a forum other than this Chamber , and we should now concentrate on the problem that we actually need to do something about .
It is good that there is emphasis on us now having to start on the real work .
We must ensure that the commitments and promises that the EU made in Johannesburg now find expression in our actual policies and that they are visible in our budget .
I should like both the Council and the Commission to return to Parliament in February to report on what has been done up to then and what will happen in future so that the commitments from Johannesburg can be implemented .
In this connection , I will naturally emphasise aid .
The Member States fall embarrassingly short of the standard when it comes to international aid .
There are few who actually come up to it .
I would also like to say a few words about the other commitments that the EU has made , for example at Kyoto , and about how things are looking with our own climate programme , which the Commission approved about a year ago , a two-year programme that comprises one half of the strategy to combat climate change within Europe .
We come back to the other half , the trade in emission quotas , in October through Mr Moreira da Silva .
It is a pity that we cannot also discuss emission quotas in this context , but I will , however , say something about the report that the Commission published about one year ago .
We have made good progress with what the Commission has put forward , but the Commission 's programme is lacking a great many important parts .
Agriculture policy , for example , is still not included , but this could perhaps be included in the programme now since one year has passed .
With regard to our targets and the 8 % reduction we want to achieve , the principle must still be that climate policy should form the basis of energy policy .
This should govern the formulation of our energy policy in future .
We must ensure that this is expressed in our research programmes and in the directives that the Commission has promised , such as the directive on public procurement with regard to energy .
Transport remains the biggest problem .
There are no good solutions , a fact that could be described as embarrassing .
Less embarrassing are the local examples .
The car-free day all over Europe on Sunday is witness to an enormous commitment of a kind that we should make much more often than we have in the past .
Mr President , I speak in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion on the European Climate Change Programme .
Commissioner Nielson , I was astonished by the self-satisfaction you radiated during your contribution on the outcome of Johannesburg .
There is little evidence to justify it , and your abuse of the press is of no use and makes no difference .
I wish to speak on the Climate Change Programme , and with specific reference to the ten of its forty-two points that are to be implemented over the coming two years .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has welcomed this programme as a whole , as we take the view that it is not enough for measures to be taken by the Member States alone .
There can , though , be no doubt that responsibility for adherence to the climate change objectives rests primarily with the states that signed the Kyoto Protocol , that is , with the Member States of the European Union , that burden sharing is a voluntary agreement within the European Union , and that the measures proposed by the Commission and supported by Parliament must not be allowed to frustrate these objectives .
That is why the Committee on Industry takes the view that what matters in evaluating the measures is that the most efficient and cost-effective should be taken first .
It is , then , about not providing just for any old measures that cost a lot of money and put the European Union 's industrial competitiveness at risk , but rather about making a start where everything can be put into effect as quickly as possible .
There are , as yet , few proposals on how to go about this .
Two have been received , one on biofuels , which are the right thing but expensive , and another on emissions trading , on which latter subject the Committee on Industry has made an emphatic call for a voluntary pilot stage up to 2008 , and for such trading not to be enforced before that date .
It is my belief that this objective and these considerations have to be looked at from the point of view of industry policy .
I have been preceded on the floor by four speakers from the Scandinavian states .
I believe it to be the common responsibility of us all not to lose sight of our industrial policy objectives and our economy 's competitiveness , no matter how necessary it is that we support to the utmost a sensible European climate change programme .
Mr President , I am going to speak about the Johannesburg Summit .
With regard to the Hulthén report , my colleague , Peter Liese , will address this issue .
Unlike what many tried to do , and which amounted to condemning the summit to failure even before it began , Parliament set out for Johannesburg with considerable ambition : in other words , we did not join in with the cynical approach of those who sought to lower expectations before setting off in order to be able then to make small victories appear to be major ones .
We adopted this approach for two reasons : first , because this is what the world required .
The world is in a state of emergency , in both the environmental and the social fields , and so achieving a merely reasonable result at the summit was not acceptable to this Parliament .
Second , because this was an opportunity that did not arise ten years ago and which will not arise in the next few years .
It would , therefore , have been a tragic mistake not to take advantage of this opportunity .
We set out , then , with considerable ambition and with a great spirit of unity and of solidarity between all the political groups .
And at the end of the summit , I must say that although we moved in the right direction and we went further than Rio , we achieved less than what was needed .
Admittedly , some results were achieved , but these are by no means sufficient to reverse the signs of unsustainability afflicting the planet .
On the positive side , in addition to what the Danish Presidency and the Commission have highlighted in terms of timetables and targets , specifically for poverty , water and health , I would highlight as equally positive the change in the character of the summit .
Whereas in Rio we did not get beyond the concept of sustainable development , Johannesburg was associated with action .
The nature of the summit took a qualitative leap forwards .
Secondly , a qualitative leap was also taken in terms of concepts : sustainable development made a very close link between the environment and poverty .
And I think that another qualitative leap was the desire to eradicate poverty and , at the same time , to put a brake on environmental degradation .
Thirdly , in terms of the actors : reversing unsustainability stopped being an obligation of nations , of states alone .
With the huge number of partnerships approved , the participation of civil society has been guaranteed .
Both the public and private sectors are committed to this objective of sustainable development .
On the negative side , it was obviously a disappointment that no quantified targets were set for renewable energies or for reversing lost biodiversity .
I would , however , add a point not mentioned either by the Danish Presidency , or by the Commission , and which I believe is negative : it is the fact that no boost was given to institutional reform in the field of the environment .
This summit could have been used to ensure the ' greening ' of the existing institutions , such as the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation , but also to launch new institutions that place globalisation at the service of sustainable development .
I am thinking , for example , of a World Environment Organisation .
This issue was not mentioned or discussed , and played no part in the summit , and this was deplorable .
I have one last thing to say , also on the negative side , with regard to Kyoto . Many people have placed Kyoto on the positive side of the balance-sheet of this summit .
I would put it on the negative side .
It is true that Russia , Canada , India and China made very fine declarations with regard to the future .
What was expected of this summit , however , was not declarations or intentions about Kyoto : what was hoped for was for the summit to lead to the practical implementation of the Kyoto Protocol .
And ten years after the Rio Summit , Kyoto has still not begun to exist in practice .
I wish to say one last thing about the role of Parliament and our relationship with the Commission and with the Council .
We tend , at these summits , to praise the Commission and to criticise the Council .
This time , things were reversed : our relationship with the Danish Presidency was excellent , transparent , highly cooperative and , unfortunately , this time , with the Commission , we did not see the same level of cooperation that we have grown accustomed to at the conferences on climate change with Commissioner Wallström .
We have always enjoyed excellent cooperation at the summits on climate change .
Unfortunately , this time there was neither transparency , nor cooperation , nor sufficient collaboration .
Mr President , Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Johannesburg was indeed a summit at which it was no longer the fine and already so often enunciated words that mattered , but the commitment to definite actions .
I believe that this was also timely , as what we know to be necessary has long been an item on the agenda .
If it is the worldwide acceptance of sustainable development that we are about , then it goes without saying that this involves the alleviation of poverty and the promotion of social cohesion in many countries of the world , that being the foundation stone for sustainable development and for environmentally responsible behaviour .
So it is that I find it all the more regrettable that the current American administration behaves as it does , making use of every tactical evasive trick in an attempt to forestall definite commitments with the ultimate aim of causing its own economic interests to prevail .
I believe that this has to be said with the utmost clarity , especially in the light of how the European Union , the driving force behind this summit , tried to get the right questions onto the agenda and also to get to grips with the right targets for implementing sustainable development .
This has , unfortunately , been only partly successful , mainly because the world 's largest industrial state blocked it .
The EU provided the driving force and indicated the right way to go , notably on issues of water supply , sanitation and environmentally friendly production .
I also found the daily discussions with the Commission good and appropriate , and am also grateful to the Presidency of the Council for , on three occasions , having very in-depth discussions with the Parliamentary delegation , although it is still Parliament 's demand that the leader of the delegation at least should take part in the EU coordination meeting tomorrow and be able to observe and comment on the actual negotiating processes .
If , however , you point the finger at the right issues , three fingers are generally pointing back at you , and that is also true on this issue of sustainable development .
One of these fingers is our agricultural policy .
How , indeed , can we go on the offensive in demanding changes in production worldwide if our agricultural policies and subsidies stand in the way of fair dealing , if our agricultural subsidies are many times in excess of what we give as development aid ?
Second finger : what about a system of fair trade for the world ?
To judge by the situation that coffee growers currently find themselves in , there is a need for bold revision of the trading system and also of the international financial flows , which have to aim at fair investments rather than the maximisation of short-term profit .
The third finger , without a doubt , points to the issue of sustainable policies in our own activities .
How successful are we in fact in pointing the European Union 's transport systems and private households towards sustainability ?
We will have credibility in the eyes of the world only when we ourselves can make it clear that what we demand of others we also put into practice ourselves .
That is why the climate change programme that we are discussing today is an important building block towards combining environmental policy channels with economic performance and social justice .
Mr President , at the close of the Johannesburg Summit , the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , stated that this type of conference cannot be expected to produce miracles .
I must add that the results of previous conferences , Rome and Monterrey , to be specific , did not give rise to such expectations either .
We agree , however , that it is legitimate to expect more than what was achieved .
And , basically , considerably more was needed .
Obviously , we do not wish to play down some of the objectives that were sketched out and also some of the time targets that were adopted , particularly in terms of access to drinking water and to basic sanitation , in terms of the use and production of chemical products or the recovery of fish stocks . Not to mention other objectives which had been previously enshrined and which have now been reaffirmed .
However , and at the same time , we cannot ignore or gloss over the clear failures seen in other fields , specifically in the field of renewable energies , to which the European Union has been so committed , but in which the results fell far short of our expectations .
Furthermore , we must bear in mind that the means and even the commitment crucial to realising the objectives adopted remained largely undefined , especially if we take account of the deadlines that were set .
Despite the fact that , as has been mentioned , some new objectives were defined , nothing relevant or practical was put forward apart from the insipid Monterrey commitments in the field of financial resources , either in terms of public development aid or of debt cancellation .
We are aware that a decision was taken to create a solidarity fund designed to eradicate poverty .
We also know , however , that this fund has a purely voluntary basis which is not , therefore , binding . We cannot , therefore , expect great results of it .
At the same time , this fund demonstrates the clear failure by the developed countries to provide the public aid to which they committed themselves some decades ago .
In other words , given the lack of adequate resources , we might once again be in the field of good intentions , such as many of those declared in Rio and which experience has shown have gone no further .
Fundamentally , however , the Johannesburg Summit produced no clear and objective definition of the direction to be taken in order to achieve the realisation of the central objective of the summit , and which it took , incidentally , as its motto : sustainable development .
We would really like to see , in this field , a level of commitment , a degree of responsibility and a clarity with regard to targets similar to those that have been adopted at the trade summits .
It is clear , however , that neither the will nor the political priorities are the same , especially on the part of those that determine the outcome of these events .
And , with regard to this , it is worth pointing out that Secretary of State Colin Powell set the tone by making the very limiting statement that trade is the driving force of development and that Johannesburg is an important step on the path that lies between Doha and the future .
Much of what happened in Johannesburg can be understood in the light of these two statements placing the entire emphasis on trade .
Mr President , the lack of success of Johannesburg was due to the change in the political climate .
This change in the political climate is taking place not only in the US , but also in the EU because we have a much more trade-dominated political agenda than we did in 1992 .
The Verts / ALE Group today considers that we will no longer be credible in the eyes of the G77 countries if we do not change this and add four cornerstones to our international policy .
Firstly , monitoring is not sufficient .
We need a binding agreement in the EU on 0.7 % of ODA .
Secondly , we must stop export subsidies on agriculture .
Thirdly , we must progress in Europe in the area of production and consumption patterns .
Fourthly , we must stop trade dominance and restore a better balance between multilateral environmental agreements and trade , and also introduce binding agreements for big business with regard to their corporate and social responsibility .
If we look at the way the negotiations were handled in Johannesburg - and this is another reason for its lack of success - in the first week we had a Commissioner who was primarily interested in trade issues .
There may have been very good reasons why the Commissioner for the Environment was only able to attend for some 48 hours , but on top of this we had a Commissioner who had determined a substantial part of the negotiations , without any democratic scrutiny , in secret negotiations months ahead of the whole summit .
Finally , we were less well prepared with regard to the energy partnership than we were on the water partnership .
That was another reason why we were not able to move ahead quickly on this and you , Commissioners , signed a letter in which you tried to readdress the question of the role of nuclear energy in this partnership .
Can you give us a clear message that we in Parliament will be much more involved in the future of this partnership , as we requested in our report ?
Mr President , what we are left with after Johannesburg is little concrete progress and a muddy outlook for future global work on sustainable development .
What should have been the climax of the Johannesburg summit - the political declaration - ended up being a weak mish-mash of the special interests of various countries which does not dare mention human rights directly , which leaves it up to the corporations themselves to check whether they are meeting their responsibilities and which erased all mention of the promises made at Rio not having been met .
A declaration that never managed to grasp the nettle and change the circumstances that could really make a difference to the poor people of the world .
Neither the EU nor the USA had the will to make concessions to the developing countries in the area of aid and trade .
Both Mr Lange and Mr Turmes have mentioned the EU 's agricultural subsidies , which are quite fundamental .
Consequently it was also difficult to achieve improvements in the areas of the environment and human rights .
So that was the outcome of hours of negotiations behind closed doors - in sharp contrast to several sections of the declaration , which talk about the broad involvement of partners .
The Johannesburg Summit provided confirmation of ten years ' experience of the USA as a player in global environmental and development policy .
First they water down the agreements , then they still do not sign up to them anyway .
Unfortunately , the EU does not have much to boast about either .
' Let us enter into an agreement capable of replacing darkness and despair with light and hope for hundreds of millions of people , ' said Mr Rasmussen in his speech at the summit .
Sadly , I find it difficult to see where these fine words are reflected in the final outcome .
Water and sanitation - yes , those are positive things , but if we look at the promises made at Cairo , for example , and at how few of them have been met , I would like to see things implemented before I dare to trust in these promises .
Do global summits still have a role ?
Yes and no .
As long as the rich leaders of the world have no real intention of bringing about improvements for the poor people of the world , the money can be spent on better things than expensive conferences and summits .
It will take more than pipe dreams to feed the poor properly .
Mr President , the world at large is slowly getting tired of hearing reports on environmental summits with feeble outcomes .
Rio still managed to be the bearer of great hopes , at least as regards theoretical approaches and fine words .
The deeds that ensued were so disappointing that the environmental movement around the world has been virtually struck dumb .
Kyoto was at least able to formulate an objective .
The length of the periods of time leading up to implementation is such as to induce paralysis .
Johannesburg was another disappointment in terms of what had been expected of it .
Every failed summit does more harm than good , as it brings on a mood of resignation .
Despite all this , I would like to mention the positive things about Johannesburg .
For the first time , the European Union set out a practicable way ahead and a definite strategy in the form of the development of renewable energy sources .
It is of course a matter for regret that the global one per cent increase was not adopted , but the EU now has the chance to live out and demonstrate , within its own borders , the way in which conversion to renewable energy sources makes everyone a winner , in that , by doing so , we will not only be mitigating climatic disaster , but will also be creating five times as many jobs as we would with traditional use of energy , preserving resources around the world , using renewable energy sources to develop technologies that we can export .
Let us bear in mind that two billion people in the world have no electricity .
It is now for us to work hard at demonstrating by our actions that we are actually achieving the objectives set by the White Paper for renewable energy sources .
I would like to point out that we are rather behind in our aim to double their use by 2010 .
I wish to inform you of the progress of our work .
We should have finished this part at 10 a.m. , which would have given us 45 minutes of free debate between the Members present in the Chamber .
I regret to say that hardly anybody respected the speaking time , with the - greatly appreciated - exception of the President-in-Office of the Council .
Now , before we start this part of the debate , the two Commissioners have asked to speak - in response to Mrs Hulthén 's speech , I imagine - and they will speak later on as well .
I invite the two Commissioners to be brief in their mid-debate contributions .
On a point of order , Mr President .
I think we should ask the Commissioners to reiterate their positions at the end of the debate rather than while it is in progress .
Now it is the turn of the MEPs !
Mr Liese , the two Commissioners are already scheduled to speak at the end of the debate .
I am quite aware of that .
However , they have explicitly requested the floor now and I cannot refuse .
Mr President , we are totally in your hands .
We can do this in whatever way you want .
I would like to thank the two Commissioners for their amenability .
In actual fact , I too found the idea that they should make three contributions to the debate a little odd .
The two Commissioners will , therefore , respond at the end , after the free debate which is about to take place and the second speeches of the speakers from the political groups .
Mr President , I am speaking on the Hulthén Report in my capacity as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group , but I cannot be anything other than astonished at Commissioner Nielson 's behaviour in particular .
What has been reported by the Members of this House who were in Johannesburg , and also his conduct here today , make me wonder whether it makes any sense to let a Parliamentary delegation take part in such summits in this way .
Let me turn now , though , to Mrs Hulthén 's report on climate change , which is excellent and for which I thank her .
One might say that this topic has been whirled back to the surface by the floods in Germany and in neighbouring countries .
Although we cannot say that this actual flood was a product of climate change , we are all aware that such events will occur more frequently if we do not take prompt action now .
This makes the European Climate Change Programme important , but the actual measures so far proposed by the Commission are insufficiently ambitious .
Emissions trading is a highly controversial topic in this House , and the Commissioner knows that Mr Moreira da Silva has my firm support in his efforts at improving the Commission proposal and preventing it from being watered down .
The Commission proposal on emissions trading is , however , only a part of a comprehensive strategy .
Too little has been done to date in the areas of transport and the Budget , and , if we are not careful , this can even result in grave distortions , for example , to the detriment of railways and to the benefit of HGV transport .
We are still waiting for the proposal on the energy efficiency of machinery .
If we are to have a comprehensive strategy on this as well , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi should waste no time in submitting a very ambitious proposal .

I would like to draw Members ' particular attention to item 16 in the Hulthén Report , which has to do with the abolition of subsidies that harm the environment and the climate - a difficult topic , but we are sticking with it , dealing as it does with the introduction of a revenue-neutral pollution-related levy for all areas to which emissions trading does not apply .
This means that industry , if it wants to campaign against emissions trading , has to ask itself whether it would , in its stead , prefer this pollution-related levy , and I do believe that we will then have a hard-headed discussion on this issue .
Mr President , I welcome the part of the proposed resolution relating to health and meeting health targets .
Firstly , the reduction of the prevalence of HIV-AIDS - a disease that has reduced life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa from 62 to 47 years - is an absolutely essential target .
There are reliable estimates to say that if the present state of the disease continues , every other 15-year-old girl in South Africa will die of HIV-AIDS .
One way to combat this is through further development of microbicides .
This particular form of preventive treatment can be singled out because , unlike conventional methods of protection , it allows women to take responsibility for its use .
The problem is that investment in their development is not sufficient and such treatments are still several years away .
There is a real problem in obtaining money for clinical trials .
The second point is to draw the attention of colleagues to Parliament 's own work on the Sixth Framework Programme .
Through this programme the European Union has given high priority to combating poverty-linked infectious diseases , such as AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis .
Finally , I should like to mention access to medicines .
I hope the present contretemps about TRIPs and possible barriers to the most modern medicines will be overcome very shortly .
There is also a shortage of generic medicines , the cheaper medicines and other forms of treatment , which are just as important in countries where poverty is so rife and where water standards are so poor .
It is a priority and the European Union must do all it can to stave off one of the biggest threats to the global population - disease .
Mr President , I listened carefully to the two Commissioners emphasise the positive role played by the European Union during the negotiations at the Johannesburg Summit .
I think that it is true that the European Union played a positive role .
I would like to draw everyone 's attention to the fact that if we really want to make progress at this type of summit , we must be credible to the partners who take part in negotiations and discussions .
In this case , however , our credibility is marred by the fact that the European Union , in a whole string of policies , is doing the opposite of what it claims to want to do .
If we take the case of the common agricultural policy , the current debate on Mr Fischler 's proposals shows that the majority of the Member States are reluctant to change , are reluctant to abandon the privileges that we acquired in the area of export subsidies .
We absolutely must make an effort in this area to withdraw export subsidies and to gain this credibility in countries which are affected by these subsidies .
If we do not do this , how can we ensure that , at summits of this type , these people listen to us slightly more earnestly than they do at the moment ?
They are not listening to us , because we are not credible .
I am thinking of the agricultural policy , of the fisheries policy , which we are proposing to reform as well .
The future will tell us that if we are not capable of revising these policies , in the appropriate fashion , we will not succeed in gaining more influence at forthcoming summits , because the Johannesburg Summit is not the only one , there will be many others .
It is absolutely essential that we put our own house in order before we tell others what to do .
Mr President , in my opinion , the wording of items 6 and 7 on the CAP and the agricultural subsidies demonstrates three major political mistakes .
The first is a total ignorance of the declaration signed in Doha , where the European Union agreed to reduce its export subsidies , but managed to insist that all other types of subsidies , specifically the credits handed out by the United States of America and the state undertakings of other countries , should also be reduced .
And this is a major victory for the European Union to have achieved .
The second reason is that this wording reveals a completely ingenuous analysis , which states that a unilateral reduction of subsidies by the European Union could solve the problems .
Especially at a time when the United States has just approved an agricultural policy in which they increase their subsidies and especially when it is widely known that this new American policy is heightening the depression in world prices .
This way of thinking is all the more ingenuous because the USA is the largest exporter of agricultural products to the Developing World , and not only to the European Union .
The third reason is this declaration 's incomprehensible silence on the European Union initiative known as ' everything but arms ' , which is to date the largest , most relevant and generous offer made by the developed countries to the world 's poorest countries .
And the fact that this has been ignored and not mentioned is incomprehensible .
In other words , we are not valuing our own efforts .
All these reasons , therefore , explain why the wording of items 6 and 7 in this declaration on agriculture is known in politics as ' shooting oneself in the foot ' : this weakens the European Union , this European Union that has until now been the most powerful force promoting the interests of the poorest countries .
This is why it is crucial , in tomorrow 's voting time , to remedy these aspects .
Mr President , politics works in such a way that , after each international meeting , we spend more time talking about the results that are , apparently , still unsatisfactory than about the actual progress that was made .
This is what happened after Rio , this is what happened after Kyoto , even though , in the meantime , Rio and Kyoto became undeniable milestones in the area of sustainable development .
The concept of sustainable development has become a chant , a sort of enchanted prayer that is uttered indiscriminately .
In my view , it is obvious that there can be no sustainable development without economic and social development - it is as simple as that .
Poverty is the major enemy to managing natural resources and protecting the environment in a responsible manner .
Responsible globalisation must become the process of a global economic development that makes genuine global solidarity possible .
State development aid is not sufficient , even if we manage to double or triple it .
USD 50 billion of state aid is not much .
Americans spend the same amount of money on the upkeep of their lawns !
In 2001 , a year that did not bode well for international investment , private investment flows towards developing countries amounted to over USD 200 billion , in other words already four times more than the total state aid .
For private investment to reach all countries , we must , as a necessity , negotiate a multilateral agreement on investment protection , which involves creating international arbitration bodies responsible for resolving disputes .
No private investor - no ethical investment fund , even - will invest any money without guarantees and without the prospect of a return .
In the absence of any multilateral rules , there will be an avalanche of bilateral agreements .
There are already more than 1 200 !
Yet , in all bilateral agreements , it is not the poorest partner who dictates the conditions .
Sustainable development needs global standards , and these standards are also needed for investments and for their protection .
Mr President , I shall focus on the European programme on climate change .
I fully and wholeheartedly agree with everything Mrs Anneli Hulthén has to say on this matter , but I do miss one aspect , namely communication with the citizen .
Since the recent floods , the seriousness of any potential climate change is starting to strike home , but few are aware , let alone convinced , of the need for action .
I would suggest three points that could facilitate communication with the citizen .
First of all , I believe that the citizen must be given clear choices .
Although Member States play an important role in this , the Commission can do a great deal to clarify the options .
What is the implication , for example , of reducing the maximum speed on motorways to 100 km / hour ?
How much do we stand to gain ?
What does it mean if each house were to be fitted with a solar panel or use low-energy light bulbs ?
Are these merely drops in the ocean or do they make a substantial contribution ?
If the choices were clear , then citizens could become involved in the subject of climate .
Policy on climate could then also become integrated in a climate strategy .
Secondly , policy on climate should be placed much more in the context of development .
Investing in sustainable energy is costly , but rewarding .
At present , 2 billion people have no access to electricity .
Sustainable energy is local and can give an enormous boost to development .
We should not only send out this message in Johannesburg , but also in Brussels and Strasbourg , and preferably every day .
Thirdly , a flagship is what is needed .
Member States must invest jointly in the development of sustainable energy and energy efficiency .
Something along the lines of the Airbus project .
The Sixth Framework Programme for research and Article 169 offer good opportunities in this area .
A flagship project is visible to the citizens and can play a key role in public awareness .
Commissioner , in my view , there could be a little more enthusiasm for policy on climate .
To date , we have mainly sent out a negative signal and a sombre message .
More attention to communication and the political aspects could contribute to public involvement .
Mr President , I have just had this confirmed to me by various Fisheries Ministers meeting at Reykjavik in Iceland .
These Fisheries Ministers came from the USA , Chile , Sri Lanka , Tunisia , the Faeroes , Norway , and so on .
They say unanimously that Johannesburg is on the right track with this decision .
Rarely enough are there real political decisions .
Everyone prefers to rush to coat their personal or national egoisms with a veneer of sanctity , particularly when the eyes of world public opinion are upon them .
This time , though , there was a real decision on sustainability and on the fisheries sector , which has undergone such a severe battering .
This agreement on a point of principle was achieved very quickly .
It sends the message that there is nothing more to be discussed , and that now is the time to act .
That is Johannesburg 's appeal to the world .
It is also addressed to us who have Europe for our home and sit in this Parliament .
The reform of European fisheries policy simply will not wait .
It is of great intrinsic value and must not be used to gain advantages in other policy fields by being a pawn in negotiating tactics and games that it is all too easy to see through .
That is what is also called meeting each other halfway at the expense of fisheries .
Johannesburg was unerring in recognising that .
Fish stocks are to recover by 2015 .
Now we have to get a move on .
I hope this will be one of our successes - one of the successes of the European Union within the framework of a reform that is imminent and can be delayed no longer .
Mr President , Commissioners you will be beginning to find our speeches repetitive .
Great : in a multi-national and cross-party body , that means our message will get through .
We all agree , for example , that energy is the largest contributor by far to the emission of greenhouse gases . Some of us think that nuclear energy is expensive , outdated , potentially dangerous and no solution at all to energy problems .
But we all agree that transport is the key energy problem : fossil fuels must be replaced by alternatives , and very soon .
How ?
We agree that renewable energy and energy efficiency are key solutions .
This was recognised in Johannesburg , but unfortunately , only to a limited extent .
However , we should act quickly on this through the EU .
Remember that the key role of energy in poverty alleviation was recognised at Johannesburg , and that the new EU programme , COOPENER , on renewable energy and energy efficiency in the developing world , will help to access some of the funding which will be available , this programme is important .
There is , incidentally , a very strong gender implication to the provision of energy , because of the tasks of women throughout the developing world .
The failure to achieve targets for renewable energy - a failure for which the United States , to their shame , are largely responsible - can be overcome with goodwill and effort from the European Union .
On the matter of implementation : Carrying suitcases from summit to summit does nothing .
It is what happens in between the summits that matters , and I urge you , Commissioners , to use your legislative powers and your monitoring ability to ensure that what was said at Johannesburg , even if it is not enough , is carried through .
Mr President , I was one of the Members who attended the summit in Johannesburg and was fortunate enough to meet some of the thousands who went there from all over the world to focus attention on the need for people-centred policies .
We heard over and over again that the summit had to change the lives of the poorest people in the world if it was to be a success .
We did not expect dramatic changes and we did not get them , but there was some modest progress .
For example we saw a move towards achieving better governance .
I hope that this Parliament will actively support universal membership of the UNEP for environment ministers .
This could be the starting point for a world environment organisation .
This brings us to the central question of enforcement and monitoring .
We know from experience since Rio that it is one thing to make agreements but another to ensure they are implemented .
We welcome the possibility at last of bringing the Kyoto Protocol into force , but it has been a long and difficult process .
How will progress from Johannesburg onwards be achieved ?
It is not clear .
Although the Johannesburg Declaration includes a commitment to an inclusive process , which means involving the kinds of groups that met around the summit , how is this going to be done ?
Similarly the regional and local level are important .
We know how the private sector is going to be involved , but how will different levels of government be involved ?
Finally , I welcome the fact that the efforts to include biotechnology as an intrinsic part of sustainability were resisted in Johannesburg , despite the efforts of the United States .
At the very time when the summit was going on to use a human crisis to try and force GM food aid on some of the world 's poorest countries .
This takes away freedom of choice , undermines human dignity and works against sustainability .
We must continue to resist it .
Mr President , Commissioners , I am reminded of the optimism caricatured by the French philosopher Voltaire in the person of Pangloss , which , in fact , derives from the philosophy of the German philosopher Leibniz , according to which ' everything is for the best in the best of all possible worlds ' .
If Voltaire were to return here , however , he would also draw a caricature , certainly a very impressive one , of those that today think that everything is for the worst in the worst of all possible worlds .
This almost phantasmagoric pessimism that affects many commentators , many politicians and many Members of this House is unjustified .
It is unjustified because at the Johannesburg Summit , as I see it , indication was given of the right way forwards , the correct diagnosis was made , and the European Union acted correctly at the summit , and we should be congratulating it on this instead of being constantly critical .
The summit pointed in the right direction but we must also take account of the fact that the rich countries are going to have to pay for the policies that were outlined in Johannesburg and that control mechanisms must be established to ensure , as has already been said , that words are translated into action .
I would also say that the Johannesburg Summit served to reveal some of our fears and weaknesses in analysing the world 's problems .
I wish to highlight only one of these , if I may , which is the issue of birth control and the world 's population .
It makes no sense that this problem should not be addressed because we fear religious dogma , the type of dogma that Voltaire condemned , or because we fear being considered Malthusian .
We all know that it is precisely where the population grows at a faster pace that we see more poverty and more degradation of nature .
And , therefore , this issue of birth control , of the global regulation of the world 's population cannot be ignored in any discussion about the survival of the earth and about a more humane life for human beings .
We now come to the speakers from the political groups .
The good news is that I can be flexible in terms of timings : speaking time can be extended if the speakers so wish .
Mr President , the previous speaker referred to Voltaire .
Let me refer to a Danish author , Hans Christian Andersen , who wrote a story that many of us have read , The Emperor 's New Clothes .
Sometimes I feel that the debate we are holding is a little reminiscent of this very story .
Everyone can see that the emperor is naked , but we will not , dare not , actually say so .
I am therefore one of those who cannot in any way see the Johannesburg Summit as a success .
I think that it was good that the meeting was held , that a large number of contacts were made and that a number of good decisions were taken .
Given the problems we face on this small planet ; poverty which continues to spread rapidly , the spread of infectious diseases , the many environmental problems and , especially , the tremendously rapid development in technology in many areas , some form of regulatory framework is required if it is to work well .
What we arrived at in Johannesburg is not sufficient .
Unfortunately , I am afraid that we will meet here again in five or ten years and that we will then see that a great many of the problems that have quite rightly been identified in connection with Johannesburg will have become worse .
Let me raise an issue where I think that the final result from Johannesburg leaves a great deal to be desired .
As early as 1992 in Rio de Janeiro it was seen that current patterns of production and consumption are not working in a world with seven to eight billion people .
At the same time , everyone wants the poor countries to develop .
It is therefore obvious that production and consumption must change .
What I had hoped for from Johannesburg was a real commitment from the rich countries to assist with the modernisation of patterns of production and consumption in the poor countries .
This applies to energy production , which is now expanding very rapidly , this applies to transport , it applies to chemicals , waste handling , agriculture and water .
Every year , countries like China , India , Mexico , Indonesia and Brazil invest hundreds of billons of US dollars or more in new energy production .
Most of this is carbon technology .
We have a self-interest in helping out with favourable loans , with subsidies and with technical cooperation in order to actually ensure that the required energy development also occurs in an environmentally friendly and efficient manner .
Unfortunately we do not have the instruments .
I welcome the initiatives that the Commission took on Sustainable Energy .
I think that this was very good , especially in the light of the Commission 's previous doubts about making vigorous efforts in this area .
I will gladly contribute towards working out the details , but this is a very limited measure compared with the great needs that exist .
I consider that we need efforts of a completely different magnitude .
It seems as if we have realised this too late .
In a few years , we will undoubtedly increase resources in this context , but they are required now .
Let me conclude by stating that perhaps we simply have too great a level of expectation from this type of international cooperation .
I think that Commissioner Wallström made a very true remark in the days after the Johannesburg Summit .
She said ' that it is possible that we must find other ways , that we must identify countries that want to go further , including hopefully the European Union ' .
We should perhaps create partnerships with companies that want to progress further and faster , with popular movements , with researchers and so on , so that we can achieve greater speed in some of the areas where the situation is particularly critical .
We simply do not have any political system at the international level that is a match for the development that is now occurring , where so many problems of different types require common rules .
I look forward to initiatives from the Commission in these areas .
I would ask the Commission in each individual case to involve Parliament at an earlier stage .
As regards the initiatives that the Commission took in the areas of water and energy , we have never had an opportunity to present any opinions , something which is somewhat frustrating considering that there is indisputable commitment and interest in these areas .
Mr President , I would like right away to enlarge on Mr Wijkman 's analogy with Hans Christian Andersen 's story of the king 's new clothes .
I do think that there are enough Members of this House , who , on finding the king totally naked , would say so out loud in the plenary .
I believe it is very difficult to assess either the role of the European Union or the results of the Johannesburg Summit .
None of us is satisfied with the results .
We would , in various areas , have preferred results that went further .
I would , though , like to say that I see the European Union 's - Europe 's - role as having been a good one and one that was also well coordinated .
It should also be said at this juncture that , on the most important demands , coordination between the European Union and the candidate countries worked .
I am of course not satisfied with the Commission 's attitude towards us , or with the information policy .
I want to address Commissioner Nielson directly in saying that we did not expect all our demands to be met , but it is sometimes the case that the tone is what matters in music , and at times our side was dissatisfied with the way the parliamentarians were negotiated with or spoken to .
I took part in this delegation as a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and one of the major topics in Johannesburg was of course the way in which development is financed .
It was also clear that we will not go back to the way things were before Monterrey .
One generally wonders whether it makes sense to stage UN summits of this sort at short intervals and then end up with little substance to the agenda at a summit on sustainability .
That , though , is the responsibility not of the Commission , or of Parliament , but of the United Nations .
The question I want to put to the Commission is a very straightforward one : how will we monitor the Monterrey undertaking to allocate an average of 0.39 % of gross domestic product to development cooperation with effect from 2006 ?
Will Parliament receive reports on development ?
I am from Austria , and on this point I am less than proud of my own country , which is among those at the bottom of the league as regards support for development cooperation .
Now for the actual question .
I know that you cannot draw up the national budgets , but what form will follow-up take , including as regards Parliament ?
Something I found quite absent from Johannesburg was the issue of population growth and that of reproductive health .
I found the formulations in the final text to be woolly , to say the least .
There is reference in them to health and to mothers , but not to reproductive health , which , along with family planning , I believe to be essential issues in sustainable development .
I would , however , like to express my gratitude for the clear position that the European Union has taken up on these issues .
We know that America , with the fundamentalist states , has stood in the way of progress of every kind and that the requirements of the Cairo Action Programme on reproductive health are far from being complied with .
Mr President , Parliament 's task is , in the first place , to monitor the Commission and , in general , the Council 's and Commission 's achievements in Johannesburg .
I think that this debate demonstrates that we can be rather positive about the role Europe played .
In my view , Commissioner Wallström was right in saying that the European Union was the driving force behind the Johannesburg Summit .
As far as I can see , though , the results of Johannesburg are too insubstantial , but this is actually more despite rather than thanks to the EU 's efforts .
I believe we can be pleased about the role we ourselves played on that forum .
Nevertheless , the outcome of Johannesburg is , broadly speaking , too insubstantial .
In not one single area have verifiable and firm goals been established , and sanctions pertaining to the infringement of the already weak goals are completely lacking .
I believe that this is because these goals were too abstract .
Everyone is in favour of cleaner water , less poverty and more education , but in my view , the Heads of State or Government should have directed their energy more towards achievable and concrete projects .
The Rio Summit had already taught us that concluding agreements that cannot be enforced is an empty exercise .
Despite this , some positive results have been achieved which have been mentioned in this debate .
I should particularly like to single out progress in the field of cleaner water , hygiene and the prevention of diseases .
These elements are , of course , of crucial importance , particularly for the poorer sections of the world 's population .
Another positive development is what has finally been said in the documents on fisheries and on energy , although concerning the latter , these documents could have easily been a bit more constructive in the chapters on wind and solar energy and hydropower .
Anyway , this too is something which causes no problems in the EU but has run into major problems elsewhere .
These texts are upbeat , even the introduction in the text on agriculture and relevant subsidies is upbeat , in my view .
It is not , however , the EU that we have to thank for this , of course .
Quite the reverse , in fact ; the EU could have been a little more accommodating on this front .
Anyway , we are all familiar with the internal situation .
It is a matter on which we need to reach a better position internally the sooner the better .
Agriculture still remains a weak point for all of us in those international negotiations , and this is something we only have ourselves to thank for and which requires our involvement .
It is also related to the issue of environmentally harmful subsidies , something that we know Commissioner Wallström wishes to address in the EU .
It is a matter related to agriculture , but also to all kinds of other subsidies that we provide in the EU , as this is also done worldwide .
The fact that we made little progress in this area in Johannesburg should serve as an incentive to address it within the EU and outside it as a matter of priority .
I should like to finish off with a comment on the role of Parliament 's delegation .
I did not intend to mention this at first , but since the matter has now been brought into the open in such a manifest way , I should like to say a few words .
This delegation was , incidentally , excellently led by our fellow MEP Mr Moreira da Silva .
I should like to express gratitude on behalf of our group for the way in which he acquitted himself of this task .
I should also like to thank the Danish Presidency .
We - at any rate those of my group who attended the Johannesburg Summit - were delighted with the communication at the summit .
I am , however , somewhat surprised about the comments by Commissioner Nielson on this score .
I can understand that it is disagreeable to be monitored by troublesome MEPs , but it is still necessary for us to join forces more effectively at times like these .
We must create a wider support .
I think that the MEPs who attended the summit had a positive attitude and that better cooperation and communication benefits us all .
The Commissioner struck me as somewhat acidic in his comments , and the environment is acidic enough as it is without the need for an acidic Commissioner .
I therefore hope that in future , at other conferences too - for this was not a one-off problem , but one that also plays a part elsewhere - better cooperation will be established between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Cooperation is fluid and requires a positive attitude , not only from Parliament , but also from the other institutions , and this will eventually benefit us all .
Mr President , with all due respect to the Commission and the Council , the judgments we are making here in the European Parliament are being made on the basis of resolutions which we passed before Johannesburg .
We passed our resolutions and we held our debate and , that being so , I have no desire to challenge all the positive points we have managed to find in Johannesburg or what Mrs Wallström has said or what the honourable Members who were in Johannesburg have said .
I shall not reiterate them , just as I shall refrain from reiterating the negative points , the specifics , aid , renewable sources of energy etc . , issues which my honourable friends have already raised .
I should like , if I may , to comment on two or three other points which perhaps received too little attention .
We said before Johannesburg that we need to strike a balance between development and trade on the one hand and environmental protection on the other .
This balance was not struck .
The Johannesburg text is full of references , reservations and provisos , just to make sure we keep our hands off trade .
It is written with one eye on the World Trade Organisation and there is no institution with the same standing and influence as the World Trade Organisation to oppose it .
That is a fact .
It is not good , I am not saying it is fatal , but it is a fact nonetheless .
A second point we made was that we needed to incorporate the cost of environmental protection into our production and our consumption in the most practical way possible .
Instead of this , which implies certain things , it implies taxes , it implies bans , political arrangements , a whole series of topics under discussion , we have a statement to the effect that we need to change production methods and consumption patterns .
And why not ?
All very ambitious and even rather literary , I think , but it does not say to what .
To me , it is totally incomprehensible , as it is to my first year economics students .
A third point we made was that we would at least try to keep to and , of course , build on and implement what was said in Rio .
For example , what has become of the principle of prevention ?
Why was there a preventive approach ?
What does this bode for the future ?
For the policy which we , the United States and others will apply ?
Why were the United States so insistent ?
A fourth point we highlighted was the policy and international dimension of environmental protection and sustainable development .
Instead , nothing was done .
And with all due respect , not only was no world environment organisation set up ; it was buried post haste before Johannesburg had barely started and all discussion of greater political coordination between old and new bodies , between Bretton Woods and the World Trade Organisation , for instance , with the political objective of sustainable development , was sidelined .
Why ?
How are we supposed to pursue a line of thinking that says we set targets , we introduce measures , we monitor and control and we impose sanctions ?
Which is the very essence of governance .
Governance means no more and no less .
Because if all it means is moralising to Developing World countries , however useful that may be , it is too little and it is highly hypocritical on our part .
I think that pretty speeches were made , with no targets , means or timetables and we need to keep an eye on that .
I suggest and request that we think hard .
Surely somehow - I think under the Rules of Procedure - the European Parliament should be able to set up an ad hoc committee to permanently monitor the application of all these pretty speeches along general lines to have come out of Johannesburg , so that we can also look at what the Commission and the spring Council bring and what is happening internationally , so that we do not just simply end up like Epimetheus , saying what we like or dislike after the event and with no monitoring on our part .
Mr President , let us not mince our words .
Johannesburg was not a success .
The results were disappointing , but I am pleased that the Commission is now giving a balanced judgment rather than the overoptimistic views it expressed immediately at the end of the summit .
In our view , if the summit were to be rated according to the Dutch rating system , it would be given a four out of ten , a fail in other words .
I am bound to correct the Commission on one point , namely biodiversity .
It has not been agreed worldwide that we will put an end to the loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
The only thing that has been decided is to significantly reduce the extinction of species , while only this spring , 100 ministers in The Hague called for an end to the loss of biodiversity by no later than 2010 , as we have also stated at European level .
The question is , of course , why Europe has achieved so little .
Of course , it is true that the United States wanted hardly anything , but many G77 countries are also tired of unfulfilled promises .
They were promised more development aid while they are , in fact , receiving less .
This is why it is logical that these G77 countries have focused on the traditional fight against poverty and for clean drinking water , sanitary facilities and energy for the poor .
This is what they got , which is a positive thing .
We must , however , search our own conscience .
Too many key players in Europe , particularly Commissioners Lamy and Nielson , saw Johannesburg only as an intermediary step between Doha and Cancùn .
That is why Europe had hardly anything to offer to the G77 countries .
This is not helped by the fact that we still have not reformed our own agricultural policy and that we consider our own trade interests to be more important than sustainable development .
We have not got our own house in order in terms of agriculture , fisheries , traffic , energy and the use of materials .
I do not think that mega-summits of this kind will work any more in future .
We should move towards UN summits that address specific goals , the prime example being Kyoto .
If it is impossible to conclude a treaty at world level , Europe should at least act consistently on its own patch .
What we need , for example , is a UN treaty in which multinational businesses are required to issue a social and environmental report that is inspected by independent accountants .
We can start with this in Europe .
It is also necessary for large businesses , maybe over a 5- or 10-year period , to commit to using the same environmental standards outside Europe as they do inside .
Volkswagen is already doing this .
After all , South Africa and Namibia do not have environmental legislation , let alone any system of enforcement .
We cannot wait for a worldwide regulation in the environmental field .
Another example is deforestation .
Rio failed to produce a treaty , and so did Johannesburg , but there is something we can do in Europe .
Why does the European Commission not suggest that a clear label be introduced for timber and timber products ?
A green label for sustainable timber and a red label for incorrectly produced timber .
My group would like to see us adopt an even-handed approach in trade policy .
I hope that Mrs Wallström will join in the preparatory meetings of Cancùn and that she will be representing Europe at that summit in Cancùn in a year 's time , for this is the only way we can prove that we take sustainable development seriously .
Mr President , I consider sustainable development to be an expression of the task given by God to mankind to cultivate and preserve the earth .
It is essential for a balance to be struck between social , economic and environmental components .
Moreover , we should try to achieve this balance in the developed and the developing countries alike .
The Johannesburg Summit has culminated in a plan of action which mainly focuses on the economic goals and not so much on the environmental goals .
This is hardly a balance , therefore .
Ten years ago , a legal framework for climate and biodiversity was established in Rio .
The Kyoto Protocol has been drafted for climate , but ratification and implementation are still a major point of concern .
As far as biodiversity is concerned , we opted for the status quo ten years ago .
As Mr Alexander de Roo mentioned earlier , this goal has now been watered down in Johannesburg to a decelerated decline in biodiversity .
In addition , the summit did not manage to reach definite agreement on sustainable energy .
Despite great European ambitions , and it is certainly no criticism of the Commissioners , worldwide sustainable development has not been given any extra impetus .
Fortunately , there are also a number of positive elements to report , including target goals for drinking water and sanitary facilities , chemicals , fish stocks , the fight against poverty , hunger and child mortality .
As regards development aid , however , the rich nations have for the past ten years been promising that they intend to spend 0.7 % of their GNP on it .
When will this happen ?
I would have liked to have seen a deadline set for this .
The fight against poverty can create scope for environmental protection , for it is true that if people have no food , no housing and no clean drinking water , environmental protection is often a concern for later .
In other words , we must create a support structure for environmental protection and this is why it is our primary task to do something about the fight against poverty .
If the agreement , taken from the Johannesburg plan of action , that trade policy should not affect the development of poor countries and is taken seriously in the area of the environment , this will have far-reaching consequences for European agricultural and trade policy .
I should like to hear from both Commissioners what their views are on this .
Many people seem happy with the outcome of the UN Conference in Johannesburg on sustainable development .
Whether my grandchildren will see things in the same light 20 years from now remains to be seen .
This is a requirement , however , if we consider Mrs Brundtland 's commitment to achieve a good definition of sustainable development .
The implementation of the goals will certainly need to make a contribution to this .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , I believe that we are all staunch advocates of the need to improve the quality of the environment .
I am , however , convinced that we must take as a starting point the consideration that the quality of life and , in many respects , the quality of the environment in the world too are not declining , as some people would have us believe , and that we must therefore avoid any form of disaster-mongering , and I am thinking here of the - subsequently disregarded - predictions of disasters which characterised the environmentalism of the 1970s , from Stockholm to the Rome Club .
This does not , however , mean reducing our efforts to address environmental issues , which are , moreover , the items on the Johannesburg agenda .
I have two points to make in this regard .
Firstly , as , moreover , has been pointed out repeatedly by Members too , I am convinced that one of the decisive factors in improving the quality of life of many peoples and , therefore , of the environment , is the need to open up markets to international trade .
I believe that the United States , the subject of much criticism in this House , is right on this point , and I feel that Europe must do more in the area of agricultural policy , agricultural protectionism and other forms of trade protectionism .
We would point out that the Everything but Arms initiative of which the Commission is so proud - and it is right , in part , to be so - provides for the elimination of all agricultural duties and quotas on products such as sugar , rice and bananas imported from the poorest countries .
This is the commitment we Europeans have to make good .
Secondly , the countries which do most to protect the environment are democratic countries where human rights are respected , the countries with open economies .
The increase in development aid has been mentioned : that is all well and good , but I would point out , first and foremost to the European Commissioners and Commissioner Nielson , that much of the aid which Europe appropriates serves to fund dictatorships , non-democratic countries , countries without open economies .
In those countries , our funding does not lead to improvement of either the quality of the environment or environmental policies .
May I thank the Commissioners for their cooperation in agreeing to speak at the end , rather than at the beginning of the debate .
Mr President , I shall start by carrying on exactly where Minister Haarder finished .
The Commission is looking forward to this .
As Mrs Hulthén pointed out at the beginning of the debate , we are also looking forward to coming back to Parliament in February to discuss how the follow-up is to be organised .
All this is quite positive .
There is one new aspect that is very important : the water and energy initiatives are EU initiatives .
We are moving into new terrain .
It is not defined only by what the Commission does .
This is a ' Monterrey-plus ' landscape , because we are about to announce and launch global EU actions , which also makes it quite interesting .
I turn to the discussion on how we view this matter - whether with complacency , or pessimism , or optimism etc .
From a literary point of view it is not totally correct to say that the emperor was naked .
He was wearing some clothes , but only his night attire .
So one would be justified in asking whether he was half-naked or half-dressed .
There is no certain answer to this , just as there is no certain answer to how we should approach this area .
From the very start - even in Johannesburg when we were trying to respond to questions at press conferences - we tried to avoid using the terms ' success ' or ' failure ' because it was clear that this would never bring us and the people we talk with through the media close enough to something that was a professional and correct evaluation .
Again , in the course of the discussion we have tried to address the wilful pumping-up or the toning down of expectations before the meeting , which have been referred to as deliberate working methods .
This makes a lot of sense , but the truth is that with global UN meetings like this we must calibrate expectations to fit in with reality .
We are firmly in the realm of intergovernmental work .
Comparing that with what we in Europe could do if we unite is , unfortunately , not fair .
Everybody talks about the international society .
We do not have one , we are trying to create one .
That is where we are .
I am pleading for professional realism as to how we evaluate these things .
On balance , whilst progress was made , we would have preferred to have made much more progress .
However , to express dissatisfaction as Mr Turmes did when he said that we did not come back with the whole Christmas tree , complete with decorations , is an illustration of the fact that one has not allowed oneself the minimum of realism .
That is the raw material that creates results .
I wonder whether a debate like this is taking place in any other political centre in the rich North .
I doubt that the US Congress would devote a day to discussions , as we are , after Johannesburg .
It would be nice if this happened , but let me remind you that it would be an error to think that it was only because of US attitudes and resistance to multilateral agreements that these were so difficult .
It is a dangerous illusion to think that the whole G77 group is very enthusiastic about these different targets , or committing itself to a specific energy mix within a certain timeframe .
This is not how it is in reality .
The things we need to change cannot be changed easily .
Mr Moreira Da Silva said some very important things which characterise indicators of progress .
They are more specifically action-oriented compared to Rio , but this is exactly what we should be doing with regard to Johannesburg .
Secondly , Mrs McNally and others pointed out the closer and clearer link between the environment and poverty .
It is extremely important to move closer to reality .
The balance between the issues of trade , development and the environment has been taken up by a number of speakers .
We must remember that the basis on which we were able to work in Johannesburg was very clearly defined by decisions in the Council clarifying our mandate .
In essence , Europe clearly wanted , and needed , to stick to the Doha formula .
We could neither add nor subtract anything .
This was the political basis on which we were able to negotiate in Johannesburg .
Some may not like it , but it was a diplomatic achievement for Europe that we came back from Johannesburg with a formula that clearly reflected our words and left the Doha track open and clear , as it should be .
Please bear in mind that the meltdown in Seattle was due to an overload of the international agenda .
If we had not cleared this up , and done what we did in Doha and Monterrey in order to allow the world to discuss sustainable development in Johannesburg , the whole thing would have been one big mess , damaging our attempts to tackle our problems with liberalising , and reducing subsidies for , agriculture .
All that is now part of the Doha track .
This would have been damaged if we had tried to ' redo ' Doha in Johannesburg .
As far as the institutional debate is concerned , some people clearly find it a problem that I described the cold hard reality of institutional agreements .
I noted Minister Haarder 's remarks when he said that he could not promise any changes here today .
Strangely enough this is exactly what I told Members of Parliament in Johannesburg .
I could not undertake to depart from the institutional agreement .
Nor should we regard this debate as simply a discussion between Members of Parliament and a Commissioner .
Normally one says that it takes two to tango , but the institutional complexity of the European institutions is such that for us it takes three to tango .
It is therefore a mistake to think that this discussion is just between Parliament and the Commission .
In fact if people look at what actually took place in Johannesburg , they will see that we did our utmost to try to inform parliamentarians .
I would certainly have welcomed full participation by parliamentarians until the end of the summit .
Unfortunately , however , after the weekend , very few stayed in Johannesburg until the end .
The money spent on travelling there with nine assistants would have been far better spent if Parliament had allowed its representatives to stay throughout the international meetings rather than returning home in the middle .
That would have strengthened cooperation .
I would say to Mrs Evans and Mrs McNally that an integrated approach to energy , gender , poverty , health and population - a point which was also very strongly made by Mrs Scheele - corresponds exactly with the kind of approach that is required .
Mrs Evans stressed the importance of enforcing monitoring .
The best method is to incorporate this into the country and regional strategies to secure ownership in the South .
Considering what I said before about the lack of enthusiasm shown by many countries in the South to do these things , it is extremely important that we ensure that this is anchored in their own planning .
Mrs Scheele also asked how we are monitoring the financial commitments to development assistance levels made by Member States and the Union collectively in Monterrey .
Fortunately , monitoring is already available via the reports which are made to the Development Assistance Committee in the OECD .
This means that every donor country is obliged to submit information which the Commission will use to gain feedback .
Discussions will be held on a regular basis to ensure that this increase is actually happening .
The discussion on reproductive health and rights dominated the last days of the summit .
This is another reason why I would have welcomed the presence of Members of Parliament during that time .
Article 47 of the political declaration was the result of a huge battle that was fought , day and night , before we finally managed , with the support of Canada , to get the established Cairo terms accepted .
These were reintroduced into the text and we avoided a major defeat at the hands of the dark coalition of you-know-who .
We ended up with something acceptable .
This was an unwelcome drama .
It is very disturbing to have to fight for something like this .
I have covered some of the aspects .
Certainly , the enormous follow-up task is going to be a huge challenge .
The water initiative - trying to organise regional cooperation in all the major African river systems - will be a huge project .
We hope this will also feed into the general effort of trying to create more stable regional cooperation , which again will be good for democracy , stability and liberalisation of trade .
So we see the water initiative there not only as an aim in itself but as something which is also very positive with regard to its indirect effects .
Mr President , we have been here since 9 a.m. to speak about the outcome of the Johannesburg Summit .
Some Members have taken pleasure in attacking the Commission on the pretext that it has , apparently , failed to communicate sufficient information .
In my view , the Commission did a good job in Johannesburg .
It defended European positions , even though it was unable to impose Europe 's views on the rest of the world .
And although the Commission did not have enough time to boost the egos of certain Members who were twiddling their thumbs in their hotel , it is certainly not a tragedy .
I also think that the same Members who criticised the Commission should have at least stayed in the Chamber to listen to the answers provided by the Commissioners and the Council .
Mr President , as you know , I led Parliament 's delegation in Johannesburg and I should like to explain something , because I think that Commissioner Nielsen has confused matters somewhat .
Commissioner Nielsen has not understood why we are praising the Council and criticising the Commission for the fact that Parliament was not given the institutional role it should have had .
I shall try to explain once again : Let us separate the institutional level , the role of Parliament , from political cooperation .
At the institutional level , we want both the Commission and the Council to support our right to participate in the daily coordination meetings of the European Union .
This is a matter to be resolved under the forthcoming revision of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Cooperation policy is a very diverse thing and we had the feeling that , in the framework of cooperation policy , the Council was acting with transparency and the Commission was guilty of omission .
And this is what is causing us certain difficulties because we were not used to this sort of behaviour by the Commission ; we were used to seeing its commitment , to holding joint Parliament press conferences with the Commission and with the Council , to openness , to a real involvement of Parliament , which this time we only felt was apparent , unfortunately , on the part of the Council .
Mr President , I too was in Johannesburg and I spent very little time at my hotel , and not because I was doing the rounds of the famous bars of Johannesburg .
I just wanted to say this : the Commissioner referred to the presence of MEPs in Johannesburg and said , I think somewhat condescendingly , that we left before the work was finished and would have done well to have stayed until the end .
I assume the Commissioner meant , if we expected to be taken seriously .
Could you please confirm to us from the chair that our delegation to Johannesburg had orders from the Bureau itself to leave for Europe by Sunday at the latest in order to attend September 's part-session .
The Rules say that Members cannot be on mission during Parliament 's plenary session .
Mr President , I would like to turn to our audience today and welcome them to this debate in the European Parliament .
We are discussing two different things , although they are interlinked .
We are discussing a report that has been drawn up by Mrs Hulthén , a Swedish MEP , about how to combat climate change .
I would first like to comment on that and then make some concluding remarks about our discussion on Johannesburg .
I will now speak Swedish for a little while .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
I have received a motion for a resolution
.
( FR ) Being aware of the lack of conviction at international level in favour of a sustainable development which reduces poverty and preserves the environment , we are nonetheless reassured that the principles agreed at Rio will be honoured .
Which was not self-evident , so whose fault is it ?
Community responsibility for this lamentable lack of progress should not be diminished .
The collective failure amounts to a loss of credibility .
It is ridiculous to seek majority agreements with the G77 countries , who were allies at Rio and Kyoto , whilst the Union 's own plan for a sustainable development within its borders has failed !
The examples are as numerous as they are revealing : biodiversity , the subject of a Convention in Rio , continues to decline sharply .
Species are disappearing and habitats are being lost forever .
The ' Biodiversity ' action plan is honourable , though it is nothing more than a pious hope .
And it is still an instinctive response for many Member States to overlook the ' Birds ' and ' Habitats ' Directives .
It is our essential political and moral responsibility to demand of ourselves what we are demanding of others .
The Commission must provide an annual presentation of the progress made in integrating the dimension of sustainable development in all Community policies .
In order to restore Europe 's credibility , we must , in conjunction with our international partners , draft a policy to eradicate poverty and industrial processes that are damaging our ecology .
Mr President , on a point of order , on Monday I raised a point of order about Rule 2 and yesterday had the Minutes corrected to indicate the exact purport of that point .
In my remarks on Monday I suggested that there was a risk of a certain meeting of Pesca Ministers having been intended to interfere with the independence of action of Parliament .
Mr Jové Peres was one of the rapporteurs in question and he made a statement this morning .
I fully accept what he said and if I caused him embarrassment I would like to apologise .
Colleagues , fifty years ago the first meeting of the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community , the predecessor of the European Parliament , took place here in Strasbourg .
We celebrate today , therefore , fifty years of parliamentarianism at the heart of our common European project and enterprise , and fifty years of the contribution of parliamentarians to sustained and sustainable peace with prosperity .
On that occasion on 10 September 1952 , Jean Monnet , as President of the High Authority , welcomed ' the first European Assembly invested with the power of decision ' .
The next speaker on that day was Konrad Adenauer who said that the new Assembly ' marked fresh and significant progress in our project of creating a new Europe ' .

Today on behalf of the Parliament I acknowledge and salute that illustrious post-war generation of the pioneers of European integration : in paying tribute to their indelible achievements , we today pledge our own energies as a directly elected European Parliament and pledge our own commitment to serve the rising generation of Europeans across our entire continent , as we move to embrace the historic and unprecedented enlargement that now awaits us .
To mark this anniversary , I would like to invite you to participate in a ceremony which will take place today at 1 p.m. in the space next to the hemicycle .
This will include the raising of the European flag and a short musical performance by a colliery band from the Saar .
You are all very welcome to attend .
I would also like to remind you of an invitation to the opening of an exhibition about the history of the European Parliament and European integration .
The exhibition , entitled ' A story with a future ' will be formally opened at 2.45 p.m. this afternoon in the Visitors ' area on the ground floor of the Louise Weiss building .
I would now like to welcome to the distinguished visitors ' gallery a delegation of five senators and seven members of parliament from Chile .
The delegation is led by Senator Gabriel Valdés , Chairman of the Senate 's Foreign Affairs Committee .
The delegation is in Strasbourg to take part in the Fourth Interparliamentary Meeting between the European Parliament and Chile which is being held today and tomorrow .
As you know , the European Union and Chile have signed an agreement on economic partnership , political coordination and cooperation .
On behalf of Parliament I welcome the delegation and wish them a successful interparliamentary meeting .
The next item is the vote .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0287 / 2002 ) by Lord Inglewood , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive concerning life assurance ( 7328 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0230 / 2002 - 2000 / 0162 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0282 / 2002 ) by Stefano Zappalà , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation on the Common Procurement Vocabulary ( CPV ) ( 8171 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0266 / 2002 - 2001 / 0179 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0279 / 2002 ) by Miet Smet , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on representation of women among the social partners of the European Union ( 2002 / 2026 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0237 / 2002 ) by Anneli Hulthén , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission communication on the implementation of the first phase of the European Climate Change Programme ( COM ( 2001 ) 580 - C5-0164 / 2002 - 2002 / 2072 ( COS ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , in item 21 of the report we demand a proposal from the Commission ' during summer 2002 ' .
Since summer has already gone , I want to change this to ' no later than the end of 2002 ' .
I am sure the House will agree to that .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0294 / 2002 ) by Philip Charles Bradbourn , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the granting of Community financial assistance to improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system ( COM ( 2002 ) 54 - C5-0054 / 2002 - 2002 / 0038 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0312 / 2002 ) by Giacomo Santini , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission proposal for a Council directive on improving access to justice in cross-border disputes by establishing minimum common rules relating to legal aid and other financial aspects of civil proceedings ( COM ( 2002 ) 13 - C5-0049 / 2002 - 2002 / 0020 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0301 / 2002 ) by Herman Schmid , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on taking stock of five years of the European Employment Strategy ( COM ( 2002 ) 416 - ( 2002 / 2152 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Report Smet ( A5-0279 / 2002 )
Mr President , this report was also voted under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure which allows for no debate and no amendments to the report .
The British delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new rule , however , leaves us no option but to vote against certain reports .
Most of this report represents the very worse of politically correct claptrap .
Women are increasingly achieving more top positions in society and this will continue to improve as , in my country at least , women are more successful than men in gaining university places .
We do not support quotas or interference in the ways in which trades unions , for example , select their officers .
The Committee on Women 's Affairs and Equal Opportunities talks about gender mainstreaming whilst at the same time its very existence contradicts this principle .
The Moderate Party 's delegation to the European Parliament has voted against Mrs Smet 's report on the representation of women among the social partners of the European Union ( A5-0279 / 2002 ) .
The principle of equal rights for all is one of the most important cornerstones of our society .
Rights are , and shall remain , individual .
The collectivisation of rights can be the first step towards the reduction of their importance .
The European Parliament should as a matter of principle not pronounce on how independent organisations , such as employers organisations and trade unions , should be structured .
This is up to them and their members .
Otherwise , the Moderate delegation considers that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities should be abolished and that its business should be taken over by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Mrs Miet Smet 's excellent report once again provides us with the opportunity to condemn the dearth of European statistics on the number of women in the social partner organisations .
Although many strategies have been implemented in order to remedy the underrepresentation of women in the upper echelons of these organisations , as well as in delegations to social consultation and advisory bodies , we must , as the rapporteur recommends , make a start at European level on the systematic compilation of data relating to the role played by women in the decision-making process .
It is , however , certain that the application and effectiveness of the measures taken remain entirely dependent on the political will within the organisations .
Awareness-raising campaigns prior to trade union elections and the establishment of networks among women negotiators also constitute incentives for increasing the representation of women .
After reading this excellent report , I can only recommend that you vote in favour and reiterate that the Commission must urgently compile these data in the proper fashion with a view to creating a database on the representation of women within social partner organisations .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report on the representation of women among the social partners of the European Union .
According to statistics produced by the European Trade Union Congress , the proportion of women in positions of leadership is under 25 % , which is far too low .
I believe that it is particularly important to achieve balanced representation of women at leadership level in trade unions , which , in wage negotiations , play an important part in promoting equality of opportunity .
It has emerged from various studies that women are seriously under-represented in wage negotiations , the consequence of which is that women 's issues are taken too little into account in the labour market .
Women know what the real working conditions of female employees are and where equality is lacking .
If more women were to be in charge of negotiations , I am quite sure that greater consideration would be given to women 's interests in the labour market .
I therefore call on the social partners to devise support programmes for women in order that their presence in decision-making circles may be enhanced .
The interests of female employees must not be ignored .
As part of the European Parliament 's objective to be proactive in terms of the participation of women in the decision-making bodies of the various organisations , the report by Mrs Miet Smet is an important milestone , and I am pleased to support the report in this House .
It is extremely important to implement strategies which seek to promote a more balanced representation within social consultation bodies .
Within these bodies , decisions are taken that are crucial for women , concerning equal opportunities in the workplace and prospects for career progression .
In order to protect women 's interests , we therefore need to compile accurate statistical data , which is the first essential step in achieving a genuinely balanced representation .
The increased presence of women will thus help to create new points of view on all the policies defined by the social partners .
This report is heading in this direction and must be given backing so that the European Parliament can gain further credibility in terms of its objectives .
This will require the cooperation of social partners , and particularly of employer organisations whose efforts , it must be said , are lacking in this area .
It is clear that this report is also applicable to the framework of enlargement , and that it is important to start to involve the candidate countries immediately in the process of making the presence of women more balanced .
Mr President , this report was voted under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure , which allows for no debate and no amendment to the report .
The British delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new Rule , however , leaves no option but to vote against certain reports .
Whilst we support much of what the Hulthén report contains , and of course its objectives , we could not vote in favour of a package that contains references to European eco-taxes .
Tax is a matter for Member States .
It is not within the competence of the European Union .
. ( EL ) The Anneli Report is well intentioned and proposes practicable ways of keeping to the first phase of Tokyo Protocol commitments , although it also expresses reservations about numerous shortcomings in the text .
The most important points are :
One : a directive needs to be approved for the promotion of combined heat and solar energy which will safeguard low costs and high output .
Two : the same priority should be given to a directive on the promotion of biofuel-based heat production .
Three : the Commission needs to submit a communication on quantitative environmental targets in the transport sector by the end of 2002 , so that transport also contributes to the 8 % Kyoto reduction target in the gas emissions responsible for the greenhouse effect , stressing the need for all motor vehicles to be included in the strategy to reduce CO2 emissions .
We need to favour fuels and technologies with low or zero emissions .
It is very important that we promote the use of biofuel and the use of ecological fuels in the transport sector .
Four : in industry , the Commission should immediately propose a framework directive on fluorinated gases in order to reduce emissions in all sectors .
Five : a proposal for a directive on more energy-efficient public procurement should also be issued immediately .
Six : at a political level , the European Union should condemn the USA 's lack of environmental measures and its efforts to undermine the Kyoto Protocol as a minimum reaction to the USA 's failure to take any action .
We have voted in favour of Mrs Hulthén 's report , ( A5-0237 / 2002 ) .
For us Swedish Moderates , the most important environmental issue is to avoid development that can cause climate change on our planet .
To us , it is obvious that the use of carbon for energy production must be phased out .
Work on environmental policy must be more clearly focused on emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases .
We have voted in favour of the present report as we consider that attempts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and achieve the targets in the Kyoto Protocol are important .
This does not mean , however , that we support the report in its entirety .
Items 16 , 26 , 34 and 35 advocate the coordination and harmonisation of environmental and energy taxation .
We are opposed to the EU managing the taxes of the Member States .
A decision must also be made on environmental taxes in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
A carbon dioxide tax might need to vary among the Member States , since it must be set off against other measures that the Member States need to take to achieve the lower emission targets .
.
( NL ) Freight transport by road has increased considerably over the past 20 years .
This has led to bottlenecks and pressure to keep widening motorways and to build new roads .
This form of transport takes up a great deal of space , is noisy and contributes significantly to the greenhouse effect .
The Commission is right to conclude that this problem must be addressed by shifting from the roads to rail , inland shipping and coastal shipping .
A majority on the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism are opposed to this and want to spare road traffic .
A modal shift is said to be too costly , and the alternatives are also faced with shortages of capacity and environmental objections .
It is true that the often ageing diesel locomotives should become cleaner and that the canal network has been neglected .
This is now being seized on as an argument for handing out subsidies to restrict pollution and congestion on the roads .
Furthermore , the thresholds for those subsidies are being halved .
It is also true that the remaining road traffic should become cleaner .
Nevertheless , I fear that although the EU will be handing out much more funding , little will actually change as a result .
Road transport will then get the taxpayer to pick up the tab for the necessary environmental investments , and demand for more motorways will continue to rise .
I voted in favour of this important report , bearing clearly in mind the worrying predictions of the Commission , which suggest that road freight transport in the European Union will increase by around 50 % by 2010 .
I fully share the objectives of the Marco Polo programme , and the rapporteur 's view on how to reduce road congestion and improve the environmental performance of the worldwide transport system .
I also believe that congestion constitutes a threat both to the environment and to the vitality of the economy and am , therefore , in favour of measures that reduce congestion and pollution and encourage the transfer of freight transport from road to rail , inland waterways and short sea shipping .
We must also pay attention , however , to areas in which bottlenecks occur and the factors causing these in these other modes of transport , so that the Marco Polo programme does not lead to a transfer of congestion from one mode of transport to another .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to say I was disappointed to see that Amendment 6 from the Committee went through .
This whole directive was really about cross-border legal aid .
To take the whole cross-border element out , and to try and look at the whole question of harmonising legal aid throughout the European Union , is - in my opinion and that of my Group - bound to lead to one hell of a muddle .
If we had stuck to the Liberal amendment and had concentrated solely on cross-border legal aid cases , then I think we could have had a workable document in front of us today .
Unfortunately we do not .
However , that being said , we did ultimately vote for the directive .
There are other parts in it which we feel we can support , and we leave the Council of Ministers , hopefully , to sort out the bits that unfortunately went through .
In the wake of the attacks of 11 September , the Council urged the Commission to examine urgently the links between maintaining domestic security and respecting international obligations in the area of the right to asylum .
The Commission 's approach was disappointing , since it dealt with only one issue , that of how to deny terrorists and other criminals the right to asylum .
This approach equates to viewing the problem through a microscope .
On the other hand , it is an entirely different question - a much more serious one - that is not even mentioned in the Commission 's document : what would happen if a considerable proportion of the population of a third country requested asylum in one or more Member States , because of the risk of oppression in their own country ?
The world has changed since 1950 .
The Geneva Convention was designed to protect individuals facing persecution .
Today , due to globalisation and the ease of travel , we must contemplate the fact that , one day , the Convention might be applied by whole populations or millions of refugees who would destabilise our countries .
This is the pressing issue we now face .
Governments have a duty to deal with this by supplementing existing legislation with means of protection other than conventional asylum .
The British Conservative Delegation fully supports greater cooperation between judicial authorities , especially in the execution of judgments and the service of legal process throughout Europe .
This both assists British business and helps with the completion of the Single Market .
However , we do not see the measures in this Report as being helpful and its resource implications in offering free legal assistance , regardless of the merits of a case , to anyone who wishes to pursue an action are both naïve and totally impractical .
The British Conservatives therefore cannot support the measures in this Report .
It is a fact that the criteria for EMU should have included criteria for combating unemployment in the Member States .
The quantitative and qualitative targets set at the Lisbon Summit and the fact that promoting high levels of employment was included in the European Union 's main objectives has helped fight unemployment and reduce the number of unemployed to 13 million .
The objective , however , of full employment set in Lisbon is a political commitment by the leading Member States , not a binding legal commitment .
Nonetheless , in order to combat unemployment in the Member States , European governments need to learn from each other , coordinate their approaches and exchange best practices .
The proposals in Mr Herman Schmid 's report on the guidelines on employment could help us make a careful evaluation of these guidelines .
What happens , however , when a Member State such as Greece , where unemployment has risen from 6.3 % to 11.1 % in the ten years between 1990 and 2000 , has had the same recommendations on combating unemployment since 1998 ?
Safeguarding employment should be a priority , not an empty gesture .
We cannot support the report since it advocates coordination within areas that we consider are best dealt with at national level , including the coordination of employment and social policy .
We consider that these issues should remain at national level , since the differences between the Member States are great and will increase further with enlargement .
A European policy in these areas cannot take account of the great differences that exist between the Member States .
We even consider that coordination and harmonisation within these areas could put continued EU cooperation at risk .
We do not therefore adopt a position on the actual measures in the report , but vote against the report on grounds of principle .
As we take stock , five years after the European employment strategy was implemented , and before the 2003 guidelines on employment are finally adopted , it is important to reiterate that unemployment is still a scourge , and that it is the main cause of social exclusion .
That is why several things must be done : we must call on the Commission to analyse the causes of the weak economic growth in the Union and to put forward proposals with a view to encouraging genuine and meaningful growth in order to increase the number of jobs .
Regarding the method , we must strengthen the role of the national parliaments in the drafting of national action plans ; we must give the European Parliament a role , as part of the co-decision process , on questions relating to employment under the open coordination method , and we must also involve the social partners more closely .

Regarding the substance , we should emphasise the development of local and regional labour markets in order to boost initiatives designed to attract productive investments and to encourage economic balance , social cohesion and job creation in the least-developed areas and regions .
We must also consider how to improve the integration of legal immigrants in the labour market .
.
( NL ) The EU and its forerunners have been born from the desire on the part of major international businesses for one unfettered market with a common currency .
As a result , employers ' interests have weighed down heavily on the EU 's management structures and EU policy .
For 50 years , there have been calls for more attention to solidarity with those who will never occupy economic positions of power .
The trade movement asked for a ' Social Europe ' , and the Council , the Commission and Parliament created the impression that this social Europe was on its way .
Three years ago , this ambition was officially abandoned .
The 2000 social summit in Lisbon was not about pensions , social benefits , reducing working hours , public investments , strengthening public services and economic stability , but about large-scale privatisations and increasing company profits .
This mind-set was expected to result in winning the competitive battle with America and Japan .
Unlimited economic growth without redistribution was said to automatically solve all social problems .
Social policy is now at risk of being made completely subordinate to economic policy .
This policy completely ignores the fact that the crisis in 1929 could only be halted by active government intervention , as advocated by the economist Keynes .
Given a declining economy and growing unemployment , the neo-liberal approach is a recipe for certain social disaster .
My colleague , Mr Herman Schmid , is right to denounce any future adherence to this approach in employment policy .
Increased levels of unemployment and announcements of new waves of redundancies - that is what we have to show for five years of the European Employment Strategy .
The European Union 's restructuring policy does not create jobs , it restricts them , especially full-time , stable jobs , while so-called growth deprives millions of people of the right to work or offers them a poor substitute in the form of part-time employment , with all the financial and social consequences that has for family life .
So celebrations are unjustified and do not reflect the real picture , which is that generalised , long-term unemployment - and we are talking decades here - is hovering around 10 % and is accompanied by generalised , temporary , short-term forms of employment , for which employers may even be subsidised , in order to artificially reduce the figures by making several unemployed persons share one job .
Active employment policies are being used as an excuse to subsidise big business while depriving families of even the most basic right to survival .
The proposed ' employability ' model may appear to reduce official unemployment statistics , but it does not reduce the fear , insecurity , unhappiness or poverty of working-class families .
Pronouncements about combating poverty , full employment and so on are hypocritical and their only objective is to foster self-delusion among the working classes and take the edge off the social problems which the very policy of serving multinational interests creates .
That is why we call on the workers to rally round and overturn this anti-grass roots policy .
Although I disagree with some paragraphs , I decided to vote in favour of this report on taking stock of five years of the European Employment Strategy . I particularly welcome the fact that , according to the observations made by the rapporteur on the future of employment in the European Union , businesses will be asked to give greater weight to the family-friendly organisation of work .
I also welcome the view of lifelong employability as a means of preferential social integration , particularly given the increased ageing of the working population in all the countries of the Union .
It is becoming increasingly important to focus national employment policies and the European Employment Strategy itself on giving dignity to labour and not only on the economic aspects of harmonising the EU 's productivity index with the USA , which is mentioned often in the Commission communication .
In addition to having to be ' productive ' , employment must be also a means of achieving one 's potential and of social integration .
The Luxembourg process introduced a new way of working within the EU .
It involved taking new initiatives to strengthen employment policy in the Union .
After five years , we can now say that this strategy has been successful , even if there is still much to be improved .
The open method of coordination is not based on legislation , but on common policy objectives .
This has proved to be an effective method of managing employment issues .
Parliament does not have co-decision in the open coordination .
A role that is based on co-decision , which is now required in recital R in the adopted report , would undermine open coordination as a method .
As a Swedish Christian Democrat I cannot support this .
Recital E in the report also criticises the entrepreneurship pillar , stating that the emphasis on small and medium-sized enterprises has been too narrow a perspective .
This statement is in direct contradiction of the political priorities of the Christian Democrats in Sweden .
For this reason also , I have not been able to support the report .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report ( A5-0296 / 2002 ) , by Elmar Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on Progress in implementation of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) [ 7330 / 2002 - C5-0205 / 2002 - 2002 / 2010 ( INI ) ] ,
the Council and the Commission statements on the Middle East , and
the report ( A5-0286 / 2002 ) , by Gary Titley on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the third annual report on arms exports ( operative provision 8 of the code of conduct ) [ 2001 / 2254 ( INI ) ] .
Two ministers will speak today on behalf of the Council : Mr Møller for the Danish Presidency and Mr Yiannitsis on behalf of the next Greek Presidency .
As you know , Denmark , as a result of its referenda and Treaty arrangements , is not connected with the dossier on defence issues , and so we have the unusual and perhaps unprecedented situation of a troika in operation in the House .

We welcome both Mr Møller and Mr Yiannitsis .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Naturally , it is a pleasure to address the European Parliament on the EU 's progress within the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
As pointed out in the committee 's report , the EU faces major global challenges .
Both our own populations and third countries expect the EU to be able to help to solve conflicts and calm tensions around the world .
In my statement here I will concentrate on the following topics : Afghanistan , the fight against terrorism , the Middle East , Iraq , India , Pakistan , Russia and Africa .
As far as the ICC is concerned , I refer to my other statement .
My Greek colleague , Mr Tassos Yiannitsis , Minister for Europe , will give an account of aspects of the work in the area of the common security and defence policy , or ESDP .
As mentioned , I will start with Afghanistan .
The situation there remains frail , but the Loya Jirga process still provides a good basis on which to build .
Far more refugees and internally displaced persons than expected have returned home , and that shows that there is hope for the future of their country .
Unfortunately , Afghanistan still faces very difficult challenges .
The recent assassination attempt on President Karzai and other terrorist attacks are evidence of the serious security problems .
Without internal security , neither stable government nor sustainable development can be achieved .
The role of the central government must therefore be strengthened and the influence of the warlords reduced .
Civil society and the role and rights of women must similarly be strengthened .
The Afghan institutions and basic infrastructure must be built up again .
Reforms must be implemented within the judicial system and police , and a national army under civil control must be established .
The remaining refugees and displaced persons must be allowed to return , and we must support their reintegration .
We urgently call upon the international community , including in particular Afghanistan 's neighbours , to continue to support a further stabilisation of Afghanistan .
The UN will play a very central role here through the UN special representative Mr Brahimi .
The EU will continue to do what is in its power to rebuild the country and to implement the Bonn Agreement fully .
We promised to do so last week during a special debate at the UN .
We will maintain our strong commitment to humanitarian and restructuring aid , and the EU will follow the work of the new Afghan human rights commission closely .
We expect the EU Member States involved to continue contributing to the ISAF troops .
The Danish Presidency further gives the highest priority to combating terrorism .
We are implementing the European action plan to combat terrorism as planned .
We will continue our efforts to incorporate the combating of terrorism into all aspects of EU foreign policy .
Follow-up by the EU to date has focused on the EU 's internal measures , in which considerable progress has been made towards implementation .
Implementation within the EU of UN Security Council Resolution 1373 on freezing the financial resources of terrorist groups may be mentioned here in particular .
This work will naturally be continued under the Danish Presidency .
Moreover , based on the Seville European Council , the EU 's action plan and the Council conclusions of 22 July 2002 , the Danish Presidency will aim to move EU policy forward as regards the EU 's international role in the fight against terrorism , including in particular cooperation with third countries and relevant international organisations .
In the Seville declaration , the European Council defined the Common Foreign and Security Policy 's contribution to the fight against terrorism , including the contribution of the security and defence policy .
As a follow-up to this , on 22 July the Council approved a number of decisions with a view to implementing the Seville declaration .
These included a revision of the dimensions relating to combating terrorism through the links with third countries , including such links in the form of conventions and specific measures that can help third countries to meet their obligations under UN Security Council Resolution 1373 .
The Presidency attaches importance to the Council 's conclusions being followed up by practical initiatives .
A number of concrete steps have already been taken .
I would also like to say a few words about the non-proliferation and disarmament policy .
We have earmarked the non-proliferation and disarmament policy for renewed consideration as part of the global fight against terrorism .
We consider it of great importance that this non-proliferation and disarmament policy should be strengthened and we will be bringing the matter up with all the parties involved in Troika cooperation .
On 15 April 2002 , the Council adopted as many as 42 concrete measures that will help to strengthen multilateral instruments , export controls , cooperation and political dialogue .
The Danish Presidency faces two great challenges here : firstly , continuing efforts to succeed , in The Hague in November , in implementing the international Code of Conduct against the spread of ballistic missiles and secondly strengthening the convention banning biological and chemical weapons .
This logically leads me on to Iraq .
In the Middle East , Iraq still is a serious source of concern as far as weapons of mass destruction are concerned .
We agree with President Bush on this point , which he emphasised in his speech to the United Nations General Assembly recently .
Iraq has violated various Security Council resolutions in respect of the country 's disarmament obligations .
The country must comply with these obligations immediately .
The EU is firmly resolved to support the United Nations ' continued efforts in this respect .
Among other things , the Security Council has demanded that Iraq give the UN weapons inspectors unconditional and unfettered access and ensure that the country 's authorities cooperate to the extent required .
The EU has fully supported this demand .
On 16 September the Iraqi Government notified the Secretary-General of the UN that it accepted the return of the weapons inspectors .
The Security Council is now investigating whether the Iraqi notification complies with the Security Council 's requirements in respect of the weapons inspections .
The Presidency agrees with UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan that the Security Council must comply with its responsibilities , should Iraq still refuse to co-operate .
At this juncture , I would like to say something about the Middle East .
It is two years now since the violent Israeli-Palestinian conflict broke out again .
However , a number of positive signs of progress - particularly in the area of reforms - have given cause for cautious optimism in recent times , that is , since the summer .
The EU 's response is that this progress should be utilised for the resumption of political negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians which are able to give both parties concrete prospects of a peaceful solution to the conflict .
The EU has therefore endeavoured to send a concrete message as to how this aim can be achieved .
At the informal meeting of Foreign Ministers in Elsinore on 30-31 August of this year , the EU completed its proposal for a timetable pointing the way towards peace and towards the establishment of a Palestinian state by the summer of 2005 .
This proposal , which gives practical expression to President Bush 's vision and to the Arab peace proposal for a Palestinian state within three years - and which largely takes the Arab peace initiative as its starting point - anticipates three phases . Firstly , entry this year into an Israeli-Palestinian security agreement that will stop the violence and pave the way for the Palestinian presidential and parliamentary elections that are expected to be held on 20 January 2003 .
Following these elections , negotiations are to be started on the establishment of a Palestinian state with temporary borders , and this is to take place in the autumn of 2003 .
We will then enter the third phase , in which a final peace agreement is to be entered into , adopting positions on the difficult issues of Jerusalem , borders , refugees and settlers which must be solved before the final establishment of a Palestinian state in mid-2005 .
In parallel with this - if we are to achieve a comprehensive peace - efforts must be made to resume the negotiations with Syria and Lebanon , so that the process can lead to an overall peace solution in the Middle East .
During my trip to the Middle East in early September , the proposal was generally well received by the parties in the region .
The Arab countries gave the proposal a positive reception .
The proposal was also welcomed by the Israeli side , although Israel expressed a number of reservations as regards certain elements of the proposal .
At the meeting of the Middle East Quartet on 17 September this year , agreement was reached that , in the weeks ahead , the Quartet - partly following the EU 's lead - will seek to reach agreement on a final joint timetable for the three phases of establishing a Palestinian state by August 2005 .
There was also support for the EU 's suggestion of holding an international donor conference on support for the Palestinian reform process by the end of the year .
The Danish EU Presidency has offered to host the conference and thus also the meeting of the Quartet that is expected to be held in connection with the donor conference .
The EU and the Presidency are working in accordance with the declaration made by the Seville European Council on the holding of an early peace conference which will be able to discuss and reach agreement on a timetable for the road ahead towards lasting peace in the Middle East .
I have noted that , in its recent report on developments in the EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy , the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy also shares this approach .
The members of the Middle East Quartet have agreed to continue discussions on the date and modalities of such an international peace conference .
My clear impression is that the members of the Quartet take a fairly similar view of the situation and that we will therefore be able to achieve a common timetable relatively quickly .
The Danish Presidency intends to continue this policy and to work actively towards a detailed timetable which can pave the way for a peaceful solution to one of the most enduring conflicts in recent history .
I also note that yesterday 's security resolution specifically mentions the necessity of the EU 's and the Quartet 's peace plan , or timetable , moving forward despite what happened last week .
What happened - as all of you here know - is that there were two suicide attacks in Israel .
That bodes ill as regards achieving the progress that was otherwise on the way following the summer 's task forces and working groups , following endorsement by the Quartet and the expansion of the EU 's plan for peace .
Now we have had these serious setbacks .
Otherwise we would have had reason for optimism , because partly thanks to the EU 's intervention Fatah and Tanzim had declared a moratorium on attacks on Israeli civilians .
However , last week 's actions show that militant groups such as Islamic Jihad have no intention of complying with Fatah and Tanzim 's moratorium .
The Presidency has expressed to both parties its great regret about both the Palestinian suicide bombings and the Israeli retaliation .
Israel has the right to fight terrorism , but the fierce Israeli retaliation - including the siege and bombardment of President Arafat 's headquarters in Ramallah - will not bring peace and security to the Israeli and Palestinian people .
In recent days , the Presidency has been in close contact with the parties about the situation as well as with Russia , the USA and Egypt , and we have sent representatives to the region .
It is crucial that the heralded American / Jordanian / Egyptian support of Palestinian police and security forces is put into effect very quickly so that there is a unified security system on the Palestinian side with which Israel feels reasonably secure .
We must not let the radical groups derail the political initiatives yet again .
Radical groups also threaten peace in the relationship between India and Pakistan , which remains tense .
The EU is still prepared to contribute to the international efforts to reduce the current crisis , to promote measures to create confidence and to create the conditions for dialogue between the parties on a lasting solution to the conflict .
Local elections are currently being held in Jammu and Kashmir .
The run-up to the elections has been violent and has given cause for concern .
However , it is our hope that the elections in Jammu and Kashmir will be able to pave the way for a resumption of the dialogue between India and Pakistan on a long-term solution .
India has opposed international election observers , but representatives of a number of EU countries ' embassies in New Delhi will be present during the elections .
I now turn to Europe and to our nearest neighbour , Russia .
It goes without saying that how the EU gets on with Russia and how Russia gets on with us plays a crucial role in the peaceful development of Europe .
The lead-up to the summit between the EU and Russia , which will take place in Copenhagen on 11 November 2002 , will provide us with an opportunity to take stock of five years of partnership and cooperation .
We will face new challenges in connection with enlargement .
We all know that .
In the first instance , the Presidency attaches particular importance to finding a rapid solution to the issue of the Kaliningrad enclave .
On 30 September the Council will discuss the investigation of this issue carried out by the Commission in order , in consultation with Poland and Lithuania , to find a solution complying with current Community law .
Russia is included in our strategy for the Northern Dimension , but we also intend to present a strategy for our new neighbours , since with the forthcoming enlargement there will naturally be a need to consider a new overall strategy in respect of the European Union 's neighbouring states to the east following enlargement , that is , Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova .
The purpose of such a strategy will be to encourage democratic and economic reforms in the neighbouring countries and to strengthen cross-border cooperation with these countries .
On 30 September 2002 the Council will go through the contributions that have already been received concerning the European Union 's links with its new neighbours .
A communication that the Commission will present in the course of the autumn will naturally supplement these deliberations and hopefully lead to a decision in December .
Now I will move away from Europe and move down to Africa .
As you all know , critical conditions prevail in southern Africa , where the EU is concerned at the worsening of the situation in Zimbabwe - including the latest attacks on the media , the continuing spiteful actions against farmers and President Mugabe 's appointment of a new hard-line government which is being called a ' war cabinet ' .
On 22 July the EU tightened up its restrictions against Zimbabwe by adding a number of names to the list of people covered by the travel ban .
At the same time , the EU decided to continue cooperating with other international parties with a view to finding a solution in Zimbabwe .
The restrictions introduced by the EU are aimed at people whom we regard as responsible for the crisis in the country .
The EU will , however , continue to support Zimbabwe 's population - which is suffering from the consequences of Mugabe 's policies - by sending massive quantities of food aid which will ease the famine in the country and by offering social and medical assistance .
The EU notes with increasing concern that a food crisis is rapidly developing in southern Africa and that the humanitarian situation is deteriorating .
The Community and its Member States have already responded by offering the region food and humanitarian aid to a value of EUR 490 million .
This aid initiative is being targeted at those countries hardest hit - namely Zimbabwe , Malawi and Zambia .
A number of political decisions and measures taken by the governments in the region , particularly that of Zimbabwe , have further contributed to worsening the already alarming humanitarian situation .
We have therefore made it clear that under no circumstances must food aid be used as a political tool and that the recipient countries must ensure that it is distributed fairly and entirely without political considerations .
Finally , allow me to express the Presidency 's satisfaction with the course of the summit that we have just had in Copenhagen - the ASEM Summit .
It is my impression that everyone from the Asian countries and the European countries were pleased with the summit .
In addition to informal talks , concrete initiatives were put on the table which we will now work on further , including youth games staged in Asia .
We also want to strengthen links between Europe and Asia ; there are great opportunities for cooperation not only in the economic sphere , but also in the political and cultural spheres .
Before I hand over now to Mr Tassos Yiannitsis I would like to say that I agree with the report 's remarks on the EU 's successful work in the Balkans .
The EU has succeeded in bringing a region characterised by dissolution and instability back into the general development of Europe .
With the takeover of the UN police mission in Bosnia on 1 January 2003 the EU will make another substantial contribution to promoting stability further in the Balkans .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , it is a very great honour , as deputy Foreign Minister of Greece , to address you today on the aspects of European security and defence policy with military and defence implications .
I should particularly like to take this opportunity of thanking the Danish Presidency for the way in which it has cooperated on this novel experiment by the dual presidency , which is no easy task .
May I start by saying that the Belgian and Spanish Presidencies were especially productive and gave a tremendous fillip to the European security and defence policy and it is befitting for us to acknowledge that from this forum .
There has been a whole series of developments which I should like to mention .
The first , and perhaps most important , is the official announcement in Laeken last year that the European Union is now ready to carry out certain operations and is gradually moving towards full operational capability which will allow it to take on even the most demanding of Petersburg-type missions .
The second point I wanted to mention concerns the development of military capabilities , which are perhaps the most important factor in completing the Union 's operational capabilities and which have also made considerable progress .
A conference was held on improving capabilities , giving both the Member States and third countries the opportunity to make additional contributions , and the action plan on capabilities was adopted in Laeken .
The Spanish Presidency also pushed on with the application of the plan in question , and I should like to acknowledge that .
May I point out that the announcement of partial operational readiness in Laeken is not simply of theoretical value .
It says that we have the political will to implement the CFSP mechanism , even if it is still unfinished .
What this means in practice is that we have given the go-ahead for specific operations to be undertaken in the Balkans , such as the policing mission in Bosnia and Task Force Fox in the FYROM .
The Spanish Presidency also seriously addressed the related matter of equipment and took the relevant initiatives .
My fourth point concerns the European Union 's first exercise , which was conducted during the Spanish Presidency and allowed the procedures planned to be tested and conclusions to be drawn which will be invaluable in improving these procedures in the future .
And as part of this procedural operational framework for the defence and security policy mechanism , I should also mention that framework guidelines defining the funding system for military operations , which is again a very important aspect , were adopted in Seville .
A great deal has , of course , been done to set up the mechanism for developing capabilities which , in turn , is the basic tool of military administration .
Much of the work has already been done and all that remains is to enhance certain points so that the mechanism can be put into action .
However , there are a few outstanding questions , such as relations between the European Union and ? ? ? ? and the related issue of the involvement of European allies who are not part of the European Union .
As far as the first question is concerned , progress has not been exactly spectacular .
Unquestionably , some progress has been made , mainly following discussions within ? ? ? ? of individual issues pertaining to relations between the two organisations .
However , it is true to say , by way of a general conclusion , that relations between the two organisations need to progress further .
The reason given for this in certain quarters is the delay in dealing with the outstanding issue of participation .
I should like to point out that this is not entirely accurate because , although resolving this issue would certainly make it easier to complete permanent arrangements , the fact that it is outstanding is no reason to delay on individual matters .
Here too , progress has been made , as noted in the Seville conclusions , thanks to the efforts of the Spanish Presidency which , working with the General Secretariat and with the help of certain partners actively involved in the overall issue , brokered a compromise proposal before Seville .
Unfortunately , this proposal has still not been developed .
However , the Presidency and the General Secretariat are continuing in their endeavours , as instructed in Seville .
As far as relations with third countries are concerned , significant progress was also made in Seville , which adopted arrangements to broaden the provisions made in Nice on the involvement in European defence and security policy of potential partners , such as Canada , Russia and the Ukraine .
As far as the European Union 's taking over the Task Force Fox operation in the FYROM is concerned , serious preparations have also been made here .
However , given that one of the sine qua non for taking over this operation is that permanent arrangements have to be in place between the European Union and ? ? ? ? , which there appears to be little likelihood of completing by the end of October , we may have to examine alternatives .
Of course , this does not reflect all the progress made on the CFSP over the last year .
A great deal of more or less important progress has been made , but there is too little time to describe it all .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European defence enterprise is helping to satisfy the demands of European citizens , which are being voiced even more loudly at the moment , for the European Union to take a strong lead on defence issues .
The European Parliament , with its direct links to the citizens of Europe and with its sensitive approach to important issues in the European Union , will , we are sure , help with this new dimension currently being structured in the European Union .
We are aware of the fact that , with the CFSP , we are opening up new prospects for the European Union and the cooperation established at the outset is very important .
For our part , we shall do our very best during our presidency .
To close , I should like to thank the European Parliament and its president for giving me the opportunity to present the defence aspects of the policy for which Greece has assumed the presidency during the current six-month term .
Mr President , I have been asked to respond to both the Brok and Titley reports and to make a statement on the Middle East as well .
I should like to begin with the report by Mr Brok .
This offers a very good overview of the progress achieved and the new challenges that emerged in 2001 / 2002 .
When we met here 11 months ago to discuss the previous CFSP Report , we had just been hit by the terrorist attacks in the United States and the war in Afghanistan .
The picture today has changed dramatically .
The impact of 11 September on world politics has been immense .
I agree with Mr Brok that there are currently four major tasks for our Common Foreign and Security Policy .
None of them are easily met : firstly there is our partnership with the United States .
The complexity and diversity of this indispensable partnership inevitably generate a certain degree of friction .
We stand united against terrorism , we share similar values .
But our interpretation of these values is not always identical .
United States leadership since the war has been based on two pillars , represented perhaps by the work of President Truman and General Marshall : first containment of threat ; second the establishment of a global rule book and of global institutions which could encourage democracy , open markets and the rule of law , both on continents and internationally .
That approach , which produced so much prosperity and stability for the last half of the last century , is still the right approach today .
That is why all Members in this House are united in thinking that the right way of approaching the problem of Iraq is through the means of the United Nations .
In our cooperation with the US , but also more generally , the European Union has shown resolve in the pursuit of this multilateral approach to foreign policy .
We strongly believe that multilateral arrangements and conventions , the UN , the G8 , the OSCE and others are the key to tackling the security , development and environmental problems which confront the world .
The structures of ESDP and its relationship with NATO are of particular concern .
I am worried that despite almost indefatigable efforts of many , the Berlin-plus issue remains unsettled with consequences , as we know , for our aspirations in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Finally , bilateral relations have continued to expand in the past year with virtually all major countries in the world .
Among them , Russia is an increasingly important strategic partner .
Today , we have an ambitious , comprehensive , bilateral agenda with Russia , including a structured and intensive dialogue on Common Foreign and Security Policy .
This partnership also helps us to address sensitive issues like Chechnya .
I broadly agree with Mr Brok 's remarks regarding the agenda of our regional policies .
The report includes a series of proposals which are welcome , such as the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary assembly , fresh initiatives for our partnerships with Asia and Latin America and support to the New Partnership for Africa 's Development in sub-Saharan Africa ( NEPAD ) .
There are four issues that I would like to touch on in particular .
In the Western Balkans we need to ensure that we work together to preserve the integrity of the stabilisation and association process .
Those agreements should not be seen as political goodwill signals .
It is in no-one 's interest to finalise agreements with countries before the objective criteria for an agreement have been fulfilled .
Regarding Iraq , I spoke to the House on this subject earlier this month and said that we must continue to press for full Iraqi compliance with the UN resolutions .
The political action on Iraq at present is in New York and that is exactly where it should be .
Afghanistan is an issue I remain seriously concerned about .
The assassination attempt on President Karzai and the bomb in central Kabul earlier this month are just the most recent examples of the fragility of Afghanistan .
We must not spare efforts to help the central government extend its authority to the entire country .
At the UN , in the margins of the General Assembly , I attended an important meeting of Afghanistan 's principal aid donors at which we underlined the importance of delivering as rapidly as possible on our respective pledges .
The regional agenda , important as it is , must not stop us from thinking ahead .
There are long-term strategic issues that we need to keep in sight .
There is firstly , for example , the institutional framework for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The architecture of the treaties is complex and our work on CFSP is right at the institutional frontiers .
The work of the Convention will soon produce new proposals to improve the present arrangements .
I look forward to participating in the discussions of the Dehaene Working Group .
Secondly , there are preparations for the consequences of enlargement on CFSP and ESDP .
Enlargement will have a major impact on the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Together with the Danish Presidency , we have started thinking about the consequences of this .
We have to make CFSP structures responsive enough to cater for 10 or more new Member States .
Through the Wider Europe initiative we will look more closely into how to organise relations , and whenever possible , seek partnership with the ' near abroad ' in the East , the South-East and the South .
Thirdly I should mention Crisis Management and Conflict Prevention which must become a cross-cutting issue for all CFSP and external relations initiatives .
Our work on conflict indicators will be instrumental in gearing diplomatic action and aid programming towards conflict prevention and crisis management .
We need to implement the Göteborg programme for the prevention of violent conflict and we need to further strengthen our human rights and democracy promotion policies .
There are many examples of how CFSP yields operational results when we effectively pool national and EU resources , both in the Commission and in the Council .
I look forward to working with Parliament on improving our mechanisms for this and in extending full democratic control and accountability to the field of CFSP .
But I must say , and I hope it will not be regarded as a revolutionary observation , that however much we discuss improving instruments , however much we discuss institutional architecture , in my judgment on the basis of three years ' experience there is no substitute for political will .
Secondly , let me refer briefly to the admirable report by Mr Titley on the code of conduct on arms exports .
That code is politically binding on the Member States , and the Commission has a limited role in this process .
We nevertheless welcome progress made in the Council with respect to improving the implementation of the code and enhancing transparency provided through the annual report .
We welcome Parliament 's intensive interest in this subject and in particular the constructive and very ambitious stance of Mr Titley 's report which encourages the Council to pursue and improve further its work in this area .
We share several of the suggestions presented in the report , such as those referring to arms-brokering activities and the production of military goods under licence , as well as the control of the end user of arms exports .
We also welcome the suggestions for all Member States to publish national annual reports for ensuring the maximum involvement of the accession countries in information exchange and denial notification as well as for promoting adherence to the principles of the code by third countries .
The Presidency has spoken about the Middle East and about the positive atmosphere at our Quartet meeting of 17 September .
I am sure Parliament is aware of the huge amount of work the Danish Presidency put into the preparation of this meeting .
It was constructive and the meeting served to set the basis for a possible peace plan , as well as for further international support for Palestinian reform .
Unfortunately the situation on the ground gives no reason to believe that things will get any better soon .
There was a six-week period of calm - calm of a sort , at any rate , even though during that period 50 Palestinians were killed .
Then there were the despicable suicide bombings .
There was also the bombing of the Palestinian school and so the violence increased again .
To be fair there were some signs of improvement which have passed largely unacknowledged .
We were encouraged by the declaration of Fatah / Tanzim of their intention to stop attacks on Israeli civilians .
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres called the Fatah document a ' first dawn of a different season , hopefully ' he added , ' spring ' .
But this new understanding seems to have evaporated and the Palestinian Authority and President Arafat have again become the target of an assault in retaliation for suicide attacks by those who do not believe in peace .
Let me stress once again - as I have done on several occasions in this House - that we must continue insisting that the Palestinian Authority does everything possible to stop terrorism .
We should exert the utmost pressure on the Palestinian Authority to prevent terror attacks and to bring terrorists to justice .
But how does it help the cause of peace to deprive the Palestinian Authority of the power and means to do any of these things ?
How does it improve security to destroy the Palestinian Authority ?
How does the isolation and attempted humiliation of President Arafat and the Palestinian Authority contribute to the fight against terror ?
Or , for that matter , attempts to drive him into exile .
No wonder the Secretary-General of the United Nations described Israeli policy this week as bankrupt , as being likely to increase extremism rather than reduce it .
On a less gloomy note , the Quartet reviewed the Palestinian reform process which seems to be on track in as much as this is possible under the current situation .
The reform of financial and budgetary management is continuing with European Union support and under European Union pressure .
In this context I welcome - as a positive first step - the decision by Israel to pay USD 45 million in frozen tax transfers to the Palestinian Authority through the same bank account and the same monitoring mechanism which was set up as a result of our support to the Palestinian Authority .
I repeat : through the same bank account and using the same monitoring mechanism which was set up as a result of the efforts of the European Commission and the European Union .
I hope that the irony of that remark is not lost on some of those who have been criticising the efforts that we have made in order to promote the cause of reform in the Palestinian Authority .
And I hope that Israel will immediately release the remaining money .
A wide sector of Palestinian society regards elections as a crucial part of the reform process .
The pressure for elections must be maintained .
The events in the Palestinian Legislative Council over the past week and the resignation of the Palestinian Cabinet shows the emergence of a real democratic debate within Palestinian society .
This is a very positive sign of parliamentary life .
I sincerely hope that a new Palestinian Cabinet dedicated to the reform process is formed soon and that the achievements of the past few months are not destroyed .
The European Union is ready to provide assistance if there is a minimum guarantee that the elections will be free and fair .
Whilst we fully support Palestinian elections and the need for Palestinian people to elect their own leadership , we continue to caution against elections if the legal , administrative and logistic framework for elections , including the political environment , is not in place .
And how can those things be in place if there are closures , if there are curfews , if there are tanks in the streets ?
But despite the progress on the reform agenda the humanitarian and economic situation continues to deteriorate .
This has been recently highlighted by UN envoy Catherine Bertini in her sobering report on the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories : two thirds of the population is under the poverty line and up to half of the population is currently unemployed .
The situation must dramatically improve if we are to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe .
But we must do much more than fighting the symptoms of the crisis .
We must address its causes .
Providing humanitarian assistance can only be a short-term approach - improving the economy must be our goal .
Let me mention here that the European Union 's humanitarian work is severely affected by the restriction of movement , not just within the Palestinian Territories but on arrival at the border .
This year so far we have had over 20 cases of Israel denying entry to EU humanitarian teams .
Finally , the Quartet agreed to hold in November a ministerial-level meeting of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee , involving the major donors in the international community .
The meeting will review the economic and humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza , as well as efforts to support and encourage the reform process in the Palestinian Authority , including the prospects for elections .
I should like to bring to Parliament 's attention the fact that donors will inevitably be asked to identify the possibilities of additional funding .
I should warn Parliament I am likely to come back to Parliament and the Budgetary Authority as a whole on this in the near future .
Over the last six months we have made some political progress .
The perspectives are much clearer now ; and the Palestinians and the donor community are working hard on building institutions and reforming existing structures .
But there is a danger of this becoming a sort of virtual politics , while the real situation on the ground goes from bad to worse to appalling .
Every day we talk of peace ; every day people die - Palestinians , Israelis . How much longer must this go on ?
How much longer must Israelis and Palestinians live in Gethsemane ?
Mr President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission for having responded to comments that the rapporteur has not even made yet .
As you are in charge of the sitting , I would like to remind you of the following , which is to be found in Rule 120 ( 5 ) of our Rules of Procedure : ' In a debate on a report , the Commission and the Council shall , as a rule , be given the floor immediately after the rapporteur 's explanation . '
It must surely be clear to you that , whilst the Council is allowed an explanation , it is the report that is on the agenda .
I do not believe that this is a right or careful way to handle the work of committees in the plenary .
Thank you very much !
Thank you , Mr Brok , for the point of order .
As you know , we have a joint debate , including two reports and statements .
In the context of the joint debate it was the collective will of the political groups to follow the order as indicated .
I am the servant of the political groups in the matter of deciding the agenda , and , in view of the fact that this is a joint debate and not just a debate on reports , it seems to me that it is within the discretion of the groups to seek to order the debate as they have done .
If you object to this , if you do not wish to pursue that precedent for the future , I would ask you to raise your objections inside the political groups .
This is a joint debate , it is not only a debate on reports .
I am not going to entertain a debate on this .
The point is noted , but this is not the place to resolve the matter .

Mr President , Mr Møller , Commissioner Patten , Mr Yiannitsis , ladies and gentlemen , a debate such as today 's is an occasion on which to take stock of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , highlighting its positive aspects , whilst not omitting those that merit criticism .

I would like first to extend my very warm thanks to the two rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Titley , for the excellent reports that they have produced .
Mr Swoboda , we can talk about that some other time .
I would have had no objections to the two rapporteurs presenting their reports , but that was not my decision , nor do I have any reason to question the President 's rulings , so that is not a question for me , and I am therefore not going to comment on it .
The positive elements of European foreign policy include a topic that we have not yet mentioned at all , that is , the accession of the central European countries to the European Union .
That is , indeed , at present still a foreign policy matter , and when these countries join the European Union , it will be a matter for internal affairs .
That we will soon - we hope , by the end of year - be concluding negotiations with what are obviously ten European countries , is in fact a great success story .
It is one of the great European political successes .
Reference has been made to the Balkans , and that is also a positive development .
There , the European Union is playing a positive part in the interests of stability , security and democracy .
Afghanistan has been mentioned , and here too Europeans have been active ; 13 of the 15 EU States are involved in Afghanistan , whether militarily or in other ways .
What is actually astonishing is that , although we - by which I mean the European Union and its Member States - are the greatest donors of funds , this actually goes almost without being noticed .
When the Americans donate a million dollars somewhere or other , then the whole world gets to know about it .
When we donate a billion euro , I sometimes get the impression that it is the best kept of Europe 's state secrets .
We have to give some thought to how we can make our public relations work even better .
Turning to Iraq , we very much support the American President 's efforts to involve the United Nations in this issue , and we call on all Member States of the European Union to take up a common position as Europeans together .
We see it as irresponsible for one or more Member States to go their own way .
Not only does it do damage to that country 's relationship with the United States of America , but it also shows a lack of solidarity with Europeans in the European Union , for we can influence American policy and global politics only if we Europeans act together .
We now have to require the Iraqi dictator to open up his country to inspections - the British Government produced an important document on the subject yesterday - and , if these inspections on the ground are not feasible , then it is the Iraqi dictator who , at the end of the day , bears the responsibility if military action has to be taken .
I can endorse everything that Commissioner Patten said on the subject of the Middle East .
Whilst we remain convinced that the escalation of violence must be halted , and that terrorism by suicide commando must come to an end , Israel 's responses are quite disproportionate ; the Palestinians , too , have their own dignity .
I can , then , only encourage the Council and the Commission to stick to their policy of talking to both sides in reasonable terms .
There are others who do not do it in this way , and we have an important part to play , as both sides trust us - one perhaps rather more than the other .
We Europeans must cooperate with those whose dignity is being violated .
What we are saying , with the utmost clarity , is that Israel has the right to live within secure borders , but the Palestinian people also have the right to live in peace and within secure borders .
The representatives of the Palestinian people must also be given opportunities to express their views and suggest sensible ways ahead for the future .
Mr Yiannitsis , the deputy defence minister of Greece , was right to point out that there is as yet no agreement between the European Union and NATO on access to the North Atlantic Alliance 's planning facilities and military capabilities .
We hope that we will soon be able to come to an arrangement , and also call upon our Turkish partners to contribute towards finding a solution .
I will conclude by observing that Commissioner Patten referred to the need to improve Europe 's foreign , security and defence policy instruments .
We hope that the Convention will make important proposals on this , and if the European Union is to be able to act and commit itself as it is in Afghanistan , then effective institutions must be the outward expression of this .
Our group will therefore do all in its power to make the Convention a success , for on this will depend to a great extent the European Union 's success with its Common Foreign , Security and Defence Policy .
( Applause )
How can we prevent the United States from taking unilateral action in future , or from carrying out preventive attacks , wherever and whenever , even without our approval ?
Simply invoking the United Nations and international law is not enough as a formula to change Washington from a unilateral to a multilateral player .
Only if the European Union organises itself more effectively on a political and military plane can it be a worthy Atlantic partner .
However , as long as European leaders set greater store by internal political considerations than they do by common foreign policy , our endeavours in this area will be in vain and we will continue to give America all the political leeway it needs to determine its own agenda .
This particularly applies with regard to Iraq .
The European Union must sail a liberal course midway between two Social-Democratic extremes : Mr Schröder , the electoral opportunist , and Mr Blair , President Bush 's London branch manager .
The pressure on Saddam Hussein to allow unfettered access to all weapons and to destroy all dangerous weapons must be stepped up to the highest level possible .
Needless to say , possible military action cannot be ruled out then .
After all , if we continue to allow Saddam Hussein to ignore the UN resolutions , he will become a great danger to his environment and the UN Security Council itself .
Military action does , of course , require the Security Council 's explicit approval .
If the international community joins forces , the Atlantic allies will have to follow suit .
Only with Europe 's help can America tackle the problems in the world effectively .
Political and cultural differences should not make us blind to Europe 's and America 's common interests .
Although the enlarged EU can add more weight globally , decision-making must be adapted and the right to veto must be abolished .
It remains crucial , though , for a common foreign policy in Europe to become more important than the political leaders ' own national profile .
If that does not change , we only have ourselves to blame for America being able to take global control on its own .
Mr President , the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council on the Middle East gave me great cause for alarm , because there are , even so , few or hardly any regions of the world in a state of conflict that has such a profound impact on global stability .
There are few regions in which a State breaches international law , humanitarian law and United Nations ' resolutions to such a degree and quite so repeatedly , and there is certainly no State associated with the Union which treats Europe in such an off-hand way , destroying Palestinian infrastructures that we have financed , which refuses , first Mr Solana , then Mr Moratinos , the right to visit an occupied Palestinian territory .

And there is , above all , no State which treats the appeals that we make to it with such scorn , practically torpedoing the peace efforts on which we are working .
It is in this context that the President-in-Office of the Council speaks of optimism and sees the main obstacle to peace to be the Palestinians .
I cannot comprehend this !
You are obviously right to condemn outright the suicide attacks and any act of terrorism against innocent people , in Israel just as in any other country .
The Palestinian Authority also condemns them systematically and has often tried to put a stop to them .
But what has Mr Sharon done during the last six weeks of relative calm to try to dispel the tension and re-launch the dialogue ?
The Ha 'aretz newspaper answers for you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in pointing out that 30 Palestinian civilians were killed in August alone and Yedioth Ahronot , another newspaper , condemned the irresponsible nature of these crimes , although , apparently , the number of terrorist attacks has fallen spectacularly .
This is the truth , and it has to be told , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr Sharon will not bring security and peace to his own people by re-occupying Palestinian towns , setting up yet more colonies , starving the population and destroying everything that can keep the hope of a State alive , particularly the hope of Palestinian Authority , and this is something being pointed out by many dignified and courageous people in Israel itself .
What credibility can the Elsinore peace plan that you mentioned have , if you gloss over the root causes of the Middle East tragedy ?
What sort of tragedy might this reckless headlong pursuit of the strategy of force lead to , if all those who have some authority do not use all their influence to stop Ariel Sharon ?
You did not even demand an end to the siege of President Arafat or the withdrawal of Israeli forces .
Does it not bother you that your position is a considerable distance from Commissioner Patten 's , for example ?
Europe must live up to the world 's expectations of it .
Today , you unfortunately fell far short of them .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , in addition to what we have been saying over and over again for some time now , I would like to make two comments .
Regarding the Middle East , we are in a global situation in which there has just been a new development , which is not yet reflected in either the Brok or Titley Report .
The US Administration is putting forward a new strategy for re-organising the world .
As part of this new strategy , the US Administration is telling us that there are situations in which we must intervene and take preventative action .
This is its first argument .
Its second argument is if the United Nations supports this action , all well and good ; if it is against this action , it does not matter , we shall take action with the support of our friends .
I urge the European Union to draft a memorandum in response to this new situation .

I do not want the response from Mr Schröder , from Mr Blair or Mr Chirac , or from Mr Anyone .
I want a response from Europe regarding a situation which completely changes the last 50 years of history .
Over the last 50 years , we have attempted to put in place a global justice system and global rules by means of global institutions such as the UN .
It is clear that , in a region such as the Middle East , there are two states , two entities that do not respect the decisions of the UN .
Israel does not respect the decisions of the UN , it is true , but there are those within the Palestinian Movement who do not respect them either .
I therefore fully agree with the condemnation of Israel , of the Israeli policy , but I do not agree with the way the Palestinians condemn the attacks , which is purely verbal .
This is one of the problems : we are faced with two sides who do not respect what the United Nations or the political forces decide .
Yet the two nations concerned need political forces which respect what global law asks of them .
Both sides need political leaders which respects what is asked .
That is why I believe that we in Europe - unlike the US - shall only make progress in the Middle East if we show the same empathy , the same sympathy for the Israelis as we show the Palestinians , only if we feel the same way for the Israelis as we do the Palestinians .
If someone , a political force , decides to support one side rather than the other , we shall have lost , because it will be impossible to go forward .
This is why the role of the European Union is so important .
The Union is the only political entity which is capable today of making each side see reason and of helping , at the same time , both the Israelis and the Palestinians .
It is this policy that Europe must pursue ; but above all , Europe must condemn Ariel Sharon when he blockades Yasser Arafat and condemn the Palestinians when they hide behind terrorists .
Mr President , for a period of six weeks there was a form of peace in the Middle East and our attention turned to Iraq .
That peace has been shattered by renewed acts of terror intended to wreck the peace process .
Once again suicide bombers attacked in Israel .
More families have been bereaved and more victims have been added to the tragic pages of the Middle East conflict .
Then came the deployment of Israeli tanks in Ramallah and in the north of the Gaza Strip .
Palestinian children were targeted in their schoolyard in Hebron .
Both sides must show their commitment to peace by acting with maximum restraint , as called for by the EU Presidency in its recent declaration .
Force cannot defeat force , but peace can be built on peace .
The siege of the Palestinian Presidency compound is counterproductive .
Restricting the freedom of movement of the Palestinian leadership does not contribute to fighting terror .
It is hard to see how it will lead to a reform of the Palestinian Authority .
For far too long the Palestinian people have been denied their legitimate rights .
Their ability to survive is constantly undermined .
They are stalked by poverty .
Without jobs and essential services they are forced to live in appalling conditions .
The people of Israel also live in a situation of insecurity .
Attack and counter-attack are leading nowhere .
The parties must move forward .
The security issues must be addressed , but not at the expense of the economic and humanitarian needs of the Palestinians .
The European Union is committed to working closely with the UN , the US and Russia in seeking ways to encourage and assist the parties involved to end the conflict and move towards a permanent peace .
The conflict must end .
The way to move forward is through cooperation and dialogue , and permanent peace must be established .
This must be our resolve .
The longer the conflict continues , the more it becomes a source of regional instability .
Mr President , what is reprehensible in the Brok Report - as we have already said , but it is increasingly clear - and , generally speaking , in the CFSP 's approach , is this belief , which could be described as surreal , that the EU Member States are automatically associated due to Europe 's natural general interest in the world , so that all we need to do is conjure up a pre-existing and straightforward foreign policy that is familiar to the initiated at the very least , to enable the European Union to become , quite naturally , a major player on the world stage .
This belief is put forward , in the report that is , with the call for the communitarisation of the CFSP , which was also quite rightly criticised last August by the French President , but which constantly comes back to and which is based on this - I repeat , surreal - idea , of the pre-existence of an interest and , therefore , of a common foreign policy .
Yet , reality , from one crisis to the next , continually challenges this belief .
The crises in the Balkans , firstly in Bosnia and then , more recently , in Kosovo , in the meantime , the crises in the Great Lakes region , the various phases of the crises in the Middle East , have shown us that the European Union has never ever succeeded in taking an initiative and in playing a role other than that of the stooge , of the United States , obviously .
We can only respond to the initiatives taken by others , on other sides of the Atlantic , and , the worst thing , which is , in a way , the most delightful thing for those who know what Europe is really made of , namely of independent nations , is that in several crises , particularly in the current crisis in Iraq , there are - poor old Europe , it is still in disarray - stark differences between London and Berlin , and Paris as well , and these are , to a certain extent , patently obvious .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should perhaps reflect sooner or later on the very way the CFSP is put into practice , because we are verging on a degree of absurdity , by constantly repeating that we will do better next time and that , from one report to the next , we will be able to define a common foreign policy .
This is still a figment of our imagination and will remain so .
I think that , sooner or later , we should reflect on just how possible this common foreign policy actually is .
Mr President , looking at the dramatic way the current geopolitical situation has become more acute since 11 September last , there is much to be said for Europe having a Common Foreign and Security Policy .
It will not , however , be an easy matter .
When the USA - at a time when Bill Clinton was still President - and England bombed Baghdad shortly before Christmas 1999 without a UN mandate , I wrote a comment piece in an Austrian newspaper , Der Standard , the key point in which was that this bombardment , denounced by France , Italy , and Russia , and which drew a sharp protest note from the Vatican , had resulted in a fine crack running across Europe .
Today , I leave it to you to judge whether this chasm has widened or become narrower in the meantime .
I would also ask you to consider whether substantial European interests would be affected by an attack on Iraq or even on Iran , which is sought by certain hawks in the US administration who aim to topple the regimes in Saudi Arabia , Syria and Egypt as well .
It is in any case to be welcomed that the EU 's Foreign Ministers , at the informal Council meeting in Elsinore expressed their opposition to military intervention in Iraq .
This awakens hope that the current geopolitical tendency , led by the USA , of resorting to force rather than having recourse to international law , will not be endorsed in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that both the European Union 's history and its contemporary outlook provide great proof of its capacity for peacemaking , in the form of the development and enlargement of the European Union itself .
It is an area of stability , democracy and prosperity , which will be extended by the enlargement of the European Union .
I consider this a crucial justification for a specifically European policy of making further progress in these areas .
We have to use it to build bridges to those parts of our continent that even now are not able or due to join the European Union , as well as with those who do not want to .
Relations with Russia are , for example , made crucially important by the enlargement of the European Union ; a positive interaction must come into being , and we must not set up new boundaries , but rather these boundaries must be turned into bridges .
Commissioner Patten , what the Commission has now proposed in connection with Kaliningrad strikes me as a step in the right direction when it comes to finding a starting point that takes into account small countries ' interests , their sensitivities and their claims to sovereignty , and also enables them to implement Schengen whilst at the same time accepting that Russia has a certain interest in the matter .
I hope that these negotiations lead to a constructive result that incorporates both points of view .
I know that the Danish Council Presidency has a particular interest in this issue .
The European Union is also on the right track in other areas , for example in the Barcelona process .
We are proud that we are able to say that we spend three times as much of our budget on preventive action in the area of external policy than does the United States of America .
We should also have something to say about the positive elements .
But - and this is the big ' but ' - Europe still lacks a voice when it comes to the real issues of war and peace .
The significance of what has happened over recent weeks in connection with Iraq , whether it be the uncritical tagging along behind Washington , whether it be an uncritical rejection of its demands for electoral reasons , is that there is no common European position .
Yet it is only together that we can exert the pressure that is needed to keep the dictator 's hands away from weapons of mass destruction , and , on the other hand , to be able to enforce a process of consultation with the United States of America , one that will give consideration not only to the risks of a military intervention but also to all the options for a peaceful solution to the problem of how to eliminate the weapons of mass destruction that Saddam Hussein has in his possession , and does so in tandem with the United Nations .
In neither of these directions have we demonstrated our capacity to give our citizens security , and we have known since 11 September that security is no longer clearly bounded by certain frontiers , but that it is also possible for a mere handful of terrorists to be operating with dangerous weapons in the midst of our own countries and to be capable of killing people in their thousands .
This has to do with the fact that most people in our Member States have not yet grasped that the small size and weakness of our Member States means that national interests can only be safeguarded if we pool our capacities .
What is needed is for us to really grasp that and also get it through to our citizens - or rather , it is the citizens that will get it across to the governments , as 70 % of the public in the European Union favour a European Security and Defence Policy !
Only in the foreign ministries of our countries is that not yet understood !
It also ties in with military capabilities .
That the 60 000-strong rapid reaction force will be set up on paper by next year , is something of which I am certain , but will it be at all effective , being blind and lame for lack of any logistics capability or satellite facilities ?
Is it truly operational and capable of making a contribution to a secure peace ?
Are we in a position to devise an arms policy that will make us independent and give us the technological capabilities that are also of great importance for competitiveness in non-military spheres ?
Mr Titley 's report will go into this in greater depth .
Have we sorted out the problems we had with Operation Amber Fox and Macedonia ?
Do we have rules to prevent the European Union and Turkey from being at loggerheads ?
All this shows that national posturing and egoism have prevented us from making really decisive progress in matters of war and peace .
I do believe that much of the good that was said in the aftermath of 11 September is now forgotten and was locked away in governments ' desk drawers not long after it saw the light of day .
Let us take , for example , the issue of external and internal security .
Let us just retrieve the great speeches our Heads of State or Government delivered after 11 September , and let us see how much was put into practice .
If we do , we will see this for the low point that it is .
I believe that our projects will only succeed insofar as we fashion a vessel in which a common European will can develop in the area of foreign , security and defence policy .
That is what makes the Convention so very important .
We have to bring about a reform of the institutions , one in which Europe speaks with one voice , with a voice , moreover , that is subject to Parliamentary control , and whose Budget is subject to Parliamentary control , in other words , with a voice originating from the Commission , although any such external affairs commissioner should of course be legitimised by having a special link with the Council .
The creation of dual structures , which is currently being talked up so much , has , however , nothing to do with the people involved at the top , who do outstanding work . It costs money , and 80 % of its energy is expended on infighting instead of being used to develop European positions in external affairs .
That is only human nature , but I do think it is something we should overcome .
We are shortly to have twenty-five Member States , and then that really will not work any more !
What this shows is that , when it comes to these issues , the European Union must at last come to realise where its interests lie .
I believe that the public have moved on from what we are doing politically , and so we in this Parliament should pursue this campaign rigorously .
It is the governments of the Member States that are enfeebling Europe , while we should be restoring her strength !
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Commissioner Patten for his kind words earlier on .
When we are discussing the Code of Conduct , I think we have to set it in a very clear context .
We should begin by recognising that the Code of Conduct is the most comprehensive international arms export control regime in existence .
Nowhere else is there such a sharing of information about arms transfers .
We must also recognise just how far we have come .
We were told at one time that a Code of Conduct was not possible .
Then , that if we had it , it would be no more than a statement of intention .
Then , that any annual report would not be published .
And then that the Parliament would never be consulted on such an annual report .
All these things have come to pass , and we see that the Code , in operation , has developed its own in-built dynamics .
So , it is actually taking Member States further than they initially wanted to go when they started off rather suspiciously with a Code of Conduct .
We should recognise that and set all our criticisms in that context .
The application of the Code is leading Member States towards greater dialogue , mutual understanding and greater convergence .
What is fascinating for me is that the annual reports show that we are making progress on the very issues which the European Parliament has raised .
We have often called for action to be taken on arms brokering , and we believe that it has been a fundamental weakness of the Code of Conduct that it has not addressed this issue .
Therefore , we are very pleased that the third Annual Report states that guidelines for controlling arms brokers have been agreed in Council , that Member States should be looking to register arms brokers , and that these legal controls should be supported by penalties .
We welcome that .
However , the report does not say when this is all going to happen .
We need a timetable for progress , so that all Member States take action in relation to arms brokers .
We have called for greater transparency , both at national and European level , we recognise that some of the problem of lack of transparency is created by different Member States collecting information in different ways .
We welcome , therefore , the improvements in the third Annual Report , but we are still having problems in relation to data collection and reporting .
We look to the Danish Presidency , given its Nordic enthusiasm for transparency , to make progress in this area , during its time in office .
At a national level , we welcome the fact that the third Annual Report has set out a matrix , seeking to note where information converges and where it does not .
We would hope that that information is not used to reduce the information to the lowest common denominator ; we should be working on best practice in this field .
Under the Code of Conduct , Member States who grant a licence for an essentially identical transaction previously denied by another Member State should consult that Member State .
We have never been clear about what ' identical transaction ' means , so we welcome the third Annual Report 's statement that ' there will be a broad interpretation of that phrase ' - but we are still not clear what it means .
Until we are clear what it means , there will be considerable uncertainty about the ' no undercutting ' clause .
I think we should be asking whether these transactions have an identical consequence .
If that is the case , then they are an identical transaction ; and we would be intrigued to know if consultation did in fact take place on the recent saga over Belgian exports to Nepal .
We have asked in any case that these discussions should not be bilateral but multilateral .
Therefore , we welcome indications that there will be multilateral discussions in cases where there is no agreement about whether a licence should be given .
We would hope that will be expanded , although we recognise the difficulties it presents .
We have also asked for greater efforts to be made on end-user certification , so we welcome the fact that the COARM working party is working towards this .
We would like to see a Europe-wide database established in order to assist smaller countries , who find end-user certification and follow-up particularly onerous .
We have also asked for action to be taken on licensed production abroad ; and here again we welcome the fact that there is progress on this in the third Annual Report .
What we would like to see , however , is clarification on the terms of the Code of Conduct with regard to the export of arms into areas of instability .
To what extent - particularly given areas of obvious instability , such as India and Pakistan over Kashmir , or the situation in the Middle East - are Member States interpreting that ?
Finally , I would say that the third Annual Report is a huge step forward , but on closer inspection , much of it is about words and intentions rather than actions .
My conclusion is this : we have come a long way , a lot has been done , but a lot more still needs to be done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was possible , at the Helsinki Summit , to get the impression that we really were on the way to having a common European defence policy .
The Heads of State or Government of the time set themselves ambitious objectives , and the early months made it possible to assume that these objectives would be achieved relatively speedily and within the time limits envisaged .
Looking at matters today , when the deadline is fast approaching , we can see that we are far from achieving these objectives .
The current proposal that NATO should deploy and build up a crisis intervention force makes it clear that our American friends have also lost confidence that we Europeans can actually reach the decisions that are required .
This should prompt us to make new attempts along these lines , as this European crisis intervention force is , as I see it , an essential step towards securing peace around the European Union .
Turning now to the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports , I would like to thank Mr Titley for his excellent report .
We have common rules on arms exports , we have a common code and a code of conduct , but these rules are interpreted in different ways .
We have just seen an export to one Member State prohibited , whilst the same goods were then allowed to be exported to another .
This must not be allowed to happen in future ; whilst we need common rules , the way in which they are applied must also be common to all .
It will probably turn out that any code of conduct will be insufficient , and these rules will also have to be put on a legal footing .
When talking about arms exports , we are on the way to a common market in the defence field as well .
That is why I consider it important , if we are talking about shipping armaments within the European Union and the export rules unfortunately cease to be applied , for these shipments to be made easier .
All 15 EU countries , after all , form a community of values composed of democratic states , and this leads me to believe that such a thing is possible , as are substantial savings , estimated by experts at EUR 240 billion per annum .
I would like to conclude by pointing out how important democratic control is in this area .
I would therefore like there to be even greater attention paid to this debate .
If not only foreign policy , but also defence policy , are under discussion , then the matter at issue is war and peace , about which democratically elected parliaments alone can decide .
At present , this burden rests primarily on the shoulders of our counterparts in the national parliaments , but , the more this European policy develops , the more this Parliament will also have to take upon itself this crucial task .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to be frank , I believe Mr Sharon only wants military , not political options .
He has once again used disproportionate force .
It is true that the Palestinian suicide attacks are despicable - we all know that - but what did Mr Sharon do during the periods in which there were no attacks ?
Let us remember his requirement in June 2001 that seven days should pass without violence before he would make any political concessions .
In December 2001 , there were three weeks of peace ; in 2002 , six weeks .
Did Mr Sharon make the slightest political gesture ?
No , but during those six weeks of peace the Tsahal killed dozens of Palestinians .
I ask the Council , here and now , is this not a bad sign ?
Mr Sharon carried out military attacks at key moments with the intention of invalidating periods in which there were no suicide attacks .
The last time , when all the Palestinian groups , under pressure from Mr Arafat , were considering the possibility of putting an end to suicide attacks against civilians in Israel , Mr Sharon 's political response was to bomb an entire building in the Gaza strip , killing dozens of people , including eleven children .
Mr Sharon - let us be clear about this - has never made , nor will he ever make , any political concessions , except those imposed upon him , because he is not interested in peace .
Mr Sharon is interested in pacification , humiliation , the capitulation of the Palestinians , but not in a genuine , fair peace .


The situation , Mr President , is extremely serious with regard to Mr Arafat 's physical safety , the Palestine identity , which has been crushed by Israel - and more specifically by Mr Sharon - and the area , because Mr Sharon will continue on the warpath until there is an invasion of Iraq , unilaterally decided on by the United States , at which point Mr Sharon will take advantage of the situation to definitively destroy any remaining fragment of the Oslo process , of the ' peace of the brave ' .
Will the EU continue to limit itself to expressing its deep concern over what is going on ?
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , the Brok Report discusses the progress made within the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
There has certainly been progress , but there remains much to be done , exactly as the rapporteur states .
Foreign policy is one of the most important areas in which we really need strong European cooperation .
Only through consistent action and a unanimous voice can the EU play a role in the international arena .
For us Liberals , it is important that foreign policy be based on a clear strategy , characterised by the defence of democracy and human rights , respect for international conventions , free trade , conflict management and cooperation with other nations and organisations .
We must be clear in our demands and values .
If the famous human rights clause is to have any credibility , it is important to find tools that enable it to be applied .
If we do not activate the human rights clause , despite the dreadful attacks made against human rights in the countries we are in partnership with , the clause will only arouse derision .
For us Liberals , scrutiny of foreign policy is also important .
Elected representatives and the public must be able as far as possible to follow and control what happens .
Of course there are exceptions , but my group is not completely happy with the agreement that has been reached with regard to access to foreign documents .
There are many good things to say about Mr Brok 's report .
My group also fully supports Mr Titley 's report .
Allow me to say in conclusion that we certainly disagree with the US administration on many points , and we have often criticised it in this Chamber .
The anti-Americanism that sometimes emanates from here does , however , ring somewhat hollow when it is used solely as an excuse for concealing our own failure to produce a clear , common policy on matters such as Iraq and the Middle East issue .
I have been talking to some of the Members , and they said : ' We do not agree with Bush but , if we had to choose between Saddam Hussein and George Bush , we would choose George Bush ' .
I , however , believe that there is a middle way between killing and dying , which we must take .
I am not making a philosophical statement : this must be our political strategy , a strategy of living .
However , in reality , George Bush 's decision to use war as a deterrent takes us back to the Pax Romana : they called it peace and turned it into a desert .
After 1945 , we Europeans said ' No more war , ever ' .
This is the strategy we must pursue , a strategy of dignity , for our dignity is also diminished by dishonesty such as that we are currently displaying .
Of course , Saddam Hussein must be made to change , but his people must change too .
We must promote democracy in Iraq , we must ensure that the UN resolutions are complied with , but we also have to ensure compliance with the UN resolutions by Israel as well as by Saddam Hussein , and Israel has failed to comply with hundreds of declarations and resolutions .
Commissioner Patten asked when death and suffering for Palestinians and Israelis will come to an end .
Yes , when will it end ?
I believe it will not end until we stop producing statements like those made by the President-in-Office of the Council today .
As long as we continue along this path , Palestinians and Israelis will endure death and suffering for , as everyone is aware , Ariel Sharon 's policy is a criminal policy which is destroying both his own and the Palestinian people .
Yet it is not just the violence and cruelty which concern me , it is the political decision to colonise a country .
Indeed , in recent days , while all our eyes have been fixed on the siege of the Muqata , Ariel Sharon has been appropriating land at Rafah and , at Kalandria , the airport has been reopened as an Israeli airport .
What we are witnessing here is a colonial war .
It is my genuine belief that , in the interests of peace , it is essential that we follow the example of the Israelis and Palestinians who are stating clearly that it is military occupation that is responsible for the situation .
On no account can we continue as we have been doing .
I am truly appalled and saddened , for we are all , myself included , responsible for what is happening in the Middle East and for the continuing deaths in the region .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , since the last debate on the situation in the Middle East , which took place in this House in May , the political horizon has become more than disheartening .
Less than an hour 's flight away from my native Sicily , the tragedy of two peoples with which we share friendship , history , culture and trade is continuing along its inexorable course .
President Arafat is still enclosed in his headquarters , which have been reduced to a miserable cement hut , deprived of freedom of movement .
Islamic terrorists continue to stain the cities of Israel with blood , striking at the civilian people without discrimination .
We all agree in Europe on the need to create two free , sovereign states , and we all agree that this is the only way to restore peace in the Holy Land .
How much credibility can Europe claim , though ?
My countrymen ask me : ' How much credibility can you expect to have , as Members of the European Parliament , how can you expect us to become genuine supporters of Europe if Europe continues to sit still , defenceless , in the face of genocide which is taking place only a few miles away from us ?
How can you fail to convene a major international conference involving the European Union , the United States , Russia and the United Nations , as called for by the High Representative for CFSP , to discuss the Palestinian question and the creation of two States ? '
If economic measures are not matched by political , diplomatic action , the European Union will not succeed in freeing the two peoples from the tyranny of hatred .
We must ensure that the European Union both embodies and is seen to embody genuine practical action , unity and accord .
Mr President , the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East have made a significant contribution to the road map to peace that was drawn up by the European Union and adopted by our partners , the United States , Russia and the UN .
We think that the progress made thus far to bring about the coexistence of two States should have aroused greater interest , but we fear that this plan will not be applied any better than previous ones , because it lacks a specific point of departure .
In order to get the process off the ground , so that the Israeli army withdraws from the occupied territories , we also need the suicide attacks , which bring the whole process to a standstill , to stop once and for all .
Not only do the attacks continue , but the Palestinian Authority also fails to condemn the terrorists convincingly , although they are not obviously protected .
We therefore call for a policy based on good sense , whose starting point is a - genuine - end to the half-measures currently taken against terrorists .
We call for an outright condemnation of Hamas and the Islamic Jihad , and for appropriate measures .
And we also call for the Palestinian Authority to be reformed and to accept more responsibility , failing which , Mr President , it will be impossible for the essential dialogue to be resumed .
Mr President , representatives of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join previous speakers in expressing my concern over the physical and moral siege that the leader of the Palestinian Authority , Yasser Arafat , is currently experiencing .
It is clear that this policy does not contribute either to reducing terrorist activity - but rather , on the contrary , stimulates and increases it - or to democratising the Palestinian National Authority , which had been planning legislative and presidential elections for January next year , nor does it contribute to finding safety valves to put an end to the damaging situation that this region is currently experiencing .
Mr President , I believe we must ask the President-in-Office of the Council to request , clearly and convincingly , a resolution to this situation .
This resolution must necessarily involve the lifting of the siege of the President of the Palestinian National Authority and compliance with the United Nations resolutions .
The European Union , Mr President , must demand , clearly and convincingly , that the United Nations resolutions be complied with .
Mr President , a truce allowing the Palestinian National Authority to control terrorist activity is also essential .
It is ludicrous to say that the President of the Palestinian National Authority should control Palestinian terrorist activity when at the moment he is fighting just to survive .
I also consider it absolutely essential to establish a series of measures aimed at ending Israeli military oppression , which is causing countless casualties , most of whom are civilians .
It is clear , Mr President , that only on the basis of these premises will the initiatives of the Quartet , a peace conference for the region and the European Union 's desire for peace , understanding , concord and reconciliation prevail in the region .
Mr President , in no way do I wish to contradict the excellent reports by Mr Brok and Mr Titley which I support , in the same way as I support the comments that they have made .
These reports quite rightly emphasise the progress made since last year in the area of the CFSP and in that of the ESDP .
We have made progress , for example , by establishing the ESDP bodies , in the fight against terrorism and conflict prevention .
I am thinking of the Balkans and of how specific crises have been managed .
Alongside this progress , however , it must be noted that things have not been going too well just lately .
Europe 's voice often cannot be heard .
Several speakers have told you this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
Here are some examples : the European Union played no part in the military action in Afghanistan , although the Member States participated .
In civilian matters , the Union once again provided substantial humanitarian and material aid , but its political role remained very low-key .
In Iraq , in response to US intentions , the Union did , to its credit , reiterate the role that the United Nations should play .
But what can the High Representative do , when confronted with the conflicting positions of the members of the Council of Ministers ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what are you , personally , doing today , on behalf of the European Union ?
You have proposed absolutely nothing !
And what has our wonderful Mediterranean policy achieved , not only in the Middle East , but in Maghreb and the Mashreq countries ?
The European Parliament is not the place where we will answer the question ' what can be done ? '
To sum up , I would simply like to make one comment : the CFSP and the ESDP are intergovernmental policies .
Once again , this method is showing its limitations .
If our governments continue to disagree or choose silence or inaction , if , therefore , the Union has no genuine foreign policy or any genuine security policy , then we must change method and perhaps use the Community method instead .
The answer lies primarily in the hands of the ministers .
But as you said , Commissioner , nothing is a substitute for political will .
I should , above all , like to congratulate Mr Titley , because just as the 1998 EU code was an important step towards more coherent and transparent European policy , so do the successive Titley Reports form a constructive and important contribution of this Parliament to reach a binding European code of conduct .
The need for this code became apparent recently in my country , Belgium , where a minister resigned over an arms delivery to Nepal .
Incidentally , I should like to note my regret at the fact that a number of Green MEPs have seized on this report for internal political purposes and I am surprised , Mr Staes , at their tabling amendments in which they condemn a decision made by the Belgian Government , while their Green colleagues endorsed this very decision in government .
However , far more fundamental is that the Belgian Government has announced its willingness to include the provisions of the Code of Conduct in national legislation , as a result of which this code will become legally binding .
I hope that other Member States will follow this example .
In this way , we can prevent arms orders refused by one country from being accepted by another country .
Moreover , Mr Titley is right in quoting existing Belgian law on arms trading as an example .
This law indeed provides for tough sanctions on those who trade in weapons without a licence .
The problem , however , does not only lie in the country of origin .
It becomes a serious issue when the arms reach their final destination .
A well-known Brussels research centre announced this week that half of all weapons transactions fail to meet the legal obligation of the arrival certificate .
Consequently , there is an urgent need for an effective inspection system to monitor final destinations .
It is of crucial importance to know in whose hands the weapons eventually end up .
Otherwise , the European Code of Conduct , no matter how well intended , is completely futile .
Mr President , I would also like to wish Mr Titley luck with his report and I would like to add my support for it and for what Mr Titley said in his presentation on further work in this area .
However , I have a number of problems with Mr Brok 's report .
In my opinion it contains a fantastic amount of useful and important things , but the emphasis is wrong .
Far too much weight has been placed on military security policy , while civil and economic security policy is left in the shadows .
I consider that to be getting your priorities wrong , because in fact it is precisely this area in which the EU has a unique opportunity and some unique resources .
You could say that the arena is now entirely open for us in this area .
The USA is unilaterally prioritising military security policy .
It is our strength to move into this field .
We must use our trade agreements , our many contacts , etc. in the fight for peace , human rights and democracy .
Unfortunately my own country has helped to prevent some of these opportunities , for example by not wishing to be part of renegotiating the Association Agreement with Israel .
It is the Association Agreement that Israel is violating time after time .
Finally , with regard to Iraq : what is the evidence that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction ?
I have now studied the flood of reports that have come in .
I have read them in detail .
The most powerful intelligence services in the world have worked towards this as their sole aim .
There is not a shred of evidence .
Why is that ?
Mr President , I should like to speak on the Brok Report , which , as the previous speaker said , contains many valid points , but also a number of very complex issues , two of which I should like to single out .
The first point relates to paragraph 20 in Mr Brok 's resolution , which states that if the EU wishes to be credible , a further effort in the defence budget of certain Member States will be needed .
This represents a serious misconception and analytical error .
Total expenditure of all EU countries in the area of defence and security amounts to 50 % of that of the United States .
The options created as a result only amount to 10 % .
This means that it is of vital importance for cooperation and efficiency to be improved .
In other words , the EU can do a lot more with the same money .
This is why my group is completely convinced that an increase in defence expenditure is unnecessary , completely unfeasible in financial terms and wholly undesirable from a political perspective .
The second point concerns the remark by Mr Yiannitsis , chairman of the Council for security , not , of course , to be confused with the Security Council .
Unfortunately , you have had to repeat here what many of your predecessors have said before you , namely that no compromise has as yet been reached on the EU 's use of NATO funds .
This can only mean one of three things : either Greece is still being obstructive , and Turkey is outdoing it in obstructiveness , or they are both still being obstructive .
I beg you , Mr Yiannitsis , spare us all a disappointment in this respect .
The need for joint EU action has never been so great and , as you said yourself , support among the people has never been so great .
I urge you to excel yourself for once .
Show us that Greece , and this also goes for Turkey , is not a prisoner of the past .
You , Greece , can do the EU a great service , but you can also do it a disservice .
The choice is yours .
Mr President , on the Brok report , I remain sceptical of the need to formally institute a CFSP or an ESDP .
I prefer to retain a national foreign policy and work through NATO .
Recent events over Iraq have questioned the viability of the CFSP .
Nevertheless , I engage constructively with the EU reality , and I recognise the positive role Javier Solana has played , through the Quartet in the Middle East , in promoting long-term peace between Israel and Palestine .
I also particularly support the role of Russia as our strategic partner .
Nevertheless , I support the High Representative 's role as an intergovernmental envoy and do not want these vital areas made Community-based .
Furthermore , I support US aims to rid the world of the danger posed by Saddam Hussein .
I was responsible for the amendment raising the serious issue of organised crime in the Balkans .
A great advantage of EU enlargement in the long run is the inclusion of a country such as , for example , Ukraine , whose aspirations to join the EU the Commission is , sadly , ignoring .
Enlargement will bind these countries to the West , encourage economic prosperity and make a much more coordinated fight against crime and illegal immigration possible when organisations such as Europol have a formal mandate .
Another of my interests is India , which is clearly amongst several potential great powers that are in the midst of internal transition .
With economic liberalisation , India offers a growing market for EU businesses .
A multicultural secular democracy in an otherwise troubled region , it is a source of stability with a no-first-use nuclear policy .
It is a bulwark against the rise of extremism , in particular regional Islamist tendencies such as those evidenced by recent attacks on Christian and western targets in Pakistan .
These demonstrate an unchecked rise of religious fanaticism in that country , despite President Musharraf 's rhetoric .
Tragically , only yesterday 34 Hindus were killed by an Islamic terrorist bomb attack on a Hindu temple in Gujarat .
I do not share all the Brok report 's objectives , but I remain an interested observer of this revolutionary change from the city state of some 2 000 years ago , to the 19th-century nation-state , and to the EU Member State that we are witnessing today .
Mr President , historians will without doubt say that Chancellor Gerhard Schröder 's ' no ' to war was the stimulus for a genuine European foreign policy .
Mr Schröder had the courage to say clearly and directly to President Bush what the vast majority of citizens is thinking .
His ' no ' marks Europe 's emancipation from the Pentagon 's imperialist tendencies .
This preventative and solitary war would have been unjust , because , without the authorisation of the United Nations Security Council , it would have caused political difficulties and severe economic setbacks in Europe , it would have alienated the Arab world , it would not have been in the interest of Israel either , as this war would have converted Israel into a fortress perpetually under siege .
The most affected , however , would have been the Palestinian people , who are today surrounded , trapped and starving in their vast open-air prison .
According to the findings of the Luxembourg Committee for a Just Peace in the Middle East , this war would have exposed the Palestinians to serious dangers .
The best case scenario would have been an acute increase in repression ; the worst case scenario , which would fulfil Mr Sharon 's ambitions , would be the wholesale movement of populations , the colonisation of the occupied territories and the straightforward annexation of these people by Israel .
The preparations for repression were already so far advanced that Mr Sharon sent in the bulldozers , even in the absence of an attack on Iraq .
All that the world had to do would have been to turn a blind eye .
Mr President , in a few months , the UN inspectors will tell us whether Iraq really does have military weaponry .
There will still be time then , and I am speaking to you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to implement , in its entirety , Security Council Resolution 687 ( 91 ) which emphasises that the disarmament of Iraq is part of an initiative whose goal is to establish in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass destruction and all missiles .
The new world order , proclaimed after the Gulf War by President Bush Snr , has quickly been forgotten .
Mr President , I would like to devote my intervention to Mr Titley 's very fine report .
Stopping the supply of weapons and the granting of licences is well known to be among the most effective methods of preventing conflict , and this is , incidentally , true also of the Middle East .
Many things are actually less surprising when one looks at the figures that show how much was supplied to the Middle East last year .
Although the bringing of conflict prevention to the fore is part of the European Union 's purpose - for it is cheaper than ending military conflicts later on - people are still cheerfully exporting to conflict regions .
The Belgians are supplying firearms to Nepal , where civil war is raging , Great Britain 's supply of radar screens for fighter aircraft contravenes Criterion 3 of the Code , while Sweden , France , and Great Britain are contravening its Operative Provision 4 by supplying heavy munitions to India without facing the consequences .
It is precisely in this area that the Code is weak , as it is not binding and makes no provision for sanctions against those who supply weapons to conflict regions all the same .
It must not surprise us if taxpayers complain that this European Union of ours gives out , on the one hand , development aid to these countries , which , on the other , are then destroyed by their own munitions .
It is for this reason that the Code of Conduct has to be applied in such a way as to really stop the supply of weapons to crisis regions .
That must be our objective !
Mr President , the aim of policy regarding Iraq is not to avoid war at any price and it is not merely to see the return of weapons inspectors .
It is to bring about the disarmament of Saddam Hussein 's regime so that he is no longer a threat to us or indeed to his regional neighbours .
We should have acted earlier .
11 September has now given us a heightened sensitivity to potential threats .
If we let Saddam carry on in the way that he is , then what message does this send to others of malign intent ?
My criticism of the British Government is that it has left it far too late to fight the battle for public opinion and that its effort to build a coalition of political support among the Europeans has clearly been poor .
The example of Iraq exposes yet again the frailty of common security policy in the European Union and not surprisingly it confirms a widely differing outlook in interests of the Member States of the European Union .
Unlike Mr Poos , I do not see Mr Schröder as my spokesman .
Some Members of this House have a reflex anti-Americanism .
Instead , I had hoped that they would all be motivated by the need to enhance western security in a dangerous world .
This requires strong and unassailable partnership with the United States .
The Brok report reveals a different set of motives .
It is all about empowering the European Union and boosting the role of the European Commission in particular .
I disagree with this .
It has nothing to do with enhancing the security of our citizens .
Yesterday in Warsaw NATO Foreign Ministers welcomed proposals for a NATO military response force .
20 000 troops will be used for short-term , high-intensity combat operations .
This would complement other NATO reaction forces already in existence and be a real incentive for NATO allies other than just the Americans and British to provide a small number of highly-trained and well-equipped forces ready to take on urgent tasks on a global basis .
The European countries should forget the distractions of the European rapid reaction force separate from NATO and concentrate instead on improving military capabilities for alliance operations .
Mr President , a neutral onlooker recording the current crises would observe that there is tension surrounding Iraq and a second area of tension in the Middle East . He would also observe that , basically , European policy in both areas of tension is conspicuous by its absence .
Does that mean we have no profile ?
If we look at other areas of the world , we have a very high profile .
However , they all have one thing in common .
Where we have intervened in crises , we have not intervened either to create a crisis or to resolve it , we have intervened merely in order to manage it .
Yet , in the Middle East , the only time when progress was made , in the agreement between Arafat and assassinated Prime Minister Rabin , the European Union was involved .
So what does that prove ?
That the third pillar of the European Union needs more work to build it up .
It needs a stratagem defined in terms of a number of general principles on which we all agree .
What are these general principles ?
First , respect for the European political culture .
Secondly , respect for international law .
Thirdly , a balance in relations between the centres of power on the world map .
Fourthly , a perception of the fact that a common defence and security policy requires certain minimum policies in other sectors .
For example , I should like to ask the Commissioner , what happens next with Galileo ?
What happens next with the European Union 's famous common aircraft carrier , despite the fact that it is nothing to do with the European Union ?
Having said which , I think that important progress has been made but that more needs to be done , because a Common Foreign and Security Policy forms an integral part of economic development and peace and every other kind of development .
I think that the Brok Report provides a fairly relaxed framework for a military perception and we shall slowly have to set it on a firmer basis , with a clear direction and with the objective of international peace , security and cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I am disappointed about the fact that the new Liberal , Mr Johan Van Hecke , is still getting up to his Christian-Democratic tricks .
Following his pacific speech , I would ask him , during the vote , to be guided by his conscience rather than by the Flemish Liberal Democrat party whip .
I fully endorse Mr Titley 's remark about the absolute need for multilateral discussion once one Member State has refused a licence .
In this respect , I would recommend approval of Amendments Nos 1 and 7 , which make undercutting more difficult .
It is said , with good reason , that the code of conduct must become absolutely binding .
This is the gist of our Amendments Nos 2 and 8 .
Further to the Nepal crisis , the Belgian Government will at long last include the code of conduct in national legislation .
Could I invite the other fourteen governments finally to follow this Belgian example ?
Mr President , it used to be said that war is too serious a business to be left to generals .
I fear that today defence is too serious a business to be left to politicians .
It is my fear that in an understandable but misguided wish for the European Union to have its own defence capability , politicians are forging ahead with plans that are at best wishful thinking , and at worst dangerous .
If the plan is to mirror the position of the EMU in relationship to the EU , then I foresee that the ESDP is going to inhibit NATO from functioning efficiently and properly .
I have read Mr Brok 's report , and while there is much in it - especially in the original draft - that I find interesting , I fear its proposals will create more problems than they solve .
Let us be honest , Europe 's armed forces have a woefully depleted capability .
Europe 's national governments have no coherence or agreement when it comes to military operations .
None of the experience and sophistication that has been so painstakingly and carefully developed by NATO on both the political and operational fronts is apparent in any of these proposals .
Without an increase in defence spending that would be unacceptable to our electors , Europe 's armed forces cannot mount and maintain any major operation outside the immediate area .
Nobody can deny that NATO 's record is what we should be seeking to protect , not to undermine .
It is time that Prime Minister Blair stopped dallying with other concepts .
He should make it clear that Britain and the other European states that are NATO members have a future only within NATO .
Defence policy is literally a matter of life and death : the death not of politicians , but of soldiers , sailors and airmen .
They cannot be put at risk for the sake for closer European political integration .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Bureau informs us that it is adopting measures to stop the noise caused by the automatic start-up of a security system that cannot be switched off for a while .
For the moment , then , we shall have to work in these poor conditions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , rapporteurs , where its security and defence policy is concerned , Europe is definitely at a crossroads : either we allow ourselves to be forced , mainly by a few hardliners in the current US Government , into a course of action that would above all further deepen the crisis in the Middle East , or Europe has the courage and strength to break this vicious circle .
We can , indeed we must , have grave doubts about whether the regime in Iraq , which is certainly abhorrent , should be eliminated by external military means .
But both moral insight and political common sense mitigate strongly against intervening in Iraq for as long as Israel is not prepared to implement the United Nations resolutions and for as long as Israel is not prepared to allow the Palestinians to elect their political leadership freely and without external pressure .
Recent events show particularly clearly that the current government - and it is not the country of Israel as such - is unwilling to do its bit to break the spiral of violence and stabilise the region .
How much more reasonable and successful it would be surely to let our colleagues in the Palestinian Legislative Council get on with their legitimate political work .
It seems that the Sharon Government actually does not want democratic decision-making structures and free elections in Palestine at all .
The natural right of any government to defend itself against terrorism is often only used as a pretext .
The Middle East is a region whose security affects our security in Europe .
That is why Europe must defend itself against private terrorism , against unreasonable State military measures and unilateral , external interventions not backed by UN resolutions .
Only in this way can the right to sovereignty and internal self-determination be realised .
Following the general recognition of Israel , including by the Arab States , it is now time - decades after the founding of the State of Israel - for the second half of the UN resolution concerned to be implemented too , namely the creation of a Palestinian State .
The best and most successful way of putting an end to terrorism - and this , Mr President-in-Office , should be stated loud and clear - is to recognise those natural rights that are the prerogative of every people and every nation , including the Palestinians .
Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament for this debate .
It has been interesting to listen to the many speeches and points of view .
Weighing up the speeches as a whole , it is quite clear that we must see more progress in the CFSP and that we must have more in the way of a common foreign policy .
I am pleased that those are also the conclusions drawn in Parliament 's report and in Mr Brok 's speech .
I should like , however , to make the point that , in view of the fact that there are 15 countries for which foreign policy is of prime concern , we have really done rather well actually to have a common foreign policy in so many cases .
The common foreign policy is in actual fact the rule rather than the exception .
It will succeed only if we listen to each other and bring about a consensus , but that is something we are all united in aiming for .
It is true that different foreign policy positions are expressed but , when we reach the point of taking the final decision on the common foreign policy , it is usual for us to do so jointly .
That applies in the cases both of the Middle East and of Iraq .
There is in fact consensus in these areas in spite of what is often a variety of public statements of our positions .
Parliament is nonetheless clearly right about our having most influence when we stand together .
If , moreover , divisions are created in the EU , there is also a loss of influence .
Parliament is right about this .
It should nonetheless be emphasised that the EU has in actual fact become one of the leading actors in the efforts to bring about peace in the Middle East .
I have the impression that it has to some extent escaped Parliament 's attention that it is the European peace plan that is being worked on at the moment .
We have not in fact had such a plan before .
We have had French and German peace plans , together with American and Arabic ones , but we have not had a European plan .
Moreover , the European peace plan also led , of course , to working parties and task forces being set up in July , and these have in actual fact progressively advanced the process of reform in the Middle East .
There has been money that , in spite of everything , has been restored to Palestine .
There have been workers who , in spite of everything , have been given permission to leave Palestine and work in Israel .
I acknowledge that my introductory speech was probably too optimistic , and I am sorry about that .
I also said in my speech , however , that the optimism I had felt had been shattered by the events of last week .
I regret moreover that I did not , then , express myself sufficiently clearly regarding the pessimism that is again on the point of getting the upper hand in the Middle East .
We can therefore choose to be pessimists and not do anything at all .
It is the easiest thing in the world to be a pessimist .
That way , you always turn out to be right .
We are obliged to work in a spirit of optimism . Otherwise , we could not stand to go on working .
That is why we have devised the peace plan that was adopted by the Quartet and , as I mentioned the other day , is now also the Security Council 's plan .
Has the European Parliament experienced anything similar before in the Middle East ?
I really do not think so .
Moreover , it has been brought about by virtue of constructive cooperation with Russia , the UN and the United States , whereby we do not seek sources of conflict but try to find the solidarity that will carry us through .
As Parliament quite rightly says on this subject - and this is something with which I agree , as does the whole of Europe and , indeed , the whole world - solidarity of this kind would consist in two states existing peacefully side by side , and it is a source of some astonishment that so much blood has to be shed in the region in order to achieve what we all know will be the final outcome .
It cannot end in any other way .
That is why we constantly make powerful appeals to both parties .
We call upon the terrorists to cease their acts of terror and upon the Israeli army to halt its excessive use of force .
That is the message we constantly convey .
It is , moreover , the same message that Kofi Annan delivered to the UN General Assembly the other day , when he said that the peace process must be driven by hope and by deeds : deeds on the part of the Palestinians , aimed at genuinely halting the terrorism , and hope in the form of Israel 's really making it clear that the outcome will be a Palestinian state .
Otherwise , the terrorism will not successfully be brought to an end .
European policy , or the Council of Minister 's policy , is therefore quite clear and corresponds , then , to what is also global policy .
I agree completely with Mr Cohn-Bendit that we must not forget the Palestinians ' responsibility for combating terrorism and , as some MEPs have mentioned , we are putting pressure on both parties .
I talked for an hour the other evening with Mr Sharon about the pointlessness of maintaining the present siege .
He will not achieve his objectives in that way .
This has been said quite clearly .
Mr Arafat has also been told that he needs to guarantee that no terrorists enter Israel .
The main topic 's having after all been the Middle East , I want finally to say that the European position has also carried the day with regard to Iraq .
The European common position is that we should comply with the Security Council .
The European position is that the Security Council should be supported .
That also means , then - and this is the common position we adopted in Elsinore - that we must listen to the Security Council and be willing to accommodate its requirements of us .
There is no split in the European position as adopted by the Foreign Ministers .
It is about complying with the Security Council .
It is also a position that has paid off , because the United States has of course also agreed to comply with , and consult , the Security Council .
Finally , I want to thank Mr Titley for his report on the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports .
I endorse Mr Titley 's concluding words to the effect that a lot has been done and that more needs to be done .
With regard to the transparency that Mr Titley was kind enough to expect from the Danish Presidency , I should like to say that we shall be very pleased to accommodate that wish .
The fourth annual report under the Danish Presidency will increase transparency by providing more statistical data and will add a compendium of adopted practices to show how the code is being implemented by the Member States .
The report will also contain new agreements on transit , final user certificates and the production of military equipment under licence in third countries .
That is how the Member States are obliged to regulate the arms trade .
Several Member States have introduced the legislation , and others are preparing such legislation .
On the basis of Mr Titley 's report and the backing it has received from Parliament , I am able to say that Parliament 's support for the Danish Presidency 's efforts is very welcome and very valuable .
Thank you .
Mr President , I too should like to thank you for the debate and the comments made , especially on the Common Foreign and Security Policy , from which numerous direct and indirect conclusions have emerged .
I shall confine myself to two comments : first , on the question raised by Mr von Wogau , who highlighted an interesting shortcoming in Europe 's defence and security policy , to do with the absence of a single market .
We do in fact agree that this is an area in which cooperation , be it on the production side or be it on the research and development side , as well as more general cooperation between countries can bring in significant results .
It is a shortcoming , as Mr Brok also notes in his report , which makes some very interesting points as regards security and defence , with which , as I said , we agree .
We believe that Europe , which has made such a tremendous effort and has achieved results in research and development in the non-military sector of the economy , could extend this effort to the area of defence if it wishes to acquire greater autonomy , independence and development potential and derive economic benefit from it .
My second comment has to do with the question raised by Mr Lagendijk .
As the Presidency , I have outlined the efforts being made to resolve the problem .
I should like to point out that the solution we need to aim for is a European foreign and security policy which is open to any third countries wishing to share this new experience with the European Union .
However , we also need to safeguard certain principles : the principle of independence of the Union 's decision-making system and the integrity of its institutions .
These are principles which Parliament itself has called for and they are included in the Treaties , which is why we are working to make a success of them .
I am positive that , with the systematic efforts being made and with the real spirit which can be demonstrated on all sides , we shall be able - I hope soon - to reach a result .
Mr President , there are just a couple of points I would like to make .
They are both points , certainly the first , on which I hope to say rather more over the coming months .
The first point is that grumbling about the United States of America is not the same as having European foreign policy .
Equally , assuming that any European initiative is wrong and that any scintilla of disagreement with the United States is somehow high treason does not strike me as being a very good basis for the protection of the national interests of any Member State of the European Union .
I am always surprised that some of the most fierce protectors and protestors about national sovereignty seem to suppress that point of view as soon as Richard Pearl raises his voice .
So in the distinguished and ever noble presence of my honourable friend and publisher , ever noble despite the constitutional machinations of New Labour , I commend , as ever , the middle way .
But if we are to take the middle way of European multilateralism providing more weight on our end of the transatlantic rope , being able to act as a counterpart and occasionally as a counterweight , then we have as European politicians to face up to the political and financial consequences of that .
I hope that we will increasingly be prepared to do so .
There is a second point I should make in response to the honourable Member , Mr Barón Crespo .
He asked for a report on destroyed EU financial projects .
He will recall that we tried to provide the figures for Commission projects a few months ago .
At present , we are trying to get information from Member States on all of their projects .
It is not made easy by the situation on the ground .
As soon as we have that information in as accurate a form as possible , we will of course share it with the honourable Member and the whole House .
It is an important point and it should be possible to arrive at a figure .
However , the point that is most worrying is the shattered aspirations of the Palestinian territories and , it has to be said , the shattered aspirations of Israel as well .
The sooner we have peace , the sooner we can restore a decent standard of living and quality of life for all the people who live in that region .
Once again , we are witnessing an attack by the Israeli army in Palestine .
In Europe , we are stepping up the fight against terrorism , yet we are silent in the face of State terrorism which , on a daily basis , kills innocent people who are resisting colonisation and occupation .
Explain to me why we are refusing to make sanctions against Israel the glue that binds association agreements .
Why do we keep quiet as Mr Sharon violates human rights , while condemning those elsewhere who flout democratic freedoms ?
Why do we keep quiet when colonists are occupying a State and their government is ignoring United Nations resolutions ?
Why should international conventions apply to everyone except Israel , which is carrying out illegal arrests and torture ?
Why do we send intervention forces to combat ethnic cleansing for certain peoples and do nothing to protect the Palestinian people ?
We call for justice for some while practising impunity for others .
Why do you not act now , before it is too late ?
This extermination is taking place to prevent people from demanding a fair peace , the right to their own country in which they can live in dignity ?
After this latest genocide , you will say ' never again ' .
Stop this massacre !
You have the power to do so .


Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as may be seen from the agenda , I have been asked to issue a statement today under the heading , ' The situation concerning the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) following the informal meeting of EU Foreign Ministers ( Elsinore , 29 and 30.8.2002 ) ' .
I am alert to the fact that the request for this report has to be seen in terms of Parliament 's wish to be kept informed of the EU 's deliberations following the United States ' request for the Member States to enter into bilateral agreements aimed at preventing American citizens from being handed over to the Court .
It is quite understandable that Members of the European Parliament should be concerned about this matter , just as they were concerned about the United States ' ASPA legislation ( American Service Members ' Protection Act ) , for it is of crucial importance to us all to insist upon the integrity and effectiveness of the Court .
I should like to begin by pointing out that , since the Elsinore meeting , there have been further developments concerning the ICC , and I hope that these will have a more positive and long-term effect on the issues that are at present occupying our friends on the other side of the Atlantic .
The first meeting of states participating in the ICC was held in New York from 3 to 10 September .
I am pleased to be able to report that this general meeting went well .
It had been well prepared for by the Preparatory Commission ( PrepCom ) in New York .
The present draft documents were finalised thanks to focused and significant contributions from all the delegations in the course of the ten meetings of the Preparatory Commission .
We can be pleased that the same productiveness and willingness to compromise were manifested during the ICC 's first general meeting , so that it was possible to adopt the present documents without anyone 's being tempted to re-open the discussion concerning the compromises on which a consensus had previously been reached .
Now , the time has come to focus upon the International Criminal Court 's duties in The Hague .
It is now up to diplomats and politicians to give the Court the ability to complete what was begun in Rome and continued in New York .
The ICC must establish itself as an effective and independent institution which can accommodate the demands now made by the international community .
The Court must exercise its jurisdiction effectively and independently , in the same way that we expect our national legal systems to .
Naturally , the ICC 's ability to function properly will depend upon no serious obstacles being placed in its way .
That , of course , leads me on to the problem that I mentioned to begin with and that presumably also occupies Parliament a great deal , namely the issue of the United States ' request for bilateral agreements on non-extradition .
As the Presidency has said on previous occasions , the European Union and the United States share the same basic values .
We both profess freedom and democracy , accountability to the courts and the defence of human rights and of the principle of a society governed by the rule of law .
We have therefore always thought that the United States should be among the participants in the Rome Statute .
The United States could make a particularly positive contribution to the Court and to the way it operates .
Since 1998 , we have tried to accommodate American concerns in relation to certain provisions of the Statute but , as the summer showed , these efforts have been in vain .
MEPs will be familiar with the most recent chapter of the story whereby , in a declaration of 6 May of this year , the United States decided that it did not intend to participate in the Statute that it had in fact signed under the Clinton administration .
We believe that the United States ' decision is wrong , and the European Union has publicly deplored the step taken by the Americans .
I shall not bore MEPs , or extend the sitting , by providing too many details , but I think it might be useful if I were to take this opportunity briefly to put into context the discussion we had in Elsinore concerning the bilateral agreements .
The United States ' request for bilateral agreements was first discussed by the Council in the Political and Security Committee ( PSC ) on 26 July .
There was agreement in the PSC on a provisional common response that the Member States could give to the United States in the course of bilateral contacts .
The common response essentially consisted of telling the Americans that the EU remains committed to its obligations to support the ICC and the integrity of the Rome Statute ; that the American proposal has far-reaching implications necessitating the more detailed analysis in which we also invited the candidate countries to participate ; and that we would come back with an answer as soon as the analysis had been completed .
The Political and Security Committee ( PSC ) decided to return to the matter at the beginning of September once the Council 's experts on international law ( COJUR ) had discussed the matter on 4 September .
In the meantime , it was decided that it would be useful to have a short discussion of the matter at the meeting in Elsinore at the end of August .
There , we agreed that the EU should not accept anything that might undermine the International Criminal Court .
We also agreed that the EU should not increase the difficulties in relation to the United States . Rather , we should look at possible ways of accommodating the United States .
We confirmed that the legal experts should examine the matter with a view to arriving at a common assessment which might lead to agreement as to a common and constructive approach on the part of the EU at the Council meeting on 30 September .
We find ourselves at the end of the period of reflection .
At their meeting in New York , the United States and the EU agreed to look into whether we could arrive at a common position .
This also meant that the United States was willing to move for , otherwise , there would have been no basis for further analytical work .
Some outlines of a common approach are now beginning to emerge , therefore .
In EU circles , there is agreement that any solution must take account of relevant agreements already entered into with the United States and must be based upon , and reflect , three fundamental principles if the integrity of the Rome Statute is to be preserved .
Clearly , the present American proposal is irreconcilable with obligations in relation to the International Criminal Court .
On the other hand , it is no solution , either , simply to reject the proposal outright for that reason . On the contrary , we are trying , as I stated , to find a policy that can both sustain respect for the Court and ensure that we can come to an arrangement with the United States too .
These principles underlie the issue of preventing the most serious international crimes from going unpunished , the issue of reciprocity and the issue of the categories of person to whom the arrangements are to apply .
If a solution is to be found to the issue of exemption from punishment , raised by the American proposal , it will have to contain a suitable provision ruling out exemption from punishment for those who have committed crimes covered by the jurisdiction of the Court . That is to say , there must be no exemption from punishment for those who have committed crimes covered by the jurisdiction of the Court .
With regard to the issue of reciprocity , this is not something we want to see .
It is unacceptable to arrive at a result that rules out the extradition of citizens of states participating in the ICC .
When it comes to the categories of person to whom the arrangements would be applicable , the United States wants to see a rule that would exclude everyone , and therefore all Americans , from extradition to the ICC .
There is agreement in the EU that a solution will only be able to cover specified categories of person from countries not participating in the ICC .
The issue of specifying in more detail those to whom the arrangements will apply will continue to be discussed up until 30 September .
I should like to emphasise that our analysis and deliberations have by no means been concluded . Rather , they are continuing .
As recently as yesterday , the Presidency 's legal experts held a meeting with American interlocutors in order to exchange views and information .
We shall now work hard to achieve a solution that can , if possible , accommodate the United States ' concerns without in any way undermining the Court .
Both through bilateral contacts and at a meeting with the United States ' Secretary of State , Colin Powell , we have , as I mentioned , made it very clear how important it is to us that the spirit and letter of the Rome Statute should be respected .
I also said this at the meetings I had on 3 July and again last week in New York .
In my introductory speech here today , I emphasised that the time has now come for the International Criminal Court to show that it is in a position to function as an effective and independent court .
We must hope that the United States can be prevailed upon to adopt a more positive approach once the International Criminal Court has in practice had the opportunity to show that it operates in accordance with the highest standards of the rule of law and does not allow itself to be exploited for political reasons .
Madam President , I am very pleased to speak today about the European Commission 's continuing support for the Rome Statute and for an effective International Criminal Court .
I believe , as Parliament does , that the creation of the International Criminal Court represents a critical milestone in the evolution of international human rights law .
No longer will tyrants gain impunity for genocide , war crimes , and crimes against humanity - including widespread murder of civilians , torture and mass rape - by hiding behind the cloak of national sovereignty .
No longer will the international community have to create international criminal tribunals after the fact - after the crimes that we all deplore have already been committed .
In the 21st century , potential tyrants and mass murderers will know in advance that the international community is prepared to hold them accountable for massive violations of human life and dignity .
It is our belief and our hope that this awareness will help to reduce the frequency and the severity of such crimes .
But when it does not , and the relevant national legal authorities are unwilling or unable to act , the international community will have in place a complementary system of criminal justice that is fair , transparent and effective .
The European Union fully supports the Court .
The principles of the Rome Statute , as well as those governing the functioning of the ICC , are fully in line with the principles and objectives of the Union .
The consolidation of the rule of law and respect for human rights , as well as the preservation of peace and the strengthening of international security , in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations , and as provided for in Article 11 of the EU Treaty , are of fundamental importance to us .
We have committed ourselves to the success of the ICC .
We have provided funds in projects to support the broadest possible ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute and we have committed more money for that purpose .
Of course , there is still real work to be done before the ICC can function as intended .
One challenge is to increase the number and broaden the geographical scope of states that have signed and ratified the Rome Statute .
As of today , 139 states have signed the Statute , and 81 have ratified it .
These numbers are impressive , but need to be increased .
We note a particular gap among Asian States .
The Commission will continue to make every effort to encourage third countries that have not yet done so to sign and / or ratify the Statute .
We will also work with states that have ratified the Statute to ensure the timely adoption of national implementing legislation necessary to cooperate with the Court and to exercise national criminal jurisdiction over crimes covered by the Statute .
At the moment , of course , the most controversial issue is that of bilateral agreements under Article 98 of the Rome Statute , to which the Presidency referred .
The Commission supports the decision taken by the Foreign Ministers at Helsingør to develop an EU response on Article 98 that seeks to accommodate US concerns without in any way undermining the Rome Statute .
As soon as the details of the European Union position on Article 98 are completed - I hope by the end of this month - we will work with the candidate and EEA States to maintain a united front on the ICC .
With regard to the longer term , the Commission also supports an ongoing dialogue between the European Union and the United States on the future of the International Criminal Court .
An open EU-US dialogue on these matters is critical to the ultimate effectiveness of the Court .
We disagree with the United States about the Court .
We are sorry that all the reassurances we gave during the negotiations , and subsequently , have been ignored .
We are sorry that they have declined to take ' yes ' for an answer .
So be it .
Without any acrimony , but with steady determination , we must get on with the task of making the Court a success .
There is an obvious challenge in doing that . That is to ensure that the nomination and election of the ICC 's judges and chief prosecutor are fair , transparent and fully consistent with the criteria set out in the Rome Statute .
Fairness , transparency and consistency are important to ensure the legitimacy of this new institution in the eyes of the whole world .
European Union Member States should ensure that their handling of this process sets a positive example .
Parliaments , professional associations , and non-governmental organisations around the world can also contribute to this process by recommending potential candidates for consideration by states parties and by evaluating the qualifications of all those candidates .
I only wish to add how much the entire Commission appreciates the European Parliament 's tireless advocacy on behalf of a strong and effective International Criminal Court .
We look forward to continuing this positive relationship on behalf of the ICC well beyond the Court 's first operational session next autumn .

Madam President , Mr Møller , Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to make two preliminary remarks : firstly , I should like to thank my friend and colleague Arie Oostlander very much for agreeing the motion with the other groups so that tomorrow we will hopefully be able to adopt a broad common position .
Secondly , we have got into a bit of a muddle with the timetable here and my group 's bureau has been meeting since 5.30 p.m.
It is advisable for the group chairman to be in attendance , so I would crave your indulgence if I leave immediately after my speech , something that I have never done before .
Why did the international community set up this International Criminal Court ?
It was set up because the Rome Statute of the Court states that the most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole must not go unpunished .
That is precisely our group 's position .
Our values are human dignity , freedom , democracy and the rule of law and no one has the right , except in self-defence , to kill another person or wound their dignity .
This dignity is for everyone , for Jews , Muslims , Christians , Hindus , Buddhists , people of no religious persuasion , people from large and small countries , for all the people on this earth .
No individual and no country has the right to escape punishment for crimes which concern the international community as a whole .
No one , no person and no State , is above the law .
That is why we want the International Criminal Court to be effective and capable of acting , and I very much welcome the clear statements made by both President Møller and Commissioner Patten .
We expect all EU Member State governments and parliaments to do all they can to ensure that this International Court is able to work properly and effectively .
We call in particular on the accession countries not to enter into any agreements before we have agreed on a common position within the European Union , and I hope very much that on 30 September you will succeed in drafting such a common position .
I very much regret the fact that Romania , an accession country , has concluded an agreement without first awaiting the European Union 's position .
It has not acted in solidarity with the European Union .
In conclusion allow me to say this : despite the fact that the motion naturally contains a certain amount of criticism of the United States , this is no reason for us now to adopt an anti-American attitude .
This is more an example of a case where our opinions differ , and we should discuss this without by so doing ceasing to be partners and friends of the Americans .
In a partnership it is usual for differences of opinion to be expressed and in any case we Europeans should act more in unison .
We have more reason to ask ourselves questions than to criticise the Americans .
This means that here too European unity is actually already part of the answer .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty on the International Criminal Court is an indispensable instrument to assert international law .
The founding of this Criminal Court is a European Union project and at the same time it symbolises our system of values .
That is why this House regards the Treaty as an integral part of the Copenhagen political criteria .
The principle behind this Treaty is plain and simple .
Anyone who has committed genocide or war crimes , anyone who is guilty of crimes against humanity should not go unpunished .
That is why it is completely incomprehensible that the demand should be made that not all criminals should go before the court , but that some of them , regardless of the seriousness of their crime and solely on the basis of owning a particular document , should be excluded from its jurisdiction .
This demand made by the Bush administration would stand in total contradiction to the aim and purpose of the International Criminal Court .
It is not only absurd but also unacceptable , and for two reasons .
It is firstly unacceptable because exempting all of the nationals of a State would mean that the jurisdiction could only be selective and would therefore take the principle of the universality of justice to absurd lengths .
Secondly it is unacceptable because it views all of the nationals of one particular State as potential war criminals .
I oppose this generalised anti-Americanism in the strongest possible terms .
Some States - so far 12 in number - have succumbed to the huge pressure exerted on them by the United States of America and signed a bilateral agreement with the USA .
I deeply regret this and think that it will have consequences for our relations with these States .
In any case , tomorrow , in a joint motion tabled by four groups - and it is also exceptional , Madam President , that a joint motion should be tabled in this Parliament - the European Parliament will adopt a very clear position on this .
Madam President , the establishment of the ICC marks a huge step forward in enforcing , at a global level , the principle of the rule of law which is fundamental to all liberal democracies .
While ad hoc tribunals , such as those for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia , are doing invaluable work , there is no substitute for a permanent court with the mandate and legitimacy to prosecute criminals wherever they may hide .
We need only look at Croatia 's refusal to hand over General Bobetko to The Hague on the grounds that Croatia was not the aggressor , to see the problems which can arise .
In negotiations on the Rome Statute , Europe bent over backwards to achieve an outcome which would accommodate American concerns .
It is therefore a matter of deep regret to Liberal Democrats in this House that a number of countries have refused to sign the Rome Statute for the ICC .
These countries include Iran , Iraq , North Korea and the United States .
If we follow the old adage ' you will be judged by the company you keep ' , what message does the USA 's presence in this group of refusniks send to the world ?
Especially when taken in conjunction with America 's disavowal of the Kyoto protocol , the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , and the Biological Weapons Convention .
It is bad enough that the USA is refusing to ratify the Rome Statute , but to try to strangle it at birth by reaching bilateral agreements with countries such as Israel and Romania in order to prevent its nationals being surrendered to the ICC is terrible .
UN Security Council Resolution 1422 also sets a dangerous precedent and should not be renewed next July .
The European Union should do its utmost to avoid undermining the ICC before it has even begun its work .
I therefore urge the President-in-Office of the Council to recognise the storm-clouds gathering over this issue and to pull the EU Member States together under one umbrella .
In an age of instability it is understandable that the EU wishes to avoid a breakdown in transatlantic relations , but any agreement with the USA must be supported by all EU countries and be consistent with the Rome Statute .
Another failure on our part to show unity would further undermine the EU 's credibility in foreign affairs .
We must get our own house in order .
The countries wishing to join us , including the Czech Republic , Lithuania and Malta , must understand that the values the ICC represents are fundamental to the European Union , and that speedy ratification of the Rome Statute would prevent any delay in their accession .
We urge Romania not to ratify its bilateral agreement with the USA , and it is also important for the Union to act together within the ICC in terms of financial support and the appointment of judges , the prosecutor and staff .
By acting together , Europe can contribute greatly to making the ICC work , and thereby reassure the USA that the Court is serious and poses no threat to their law-abiding nationals .
We must work to bring the Americans on board at a later date .
Neither government must forget that we are accountable to the court of world public opinion .
In conclusion , Madam President , the ICC is a symbol of the world for which we strive - a world in which human rights and international law will be upheld everywhere , and most of all , a world in which no shelter will be given to those guilty of the vilest crimes .
Let us work together to enable the court to get off to a flying start when it becomes operational in January .
Madam President , I too apologise to the President-in-Office and the Commissioner , but I must leave the debates , since I must chair a meeting of my party .
Mr President , we have to face the facts regarding the USA , the ICC and the European Union .
The facts are : the total rejection by Washington of the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court ; the postponement by the United Nations Security Council , under United States pressure , of any prosecution by the ICC , first until 1 July 2003 , and then until 2004 or maybe 2005 ; and the bilateral agreement on immunity pursued by the United States with some foreign governments , among them two European governments namely Great Britain and Italy , seeking for a law to protect American forces abroad - a law that would authorise military action anywhere , even in the Netherlands , to liberate any American personnel detained by the ICC .
Do we need any other proof of the intention of the Bush administration to torpedo the ICC ?
Nowadays there are American troops in 140 countries throughout the world , in more than half of these countries with permanent bases .
So we are confronted with a superpower which does not allow any other law but its own , on its military forces or its civilian personnel .
As Commissioner Patten has just stated , grumbling against the United States is no substitute for a European foreign policy .
I entirely agree with him .
I hope he will agree with me that lamenting , whining and giving in through endless useless transatlantic dialogue on an issue of such gravity is no foreign policy either .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in the middle of an extremely unusual debate .
With good reason , with very good reason , this Chamber is expressing wide support for the International Criminal Court and widely condemns the stance of the United States , which wants to nip the International Criminal Court in the bud .
This was most recently illustrated by the very harsh words in the national security plan that is being presented this week .
Unfortunately , as Mr Møller already indicated , this topic is no longer being debated outside of this Chamber .
The Council is working on a compromise .
The question is no longer whether exceptions should be made , but how far they go for the United States .
With this , a horrible dilemma is being created for Parliament and for anyone who is kindly disposed towards the International Criminal Court , for the choices are : either no compromise , and this translates into a divided Europe and continuous opposition by the United States , or opting for damage limitation , for example , by restricting the exception to soldiers with peace missions .
This would result in a united Europe , an end to US opposition and quite possibly the withdrawal of this diabolical The Hague Invasion Act .
These are the true choices we are facing , whether we like them or not .
This raises the vital question - and I would at the same time make an appeal to Mr Møller , as President-in-Office of the Council - whether this compromise undermines the International Criminal Court permanently and structurally .
This is where my group draws the line .
And I would urge Mr Möller to draw the line there in respect of the Council 's willingness to strike a compromise .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many people have described the International Criminal Court Statute as the most important international document since the United Nations Charter .
We Radicals have believed this for many years , and for many years we have fought , as we are continuing to do now , to bring this Court to birth and to see it grow and gradually acquire universal jurisdiction and be recognised by as many countries as possible .
Many Members have spoken , indeed almost the entire debate has been on the issue of the United States , but I would also point out that many of the world 's largest countries - China , Russia , India , Indonesia , the entire Arab world with the welcome exception of Jordan , and almost all of Asia with very few exceptions - have yet to sign on the dotted line .
There is therefore a great deal of work still to do .
Of course , it is right to concern ourselves with the issue of the United States , with its attempt to obtain exemption and , in particular , a sort of immunity for its citizens with a diplomatic offensive , but I want to stress here that the European Union must direct its greatest endeavours - and the action plan endorsed by the Council and the Commission 's work are important in this respect - towards ensuring that the Court has that universal jurisdiction which will guarantee its authority and status and which will also , indeed , show those who are openly against it like the US administration that , maybe one day , under another administration , their country might change direction .
Proof of this is the fact that , a few days ago , the former President , Bill Clinton , was publicly criticised for failing to achieve ratification of the Rome Statute when he was President .
This is important : it is important that the Council adopts a position which gives due consideration to the importance of preserving the Statute in its entirety , that , should a compromise be reached with the United States , it takes into account the question of non-reciprocity - the need for guilty citizens or , at any rate , citizens who have been accused of a crime , to be tried before the US Courts in any case - and , most importantly , that it takes into account the fact that any exception must be restricted , where appropriate , to military and civilian staff sent on mission by the United States and must not be extended , as the United States is requesting , to all US citizens indiscriminately , for this would be absolutely unacceptable and intolerable .
Madam President , the row between Europe and the United States over the International Criminal Court constitutes a threat to the European Member States ' common foreign policy .
A few weeks ago , things looked set to end in complete disaster when Italy and Great Britain threatened to conclude bilateral agreements with the US , as a result of which certain countries , including the US , or groups of citizens , including American military , would be permanently excluded from prosecution by the International Criminal Court .
Signing an agreement of this kind must be viewed as detrimental to the agreement of the International Criminal Court .
I am referring in this respect to the sound legal advice gained by the European Commission .
Fortunately , the United Kingdom and Italy ultimately did wait for a European consultation , and we in Parliament are now able to give our opinion on this matter in advance .
The International Criminal Court 's very existence is on the line , as destructive bilateral agreements undermine its raison d 'être .
However , the question also arises again of whether Europe is able to speak with one voice .
Not only as a trading power , but also as a bearer of values and standards in this rough and unsafe world , one that protects human rights and the international rule of law as a whole .
A divided Europe , in which some Member States want to take advantage of Article 98 to permanently exclude the US or US citizens from prosecution - so including Al Qaeda terrorists with an American passport - damages our ideal of a Europe that contributes to peace , stability and security worldwide .
According to the ICC Treaty , all nations , including the US , can , and must , tackle their own human rights violators themselves for the first nine months .
Only when this proves unsuccessful , will the International Criminal Court become involved .
It therefore depends on national efforts whether the International Criminal Court should actually intervene .
This should be sufficient guarantee for the US too .
Europe should therefore remain unyielding and continue to speak with one voice .
This is why I would ask Member States to abandon destructive bilateral agreements with the US , and urge the Council to remain united .
Madam President , the aim of the International Criminal Court is to judge the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that have international implications , an aim that is all the more commendable since it was defined at the end of the most crime-ridden century in the history of humanity , a century which saw the genocide of the Armenians in 1916 , of the Jews in the 1940s , one hundred million deaths caused by Communism , the Christians of Sudan massacred by Islamic fundamentalists , one million starving children in Iraq because of sanctions on their country ? the list goes on .
Alas , most of the authors of these crimes have escaped justice .
Only the German National Socialists and the Japanese leaders were tried by those who defeated them , some of whom should have also been in the dock .
On the other hand , the international socialists such as Lenin , Trotsky , Stalin , Mao and Pol Pot enjoyed total immunity .
Would an International Criminal Court have avoided these crimes , or at least punished the murderers ?
I have my doubts .
The ICC member countries do not have the same concept of law .
The powerful countries will continue to evade the law , and , even here , some speakers such as Mr Poettering have told us that it was wrong for the Romanians to have agreed to conclude bilateral agreements , but the US , which pushed them into this , would not entertain any criticism whatsoever .
The founding statute of the Court claims that the Court shall only intervene on a subsidiary basis , in cases where the Member States refuse to exercise their sovereign right or are not in a position to do so .
If that is true , it is difficult to understand the fierce opposition from the United States .
The abrupt change of direction by the US might well be viewed with a degree of cynicism .
Madam President , the word Romania has been mentioned several times today already .
I do not think either that we should criticise only the small poor , destitute countries that are being blackmailed but surely also the large rich ones , the ones actually responsible for the blackmail in the first place .
This shows that in the European Union we need a calm , unified position on the USA , and we lack this at the moment .
On the one hand we have a Head of Government in London who acts as though his country were the fifty-first US State .
On the other , we have a Head of Government in Berlin who to hear him talk would seem to be confusing Baghdad with Washington , and who gets his first message of congratulation after the elections from Saddam Hussein .
I believe that both of these approaches are wrong .
We need a calm , unified , but critical and independent position on the USA .
This is not least in the interests of the USA itself .
Strengthening international law and its instruments is a fitting response to 11 September ; this then includes the International Criminal Court , which we have been fighting for years and which is an indispensable instrument .
The Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are actually doing an excellent job , but they are repeatedly discredited in propaganda as dispensing victor 's justice .
This is wrong !
However , if we are to have objective standards in the long term we really do need to strengthen international criminal law in respect of crimes against humanity and genocide , and we need an International Criminal Court that is there for everyone in an equal capacity .
We should be clear on one thing : history teaches us that for example the League of Nations failed because this splendid idea emanated from the USA but the USA itself did not participate in it .
We call on our American partners and friends to work together with Europe to strengthen international law and the Criminal Court , because otherwise we are providing states in the Arab world , but also China and Russia - I might mention Chechnya and Tibet - with a pretext for ignoring international law on their territory .
That is why Europe needs to speak to the USA in a self-assured manner , but calmly and reasonably and in a spirit of partnership .
Madam President , the United States has a strange idea of international law .
Yesterday , we learned that , in violation of the Biological Weapons Convention , Washington is not going to allow inspections to be carried out in US firms , despite the fact that a war is about to break out because of a very similar situation .
Now , we learn that even the International Criminal Court is considered by the United States to be just another tiresome bee in the European bonnet .
We are all now quite aware that any bilateral agreement providing for tolerance towards the United States or granting its citizens immunity would run counter to the spirit of the Treaty of Rome .
We call upon the Council because , to prevent this , we need the explicit and immediate intervention of all the European governments , particularly , Madam President , the Berlusconi Government , which , just a few days ago , hinted that it might allow the US Government to take unacceptable shortcuts , disregarding once too often the fact that , where peace and international law are concerned , there is no difference between civilians and military : everyone is a citizen with the same rights and the same responsibilities .
Madam President , the setting up of the International Criminal Court is of course a quantum leap in the struggle for human rights .
On the other hand , the United States ' rejection of the ICC is another attempt to weaken the entire authority of the UN .
It is clear , in my view , that the United States is trying to make use of its position as a superpower merely to take care of its own narrow interests .
In relation to the ICC , I should like to warn the Council and the Commission against devising a cosmetic compromise in which real immunity for American citizens who have committed war crimes is wrapped up in every conceivable kind of complicated legal hair-splitting .
An International Criminal Court without American participation is naturally a weakened court .
An ICC with formal American participation but in which American war criminals remain , in actual fact , immune from prosecution would , however , totally undermine the Court 's authority .
A legal system neither can nor should be set up in that way .
Madam President , the creation of the International Criminal Court constitutes a step forward for civilisation .
In order to ensure , however , that the aims of the ICC are fully achieved and that International Law is given greater credibility , its universal implementation must be guaranteed .
The European Union and its Member States are therefore required to take action to hinder the efforts of the United States of America to strip the ICC of any legitimacy , granting itself a privileged status of immunity by means of illegal bilateral agreements .
The primacy of the law in the international order over the balance of power and the law of the strongest is a noble-minded idea , which is still a long way from being fully realised .
The primacy of the law in the international order will remain a pious fiction , however , if the world 's only existing superpower refuses to submit to the jurisdiction of the institutions responsible for overseeing the implementation of International Law .
Such a refusal would even constitute a serious step backwards , because it sends a terrible message to the world community , a sign of the irremediable weakness of principles and of the persistent power of cynicism in international relations .
The great dilemma facing the international community today is therefore to choose between an order based on law and an order based on the simplistic opposition of the forces of good and evil , in the battle between which the law is seen merely as an unpleasant hindrance .
Mr President , your statement was not as clear as Commissioner Patten 's .
I am actually seriously concerned that , in spite of their professed commitment to the International Criminal Court , the EU 's Foreign Ministers will after all get cold feet on 30 September and issue provisos that undermine the credibility of the Rome Statute .
If the universality of the International Criminal Court is compromised the Rome Statute is weakened .
We cannot have two classes of law within international law .
Article 98 is no basis for bilateral agreements because it was only envisaged for agreements between States Parties to the Treaty .
It was an article that the United States itself proposed .
It does not apply between States that do not even want to recognise the International Criminal Court .
I very much hope , however , that on 30 November the EU will say ' no ' and that it will not allow itself to be beaten into submission .

Madam President , first of all I should like to put Mr Posselt right : the first person to ring Chancellor Schröder after his election was the British Prime Minister .
Like everybody else I regret the US position , but I have some questions for the Council on the Commission .
Firstly , are not agreements within Article 98 point 2 consistent entirely with the letter and spirit of the ICC Statute ?
Accordingly , if they are part of it , surely they cannot be said to undermine it ?
Secondly , as many countries told the US that rather than reject the ICC outright it should go along the Article 98 point 2 road , is it not difficult to criticise them for doing so ?
Thirdly , does not the US draft agreement state clearly that the parties expressed their intention to investigate and prosecute war crimes and , therefore , achieves the objective we wish to see ?
Can we not therefore build on that position rather than try to take extreme positions in this particular debate ?
Madam President , it is crucial that the EU firmly support the International Criminal Court .
Firstly , Article 98 of the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court cannot be used as the USA proposes .
It is only applicable to NATO or similar organisations ' Status of Force Agreements designed to protect soldiers from sending States , but it cannot be applied generally to US troops or US citizens .
Secondly , any country that enters into a treaty with the USA is not just in breach of the Rome Statute , but also of international law .
In its treaties with Romania and others , the USA proposes not just that US citizens should not be brought before the Court , but also that covered agents should not be brought before the court , something that would be devastating for international law .
Thirdly , the treaties leave the US Government free to decide if they are to be investigated or prosecuted where appropriate .
This is not just contrary to the Rome Statute but also to the general duty to prosecute international crimes .
Fourthly , it is not acceptable to undermine the International Criminal Court 's role by protecting citizens of the only superpower from being held responsible for serious war crimes , something that would create the belief that only the law of the victor applies .

Madam President , I should like to thank Parliament for its very strong interest in safeguarding and preserving the ICC .
It is also the Council of Ministers ' view that the ICC should be protected and its integrity preserved and that the ICC should begin operating .
That is also the Danish Presidency 's attitude , moreover .
Our view is that , on 30 September , we should see to it that the EU countries work together and are also able to arrive at the same result .
The EU countries should also ideally offer the same response to the United States .
It should be borne in mind that the task of offering the United States a response is a bilateral one .
It is not for the Commission to respond to the United States ' representations .
We are concerned here with bilateral approaches , and we can therefore only put forward a recommended response .
That is all we can do , but I also assume that the recommendation will be followed .

As Mr Oostlander mentioned , we have had , and are continuing to have , dialogues with the candidate countries on this issue .
I agree completely with Mr Lund that we must not have a cosmetic and phoney compromise .
It was certainly something along those lines that Mr Lund said , for it is true enough that , when the rain comes , the façade will crumble and it may mean that everything collapses .
We are of the view that we must have a global court which will have an effective deterrent effect upon those war crimes described in the statutes of the court .
With regard to the United States , the fact must be faced that it is not participating in the court , but we shall go on trying to get it involved .
We have discussed the matter on several occasions with the United States , but to no avail .
It is a brute fact , and the choice is between not caring either way or trying to obtain an arrangement whereby the United States is part of an international legal system .
With this in view , the bilateral approaches can be used to devise an agreement along the lines that I mentioned and that are not at all different from those mentioned by Commissioner Patten .
There is no difference at all between the Commission and the Council on this issue .
If wordings can be devised whereby the United States becomes part of the international legal system without being a member of the ICC , that is nonetheless to be preferred to a situation in which the United States is excluded from , and does not have , any such legal system .
That , moreover , is what our efforts are designed to achieve .
I should like to point out that the United States does not want to see exemption from prosecution , either .
Nowhere in Mr Powell 's communication does it state that it wants to see exemption from prosecution .
That has never been the desire on the part of the United States .
It is a case of it wanting to bring prosecutions themselves , not of it wanting war crimes to go unpunished .
It is a question of it wanting to do the punishing itself .
It must be appreciated , moreover , that what is most important is that war criminals should be punished , whether or not we can get them prosecuted in The Hague .
This is apparent from the letter written by Mr Powell to the individual countries , and also from the remarks he made to the European Union at our ministerial meeting with him .
In this connection , the principle of subsidiarity , which applies to all of us who are members of the ICC , must be borne in mind .
There is a principle of subsidiarity .
The idea , of course , is that the court should only prosecute if the country concerned does not do so itself .
That is of course the principle .
It means , moreover , that it might be valuable if the United States were to give a guarantee that it would behave like the rest of us and bring prosecutions itself .
I also assume that Denmark itself would bring prosecutions , meaning that I do not anticipate any Dane 's ending up in The Hague .
I anticipate our prosecuting war criminals ourselves , if we have any .
It must , then , be the task of the actual country concerned to say that a particular matter is so serious as to be something that we ourselves should no doubt deal with .
The court must only be involved if the country concerned is unwilling or unable to deal with the matter .
Against that background , I therefore cherish a reasonably justified hope that we can grope our way towards a solution whereby the ICC remains unaffected and with its integrity preserved , while still more countries undertake to prosecute war criminals than is the case at present .
That is of course the crucial point .
There will be no compromise whereby the court is weakened and the crimes concerned go unpunished .
That will not happen .
The answer is yes .
In connection with this debate , I have received two motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37.2 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is a joint debate on 11 oral questions to the Council and the Commission .
( B5-0258 / 2002 and B5-0259 / 2002 ) by Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council and the Commission on the situation within Mercosur ,
( B5-0446 / 2002 and B5-0447 / 2002 ) by Mrs Frassoni , Mr Lipietz , Mr Nogueira Román and Mr Mayol i Raynal , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , to the Council and the Commission on the situation within Mercosur ,
( B5-0449 / 2002 and B5-0450 / 2002 ) by Mr Marset Campos , Mr Di Lello Finuoli , Mr Vinci and Mr Modrow , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , to the Council and the Commission on the situation within Mercosur ,
( B5-0451 / 2002 and B5-0452 / 2002 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , Mr Oostlander and Mr Morillon , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to the Council and the Commission on the crisis in the Mercosur countries ,
( B5-0453 / 2002 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission on Mercosur ,
( B5-0454 / 2002 and B5-0455 / 2002 ) by Mr Queiró , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to the Council and the Commission on Mercosur .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the joint resolution on Mercosur - which we support - is a balanced reflection of the European Union 's concerns regarding the extremely serious crisis affecting Mercosur and which threatens to affect the Andean Community of Nations .
The resolution firmly expresses the solidarity that the Europeans share with the peoples with whom we have so many historical ties through friendship and even family .
Unfortunately , this solidarity is not expressed by means of a co-ordinated position of the Member States in the international financial institutions , which are in fact largely responsible for the disaster in Argentina , as a former IMF Chief Economist , Professor Stieglitz , demonstrated so well .
The resolution quite rightly calls for our policies to be co-ordinated in order to provide financial aid to the Mercosur countries and to include these new guidelines in the EU-Mercosur agreement that is currently being negotiated .
These negotiations also cover external debt , the ethical position of businesses and the European banks .
So , there are many good resolutions , and yet the issue remains and will without a shadow of a doubt be raised in the US : does Europe really wish to save South America ?
In order to calm the fears of our Mercosur partners , we must listen to their demands and dot the i 's and cross the t 's .
Hence the three amendments that we tabled to our own resolution : firstly , the very clear rejection of financial conditions which would further exacerbate the poverty of the Mercosur peoples , such as lowering salaries or making cuts in public services .
Secondly , Europe 's renunciation of its subsidies for agricultural dumping for exports that are largely responsible for Mercosur 's difficulties , and lastly , the creation of a bilateral citizen 's committee so that the representatives of our societies can be involved in the negotiations .
Madam President , the crisis affecting certain countries in Latin America and , specifically , in Mercosur is clear for all to see .
We must , therefore , devote our full attention to these difficulties , and by ' we ' I mean not only Parliament , but also the Council and the Commission .
These countries are facing political , economic and social challenges that require permanent international cooperation underpinned by a spirit of solidarity and mutual respect .
Most of us share this objective , although it is felt particularly strongly , as you would expect , by those Member States , such as my own , Portugal , that have special cultural , historical and linguistic links with these countries .
We believe that relations between the European Union and the Mercosur countries are strategic relations , comparable , incidentally , to those that Mercosur is developing with other parts of the world and to which we usually give priority status .
I say this not only in light of the already-mentioned principles of solidarity or of the region 's defence of the rule of law and of the economic model based on free initiative and on improving working conditions , but also because of the opportunity that a revitalised and concrete EU-Mercosur partnership would represent for a more balanced political and economic profile of the Union and its Member States in that region of the American continent .
In this context , we ask the Council - in the wake of the recent Madrid Summit - to prioritise cooperation with the Mercosur countries , with this cooperation being translated into practical measures that go beyond rhetorical gestures of solidarity with their peoples .
Strong political signals that reaffirm European Union confidence in that region must be given , ensuring that cooperation policy is based on the principle of association to the benefit of both parties .
I should like to make another observation : we cannot combat the phenomenon of the unilateralism being demonstrated by the United States - visible mainly in its external and defence policy , admittedly - only with the criticism that we have been hearing in certain circles of European thought .
This criticism , which on top of everything is not accompanied by proposals for political and financial measures that would allow us to overcome the causes of an apparent European inferiority complex , could easily be redirected into stepping up strategic actions of this type . These would prove more useful in balancing relations between the two continents in an atmosphere of cooperation and of sharing values common to both .
Finally , Mr President , the problems that we are seeing in the region must not affect the course of the negotiations currently taking place between the European Union and Mercosur .
Instead , the crisis - which we know is complex and problematic - must act as a stimulus for an agreement that is satisfactory to both parties to be concluded as rapidly as possible .
Lastly , we are in no doubt that everyone would gain by taking advantage of the opportunities that these closer ties would normally provide to encourage the rapid recovery of the economies of the Mercosur countries and closer relations with the European Union .
Madam President , with regard to the systems of preferences referred to many times in the course of the debate , I would say that all the participating Mercosur states can benefit from the EU 's generalised system of preferences .
Particularly through the GSP 's generalised systems , they can , as Mr Barón Crespo mentioned , be given the opportunity to increase their own export income , promote industrialisation in their own countries and speed up the diversification of their economies as a stability tool .
Everyone here must be alert to the fact that the members of the international financial bodies , namely the Bretton Woods institutions , the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are sovereign states unto themselves .
They are not subject to the dictates of the European Council or to joint decision-making by the European Council .
It is therefore up to these states themselves , and not to the Council , to decide how they are to conduct themselves in these international financial bodies .
It is nonetheless clear that coordination between the EU Member States in relation to Article 19 of the EU Treaty may be of benefit to their work in these institutions .
Accordingly , there is in actual fact a degree of informal coordination at intergovernmental level within the framework of the institutions I mentioned .
With regard to the Member States ' efforts to remedy the situation in the Mercosur countries , they are participating fully and actively in the IMF 's work to secure stability and sustainable economic growth in the region .
It would be foolish to do otherwise .
The arrangements made to support Paraguay , Uruguay and , most recently , Brazil have received backing from the EU Member States , and work is being done on securing a strong , sustainable and credible IMF programme for Argentina , as outlined in the Council 's conclusions of 21 January 2002 .
In his question on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Barón Crespo states that the negotiations concerning the association and free-trade agreement with Mercosur are expected to be concluded in 2003 .
The parties have not set any deadline for the conclusion of the negotiations , the date 's depending therefore upon how the negotiations progress .
In July , the negotiators at ministerial level adopted an ambitious work programme for the next twelve months .
The European Union has undertaken to reach a comprehensive agreement with Mercosur and make further progress in the negotiations .
Allow me therefore to conclude that the Council is fully alert to the serious crisis in the Mercosur countries , especially Argentina .
It is absolutely right that it should be taken seriously .
We are therefore interested in strengthening relations between the EU and Mercosur and promoting trade , and we also had a meeting with them during the General Assembly in New York last week .
First of all , everyone here must be aware of the need to go home and say to our own governments that they themselves must work in the IMF on behalf of the institutions and say to the Mercosur countries that , first of all , they themselves must implement the financial changes .
Madam President , the Commission fully shares the view of honourable Members that Mercosur 's financial problems have intensified during the summer .
The European Union and the Commission are concerned at the financial turbulence that is affecting the entire Mercosur region .
The turmoil was triggered by the economic and banking crisis in Argentina , which led to spillover effects on other Mercosur countries such as Uruguay and Brazil .
As a result , the social and economic indicators , as the honourable Member indicated , are pointing sharply in the wrong direction ; poverty is increasing and GDP has declined in all Mercosur countries .
The crisis will require deep economic and political structural reforms .
The Commission is convinced that one of the answers to the financial and economic turbulence should be deeper and faster regional integration .
In this respect , the European Union and the Commission strongly support the Mercosur integration process , especially at this crucial moment for the region .
The European message of support for further integration as one of the responses to the present crisis is confirmed by our strong commitment to intensify and accelerate negotiations for an Association Agreement between the European Union and Mercosur .
The agreement will create improved market access for Mercosur exports to the European Union and it will strengthen Mercosur as a common market .
In addition , from the political and cooperation point of view , it will be a clear signal of a strengthening of EU-Mercosur relations .
As Parliament knows , the EU-Mercosur negotiations are highly ambitious and include three pillars : political dialogue , cooperation and a comprehensive trade agenda .
To date , we have virtually finalised the political and cooperation chapters .
At the recent Rio Ministerial Meeting on 23 July 2002 which , as the honourable Member noted , I attended , an ambitious work programme for the trade negotiations was established .
This includes a ministerial meeting during the second half of next year to kick off what we hope will be the final stage of the negotiations .
In addition to the interregional negotiations , the Commission has considered additional forms of help to alleviate the Mercosur crisis .
Firstly , on the trade front , the European Union has taken important decisions to increase the allocation of the Hilton Beef Quota for two Mercosur countries : 10 000 additional tonnes to Argentina and , as a first step , 1 000 tonnes to Paraguay .
It is also worth remembering that Mercosur countries have benefited , as my honourable friend the President-in-Office pointed out , from the EU GSP mechanism for quite a long time .
The latest review of the regime entered into force on 1 January 2002 and it should expire on 31 December 2004 .
At this stage it is not possible temporarily to adjust GSP preferences only for the Mercosur countries , as some have suggested .
However , we remain committed to helping Mercosur countries to benefit further from the current system .
There has also been coordination of the positions taken by our Member States on the South American crisis by means of Council common positions and public statements on Argentina .
It must be said that this falls short of actual coordination of positions in the International Monetary Fund .
The Mercosur crisis shows that it would desirable for the European Union to speak with a single voice and play a more influential role in international financial matters .
As Parliament knows , the European Commission cannot intervene as such in the definition of the criteria imposed by an international organisation like the IMF - in which , as I have said , European Union Member States are represented - for the grant of loans to certain countries in a crisis situation .
The approval of IMF assistance as such is based on its own criteria and is tied to sustainable economic programmes proposed by the governments of the countries affected by financial or economic problems .
We believe it is only natural that the conditions imposed by international organisations like the IMF for the concession of loans for the structural adjustment of countries undergoing a crisis are different from those set by international cooperation organisations like the UN Development Programme for the concession of grants .
These organisations have different objectives , which explains why the UN Development Programme puts more emphasis on the social component of cooperation .
But above and beyond any discussions on the merits of any of the criteria used by international organisations , we should not lose sight of the fact that the crisis requires fundamental economic reform in the region as a whole .
Finally , the Commission adopted in August a substantial cooperation package in favour of the Mercosur countries covering EUR 200 million for the period 2002-2006 .
These programmes will support regional integration , economic reform , social development and poverty alleviation , modernisation of the state and protection of the environment .
Furthermore , an additional EUR 48 million for the period 2002-2006 has been allocated to cooperation with Mercosur as a whole and it is focused on three priority areas : support to the implementation of the Mercosur internal market ; support to Mercosur institutionalisation ; and support for civil society in Mercosur .
In sum , there is a package of EUR 250 million to be made available in the period 2002-2006 - of which EUR 30 million are planned to be committed in 2002 .
I hope this is another sign of our long-term commitment to Mercosur .
Let me make one final brief point .
We have just held meetings in Copenhagen with the ASEM countries and individual meetings with South Korea , China , and Indonesia .
In the last few years - at least until the recent crisis , and for a change - European investment in Latin America outstripped investment in Asia .
It is interesting to compare the two regions and to compare for example the savings ratio in Asia with that in Latin America .
Because domestic savings are so much lower in Latin America , it has depended much more on foreign direct investment in order to promote economic growth .
The problem in today 's liberalised global market is that just as money can go in , so it can just as rapidly go out again .
The only answer to poverty in Latin America is sustainable economic development .
We can only have sustainable economic development when we have sustained investment .
So there is a very strong argument for trying to increase domestic savings ratios in Latin America and for looking at financial flows in the way that Chile did a few years ago and trying to ensure that they become stabilising rather than destabilising factors .
Madam President , if I am not mistaken , Parliament and the Commission agree on the essential points : trade barriers need to be dismantled , integration needs to be fostered , Europe needs to speak with one voice in the IMF , and so on .
I do not wish to repeat it all .
I should just like to make two short comments and refer to Mr Patten 's final remarks .
Firstly , I have been working on Latin America for many years and - to my horror , I have to say - I have observed that Latin America 's importance on the world stage is diminishing further every year , while Asia 's is growing .
There must be reasons for this , reasons that are far more complex than just a measure or two .
We should discuss this openly .
The second comment that I wanted to make concerns a survey that was carried out recently in Latin America .
Part of the population - around 20 000 people - were asked whether they believed that authoritarian governments were better able to solve the problems than democracies .
In 1996 in a similar survey only a minority put an authoritarian regime first ; the majority was in favour of democracy .
Today over 50 % of the population are saying : yes , we need authoritarian governments to solve our problems .
This means that the crisis that we are facing today in Latin America , and in particular in Mercosur , also presents a risk to democracy .
This reminds me of the eighties and early nineties when our debates on Latin America mainly concerned democracy .
At that time we understood that we needed to pursue a social and economic policy that restored people 's faith in democracy .
That is why I do not think that it is pointless for us to concern ourselves with Latin America ; if we do not then we will only end up drafting more motions on dictatorships .
Madam President , it is with pleasure that I am standing in for Mr Andria , who is absent for personal reasons , in a debate on a subject which I consider to be extremely important , for , having taken part in the Johannesburg Earth Summit , I have realised that there is great social divide between the Mercorsur countries .
The social and economic crises constantly afflicting these countries are preventing economic growth in South America and hindering the implementation of a sustainable development programme because of the frequent economic problems caused by structural instability .
I therefore firmly believe that the European Union must place South America and the Mercosur countries at the centre of its focus , although not to the detriment of the environmental protection policy , of course , which is becoming an essential tool for the preservation of green areas which are part of the world 's heritage .
To this end , the creation of a special trade programme for countries in difficulties and the promotion of agreements with international bodies which can successfully reduce the crisis threatening the stability of the entire continent would seem appropriate .
In my view , we need to review the trade agreements we have with these countries and relations between Europe and Mercosur .
The barriers to trade , the constraints on trade between the European Union and South America , need to be removed in order to boost the world 's economy , which is under threat from these crises .
We must not forget that Europe is the principal trading partner of the Mercosur countries , and it would be easier for these countries to recover and to resolve their socio-political problems if they were economically stable and opened up to trade .
We need to renegotiate the external debt and establish a system of equality between the different Mercosur countries in order to protect fundamental human rights and prevent the emergence of socio-cultural problems such as those currently afflicting the continent .
Madam President , I am in favour of the solidarity fund .
To my knowledge there is no ban on criticising the International Monetary Fund or similar institutions and I do not regard them as sacrosanct .
I was also pleased to hear Commissioner Patten say that certain import quotas in the agricultural sector have been or are being increased .
I think , however , that even if we doubled or tripled all of these measures , we would not get to the root of the problem .
Mercosur has everything it needs .
It has oil , gas , all the important raw materials , and enough agricultural products to feed not only the whole of Latin America but Europe as well .
It has a competent workforce and it has a diverse industry .
I should like to take up something that Mr Linkohr said : the causes of this crisis run deeper , and not only economic reforms but also political reforms are necessary .
It is precisely the most important Mercosur States that have far-reaching political problems .
They have inefficient and , in some cases , corrupt political systems .
Anyone who has been to a rich , thriving country like Argentina and seen the desperate demonstrations by people from the entire political spectrum outside the Casa Rosada in Buenos Aires , calling for the resignation of all politicians in all parties , because they will not accept anyone anymore , can see quite clearly that this crisis is not a passing phase ; it is democracy and the political system that is undergoing a fundamental crisis .
That is why we obviously want to take individual steps , but without a thorough reform of the political system in Argentina , but also to some extent in Brazil , this continent will not shake off the crisis .
So far , it must be seen in a positive light that , as a market , Mercosur has had the effect of preventing the worst - they have limped along by supporting each other - but in the long term the political system really needs to make a full recovery .
Madam President , despite the accounts given in the media , the ' Latin American ' question is not on the agenda and we cannot , therefore , analyse either the causes or the consequences of what is happening there .
Europe has been irresponsibly negligent with regard to this matter , and we must drop this approach without further delay .
I believe that we have serious moral responsibilities towards Latin America and that the North / South dialogue and cooperation and development are meaningless unless we translate our words into action .
We must , therefore , give coherence to the entire range of means with which Europe can act , from overcoming the differences within the Council - we could begin there - to effective and personalised intervention in the name of Europe in the framework of the IMF , to the possibilities opened up by our preferential trade mechanisms , to financial aid and the accession agreements .
Madam President , all of this will mean a very considerable effort by Europe to reaffirm , as the resolution quite rightly states , our commitment of solidarity towards Latin America , which is also a commitment to democracy in the world .
In connection with this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 42.5 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0293 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position on the quality of petrol and diesel fuels .
Mr President , I am probably going to be the only person here tonight with my position on this particular report .
This report is viewed with extreme concern , regardless of what the rapporteur has said with regard to the United Kingdom .
It will have an adverse effect on our agriculture , our farmers and our fishermen .
Where I come from in Northern Ireland the rural community is falling apart .
To put any added burden on it at this moment in time is quite wrong .
I want to make it very clear from the outset that I , my delegation , and those I represent are totally in favour of improvement to the highest possible standards . I will support those higher standards .
But I have a problem when we impose from on high purist-type ideas on those who cannot defend themselves .
That is what I oppose .
I am totally opposed to trying to impose this on off-road vehicles , be they vehicles that are used on farms , or the many other vehicles used in quarries or elsewhere .
If we have to , let us set standards somewhere down the road longer-term .
Let us work towards that as technology develops , but to sit here and say that we can impose this from this European Parliament is totally unacceptable .
If you want to know why Europe is unpopular in many areas of the European Union , just look at this type of proposal .
What do the people say ?
They say ' Oh , there is Big Brother Brussels telling us what to do again ' .
Why do we not use common sense ?
Why do we not use our own initiative and not have the European Union hurting its own citizens while the rest of the world merely goes on its way destroying the environment ?
We have seen from Johannesburg and from Kyoto and elsewhere that they do not pay a jot of attention to what we say .
I understand that off-road vehicles account for about 8.5 % of the diesel vehicles in the European Union .
Commissioner , it is within your and the Council 's powers to at least take a balanced position on this and to achieve the aim over a longer term so that we do not hurt a lot of people on the way .
That is what I support .
I will certainly be voting against this recommendation tomorrow .
I , along with the people I represent , will take great delight in voting against it .
I hope it is defeated because then in the longer term you will come back with a proposal that represents the common sense view of everyone in this European Union , and not just those with purist ideals who do not have to face the consequences of imposing their ideals on others .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0288 / 2002 ) by Mr Callanan , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position on recreational craft .
Mr President , I have a few points to make , but I can see that the debate has hardly engendered rapt enthusiasm among the packed ranks of Members so I will be as brief as possible and let everybody get away for their dinner .
I wish to begin by thanking the Commissioner and all those who have taken an interest in the report for being here this evening .
It might be a minor subject , but it is very important to those involved in the recreational boating industry and those many thousands of people across Europe who also indulge their hobby of boating .
Many of the problems apparent in the legislation at first reading have been substantially resolved by the Council at second reading .
Most of the retrospective elements in the proposal at first reading have now been removed and I can broadly support the Commission 's proposals at second reading , albeit with a few riders .
I tabled a few amendments for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , some of which were accepted .
Most of the technical amendments we put forward were accepted .
I shall just run through a few of the problems that I still see with the legislation .
I continue to have doubts about the effectiveness of a regulatory committee , particularly one empowered to alter quite important items of the directive such as Froude numbers .
The committee supported my recommendations on that and the amendments are up for vote tomorrow .
I continue to believe that craft built for users ' own use should be exempted for five years , provided they are not placed on the market .
This directive was introduced under single-market legislation and it is self-evident that if those craft are not intended to be placed on the market , then they cannot affect the single market .
The issue of in-use compliance testing is a particularly thorny one .
I understand that at some stage the Commission will be coming back with proposals on that .
I hope it will consider that issue very carefully .
The last thing we want is an extremely bureaucratic system imposed on the boat owners and users of Europe .
It needs to be very simple and effective and , above all , free of charge to those who have boats at the moment .
Finally , I should like to tell our German colleagues that a number of amendments - I call them the Bodensee amendments because they are the result of lobbying from the Lake Constance authorities - have been tabled .
There are broadly two categories of amendments .
Firstly , those tabled to allow Member States to set their own limits in particular local circumstances .
I am not usually against Member States derogating from European regulations , but if we are going to produce a directive whose specific purpose is to permit a single market across Europe and then introduce specific exemptions into the directive , that would defeat the whole point of having it in the first place .
Secondly , I have a particular problem with the so-called Table 1a amendment , again based on the Bodensee limits , but even stricter . Again it would be a barrier to trade .
However , I would say to our colleagues on the Bodensee that , if there is a problem in this particular stretch of water , then , firstly , there is no evidence that it is caused by recreational craft and , secondly , that if there is a difficulty it can be solved by local measures in the area of Lake Constance .
Speed and navigational limits could be imposed , and I entirely support their right to do that . But do not saddle the rest of Europe with unenforceable limits just to solve a particular problem that the German and Austrian authorities might have .
I have looked quite extensively at the limits proposed in that table with boat-users ' representatives and representatives from industry , and there are no commercially available engines on the market that meet those limits at the moment .
Obviously technology could be developed further , but it would require the use of catalytic converter technology , which is extremely difficult in a marine environment .
By all means let the research go ahead , let us look at the issue again in a few years , but please do not try and saddle the rest of Europe with unenforceable limits .
All that would happen - because there are no retrospective elements - is that , as has happened on the Bodensee , the whole of Europe would become pretty much a museum for old engines .
The companies making new engines go out of business , but those refurbishing old engines continue to make a lot of money .
The engine could be old , polluting or spilling oil into the water but , as long as it was in existence at the time the limits were introduced , it would be perfectly legal .
It is completely self-defeating to impose unachievable limits .
I would strongly recommend the House to vote against those amendments tomorrow .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , for the general support in their report .
The Commission 's proposal to modify the recreational craft directive aims to avoid fragmentation of the internal market and seeks to integrate environmental concerns .
As such , this proposal provides a good example of the synergy that is needed between environmental and industrial policies for the achievement of sustainable development .
Air and water pollution and engine noise from recreational boating activities have become increasingly sensitive issues .
While exhaust emissions from recreational craft contribute little to the overall pollution of the marine environment , their local effects are nevertheless important .
Recreational boating activities are often concentrated in environmentally sensitive areas so it is important that this activity does not disturb local fauna .
Moreover , boating activities often take place at the weekend and in holiday periods resulting in a concentration of the nuisance they can cause to local inhabitants .
I share with Mr Callanan the hope that the amendments that are adopted will deal appropriately with the need for harmonised reduction of exhaust and noise emissions , while at the same time avoiding over-regulation .
I therefore welcome in particular Amendment 14 to extend the 3 decibel sound allowance to the scope originally proposed by the Commission .
The Commission can also agree with Amendments 6 and 21 as they will provide for consistency in the references to ' placing on the market and / or putting into service ' throughout the directive .
Also the first part of Amendment 1 can be accepted , since it provides an improved wording of the recital .
Amendments 4 , 5 , 12 and 22 re-introducing the proposals to delete or reduce the provisions on the Regulatory Committee cannot be accepted by the Commission .
A regulatory committee is necessary for the efficient implementation and the regular updating of a specified range of technical elements contained in the technical annexes to the proposed directive .
This approach is in line with the principles of better regulation .
Another important topic of debate has been that of the right to adopt more stringent requirements at national level .
Amendments have also been tabled to introduce at Community level more stringent emission limits on standing inland waters .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , second part , 11 and 13 , as they would fragment the internal market .
Amendments 16 to 20 and Amendment 24 envisage changing the scope and timing of future work to be undertaken by the Commission .
They cannot be accepted as they would restrict the Commission 's right of initiative .
In conclusion , the Commission can accept the first part of Amendment 1 and Amendments 6 , 14 and 21 .
On the contrary the Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , second part , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 to 20 and 22 to 24 .
The Commission is looking forward to working with Parliament and the Council towards a solution which on the one hand guarantees a high level of environmental protection and on the other hand meets the requirements of the internal market .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and Parliament for their efforts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this morning we had a three-hour debate on sustainable development .
At the World Summit in Johannesburg , the European Union advocated a global water initiative .
This should make it possible to realise the aims of the World Summit on Sustainable Development - access to clean drinking water and basic sanitation .
So what are we doing , we who want to achieve such ambitious targets at international level , here in our own countries in Europe ?
We are making a law on abating water pollution that will reinforce the use of yesterday 's technology for tomorrow 's developments .
That , at any rate , will be the result if the opponents of the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy succeed in defeating them in plenary .
Regrettably they include our rapporteur , who actually ought to represent the opinion of the majority of the committee .
Unfortunately , amongst these opponents of advanced technology are also colleagues from groups and countries which are usually in the vanguard of any initiatives to protect water and the environment and cannot go far enough .
Go and stand sometime at a filling station in a large harbour for recreational craft ; you will see the quantities of fuel , diesel , petrol and oil that are pumped into the tanks of these boats .
A considerable proportion of this fuel , although it depends on the design , is discharged directly into the water - without undergoing combustion - along with the exhaust emissions , because the exhaust pipe is under the surface of the water .
The pollutants accumulate in inland waters and lakes , which are frequently used for the abstraction of drinking water .
Nowhere else is the exchange of pollutants so great .
It is precisely on lakes that the density of boats is often particularly high .
That is why we want more stringent requirements for these waters , that is , stricter limit values for recreational craft .
The technology , Mr Callanan , is available .
As an engineer you ought actually to be aware of this .
Since existing craft will enjoy absolute protection and be able to be used until the end of their life , the argument of our Nordic colleagues does not hold water either .
The limit values laid down now will only have to be complied with by boats newly brought onto the market from 2005 .
An individual who buys a new recreational craft after 2005 will be able to use it on all waters .
That is why I would urgently request your support for Amendments Nos 1 , 11 and 13 .
By adopting these amendments we Europeans would be putting our words in Johannesburg into action .
Mr Callanan , I have already heard your arguments almost word for word here in plenary ; it was nearly 20 years ago in the mid-eighties , in the last century , when we were debating limit values for cars and the introduction of new technology .
Then , as now , your country was the first to slam on the brakes .
It is quite astonishing that in two decades you have not learnt any better .
I believe that water is also the life of the future .
We must do all we can to prevent our waters from becoming even more polluted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive concerns the exhaust and noise emissions of petrol and diesel engines intended for recreational craft .
We also have these regulations for cars and that certainly does not mean that if our cars meet these standards they too are permitted to be driven anywhere .
At present , for example , there are rules limiting the number of boats on lakes to 100 or even 2 per lake .
It is possible to ban recreational craft from lakes entirely .
There are time restrictions , limiting the use of boats only to certain hours each day .
In the end , this directive does not confer any right to operate recreational craft on all lakes at all times and under all possible conditions ; all it does is allow free trade in boats and their licensing and it permits them to be used in authorised areas .
All of us in the European Union value the principle of harmonisation , but only where minimum standards are set so that these technical products can also be used .
As you know , we in Parliament - and in particular in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy - attach the utmost importance to the principle of mutual recognition , and I believe that this directive makes boat licensing possible .
We see it as very positive that the general standards in the European Union are being raised substantially here .
This would also automatically have an impact on the market , because with higher standards proportionally more boats would be permitted on the waters of Member States .
If the standards are very low , the Member States will quite certainly take matters into their own hands by prohibiting the use of recreational craft on certain lakes altogether or by imposing time restrictions , for example by only allowing boats to be used in May or June .
There is therefore sufficient room for manoeuvre here .
It is precisely from this point of view that it is necessary to alert individual drivers , as part of their training for their motorboat licences , to the environmental and noise problem , as well as to the problem of exhaust emissions .
There are countless regulations here and these are of course very important in the individual countries .
We should also observe how this directive develops in the future , because it is in all our interests - everyone in this House will agree - to have environmental regulations that are as good , rigorous and sustainable as possible .
The sportsmen and -women who operate these boats are also keen to have the best possible boats , so the switch to a new generation of craft certainly has to be in all our interests .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission ( B5-0491 / 02 ) , on behalf of the Group of the Europe People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the review of trademark rights .
Mr President , may I begin by expressing my disappointment that the people who have drafted this question are not here .
Despite that , I would like to answer the question , if only for the record and because other Members present might be interested in the Commission 's answer .
I shall begin by thanking Members of this Parliament for the interest they have shown in this important issue , namely the exhaustion of trade mark rights , whether internationally or just in Europe .
As Members may know from our previous discussion on this issue which took place almost exactly one year ago - on 2 October 2001 - the Commission undertook to prepare a report to Parliament on this subject by the end of this year .
As I stated in our previous discussion , I do not intend to reopen the investigation of issues that the Commission has already studied .
Moreover , I explained at that meeting last year that the Commission would only reconsider its decision not to propose a change to the current EU exhaustion regime if new developments justified that .
To date , there have been no such developments .
Moreover , and as this relates more specifically to the questions raised by the Members of Parliament who drafted the question , I said last year that the Commission would limit itself to investigating cases of possible abuse of trade mark rights , and especially , but not only , competition aspects .
I would like to make it clear to Members of this Parliament that the Commission has acted fully in accordance with the commitments I made on 2 October last year .
I should like to add that in July this year , my services sent out questionnaires to over sixty companies and organisations representing many small and medium-sized enterprises , including both parallel traders and trademark holders , who might be at most risk from abusive restrictions on the sale in the Community of trademarked goods .
The results of this investigation , combined with our ongoing consultations with other Commission services - in particular our colleagues in the Directorate-General for Competition - should allow us to build a clear picture of whether trademark rights are indeed being abused by right holders to stifle legitimate trade .
That report , as promised at our previous meeting , will be transmitted to Parliament by the end of this year .
That is my answer to the question .
I shall be most interested to hear what Members have to say about it .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I should like to apologise for my late arrival .
The car that was supposed to collect me came half an hour later than arranged .
That is why I unfortunately only heard part of your speech .
However , I grasped the main points .
Commissioner , the committee and indeed Parliament has not raised this matter lightly or for fun , but because we do not believe that the NERA study , on which you are relying , actually provides a solid enough basis on which to make decisions of this kind .
In other words , our main premise is that it has been proved , without the need for a NERA study , that these goods - which are everyday items , which every woman and every man buys , in particular those from the poorer sections of the population - for example jeans , shirts , polo shirts , trainers and suchlike , are being offered for sale outside the EU by the same brand manufacturers at the same quality standards for half the price or even less .
That is one of the reasons .
The second reason is that in our view the purpose of trademark law is not to seal off markets , allowing there to be different price systems inside and outside the EU , especially more expensive prices inside the EU and more reasonable ones outside ; rather we are of the opinion that this is a matter for competition and not trademark law .
The function of trademark law is to name , describe and unambiguously classify the manufacturer , the brand and the product and to confer certain rights on the trademark holder .
These rights are justified and we will do all we can to defend them .
A completely different , separate issue is , however , that of exhaustion .
In Germany , for around 100 years from the advent of trademarks we had international exhaustion .
With this system of international exhaustion in place we in Germany achieved the economic miracle , significant growth and much more besides .
In the last five years , since European trademark law has come in , we have observed a system of dual pricing , and we have observed that trademark law has become a preferred option for companies because it is far easier to assert your rights under trademark law than it is under other rights procedures , which are actually product-related , such as rights relating to design , patent and copyright ; it is more difficult to present your case here .
That alone is the reason and trademark law cannot after all be stronger than competition law .
That is why we asked these questions .
That is why we have asked you in the Commission not to rely on a NERA study but to conduct your own investigations into these specific matters and to answer on that basis .
Finally there is another question that has arisen since our past discussions on trademark law : what about trade on the Internet ?
There is of course nothing wrong with the Internet .
We promote it .
If someone outside the EU makes a purchase and the dealer dispatches the goods in the EU then this contradicts current trademark law .
This cannot be the intention of trademark law either .
Once again then we would urgently request the Commission to conduct further investigations into these few points and to inform Parliament of the result , and not to refer to a NERA study which in our view does not address these problems .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite having subscribed to the Mayer Report , I was somewhat surprised by the question put to the Commission , since the prescribed timeframe for carrying out these studies was not respected .
What is more , I am convinced that the transition from a Community-wide exhaustion of trademarks to an international exhaustion might have negative effects from both an economic and legal perspective .
Neither the NERA study nor that carried out by the Economist Intelligence Unit proved that the international exhaustion of rights system has a significant long-term effect on prices for the consumer .
The consumer would not benefit from such a change and I have here an article published recently in the Evening Standard on 4 September , pointing out that Tesco , which is well-known for its support of the international exhaustion of rights system , has not passed on considerable savings made through parallel imports to the consumer .
Furthermore , if we wish to adopt international exhaustion , we must amend not only the 1988 Directive , but also the 1993 Regulation establishing the Community trade mark and laying down the rule of Community exhaustion .
It would be inconceivable for the international exhaustion to apply to the national trade mark and the Community trade mark to be exempt .
A solution of this kind would certainly spell the end of national trade marks which are highly valued by Member States and which are needed by businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , in the frequent cases when a protection throughout EU territory is , in their view , worthless and costly .
More than ever in a context of heightened globalisation , we must affirm the economic importance of the European Union by integrating the single market and attaching more value to our creativity .
Neither the United States nor Japan has adopted international exhaustion of trade marks .
If the European Union unilaterally decided to transfer to this legal system , it would introduce distorted competition between the European Union and third countries .
Trademark protection is crucial for the European economy and for consumer safety .
A trade mark is the guarantee of a product 's authenticity and quality .
Furthermore , the current system allows us to better protect ourselves from counterfeiting ; since parallel imports pose a major risk as they use the same channels as pirated products and counterfeits .
A question was raised by Mr Mayer , but I , on the other hand , am thinking about another question which I believe to be crucial : why has the European Union not yet signed the Madrid Protocol , which would enable us to provide an integrated , efficient , global and transparent trademark protection system ?
I am therefore hoping and praying that the European Union will sign this protocol .
Mr President , I should like to take Commissioner Bolkestein back to the last part-session here when we discussed sales promotion .
He may remember that I complimented him because he had written an article in a journal complimenting Parliament on rescuing the internal market .
It is slightly disappointing therefore to find him back here at the following part-session adopting such a cautious approach on such a fundamental single market issue .
In this case we are not talking about the single European market . We are talking about global markets and about the freedom of consumers to be able to benefit from lower prices for identical goods that are placed on the market , quite legitimately , outside the European Union , and which are then imported .
I want to remind him - and he cautiously skirted around this in his answer - that we are discussing an archaic piece of legislation .
The Trademarks Directive in its original form was certainly introduced to protect trademarks and to secure consumer confidence that they would know what they were buying .
But subsequently , in cases before the Court of Justice , it is now being further elaborated into a means whereby trademark owners can actually protect their brand , or supposedly protect their brand and their authorised distribution systems , by essentially keeping prices higher artificially .
He asked us quite rightly to say what has changed .
I shall tell him what has changed .
The first thing is that consumers are getting increasingly irritable about what they see as the failure to act on what ought to be a fundamental right .
That consumer pressure was quite rightly cited by his colleague , Mr Monti , when we had a complete and total reform of the legislation relating to the selling and servicing of motor cars .
What has that done ?
It has opened up the distribution system across the European Union .
Essentially , cars will be available across borders much more freely than they were before and prices which differ from one market to another will clearly converge .
So why should this be any different ?
I have to disagree with my colleague Mrs Fourtou .
It is not a question of counterfeiting or other spurious issues .
Surely the reason we have so many of these counterfeit brands is because the genuine brands are prevented from being sold at the price that consumers want to buy .
It is a circular argument .
I hope that in the July report he has commissioned he will have the facts available and that he will be able to meet the deadline of the end of December that we asked him to meet . This needs to happen so that we can come up with a sensible balanced view , not looking to the past , looking at all the evidence , to the benefit of consumers .
We need to continue together with the Commissioner the task of creating a true single market for consumers .
I hope he will give us an assurance this evening that he is prepared to move from his overly cautious approach and join with us in the crusade to give consumers across Europe a better deal .
I should like to thank the Members who have spoken on this subject very much for their views .
I shall start with Mr Harbour , who has in his usual eloquent manner impressed the Commission with the need to change over to international recognition .
In his closing remarks he said that he wants the Commission , and this Commissioner in particular , to see that consumers get the benefits to which he says they are entitled so that there can be a true single market .
I should like to tell Mr Harbour that we already have a single market .
That market is confined to the European Union .
It is not something that appertains to the whole world .
The Commission is aware that consumers benefit from lower prices .
That is obvious .
The Commission is very much in favour of seeing to it that consumers benefit from prices which are as low as possible .
However , they are not the only ones involved .
It is not just consumers who are interested in this matter .
Producers are also involved and , in particular , trademark holders . Just as consumers are entitled to the lowest prices that are economically feasible , so the producers of trademarked goods want and are entitled to get protection for their trademarks - but not unlimited protection .
That is the reason behind exhaustion in the European Union .
There should certainly be a balance between , on the one hand , the interests of the consumer and , on the other hand , the interests of the producer , and the Commission continues to believe that European exhaustion provides for that balance .
The Commission has not changed its mind since we last spoke about this issue 12 months ago .
I accept Mr Mayer 's apologies .
He said the studies are of insufficient quality .
I do not accept that .
I do not understand why the NERA study should be of insufficient quality .
The NERA study , as is well known because it is available , states that the changeover from European to international exhaustion would have a negligible effect on prices .
Mr Mayer may know that in his country , Germany , there was once a system of international exhaustion .
Because of the policy accepted in Germany on account of the European Union , the changeover was made from international exhaustion to European exhaustion .
It was then claimed that certain luxury goods producers had to raise their prices , but we then heard from those luxury goods producers that they had in fact lowered their prices .
So , in that specific case , international exhaustion did not produce prices any lower than European exhaustion - quite the contrary .
Mr Mayer may have in mind the studies carried out by the UK and Swedish Governments two years ago .
Those studies - interesting as they are - showed that there is a great disparity in prices between the different countries belonging to the European Union .
What stuck most in my mind was the 40 % difference between electronic goods sold in Sweden and those sold in Germany , which are almost neighbours , apart from the stretch of water between them .
A 40 % difference in price means that the internal market is not working as it should , because , if it did , prices should be related to objective costs - costs of transport , distribution , etc .
But 40 % means that other factors come into play . 40 % is far and away bigger than any differences in prices that come into play and are discussed in comparisons between international exhaustion and European exhaustion .
So I am afraid that the studies of which the Commission is aware - the NERA study was commissioned by the Commission itself - do not support the view that international exhaustion would lead to lower prices , quite apart from the fact that , as I have said before , the rightholders of trademarks are entitled to proper protection , not unlimited protection , but substantial nevertheless .
I thank Mrs Fourtou very much for supporting the NERA study .
She has cited the United States and Japan .
The Commission agrees with her view .
As to her question on the Madrid Protocol , I must tell her that this is in the hands of the Council , and the Commission can only wait for the Council to take a positive decision in this area .
Once again , the report will deal with matters of abuse of trademarks .
As I have said , the Commission has sent out 60 letters to companies and legal bodies asking for evidence of abuses of trademark rights .
The answers should be in by the end of September .
We do not have all the answers yet .
We shall wait for them to come in . We shall analyse them .
They will be included in the report due at the end of December .
I should like to confirm that Parliament will indeed receive that report at the end of December .
I should like to conclude by stressing that the Commission has an open mind on this issue .
Only those who have no ideas never change them .
The Commission is full of ideas and has an open mind .
It is always willing to reconsider .
As I said a year ago , the problem is more a lack of definitive evidence showing that there is an advantage in opting for international exhaustion over European exhaustion .
I do not believe that the Commission should change its policy without clear evidence of there being an advantage in doing so .
With these remarks , I should like to end my response in winding up this debate .
Once again , there will be a report at the end of December .
I look forward to a further exchange of views with Parliament once that report has been brought to the attention of this House .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 10.35 p.m. )
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mr Santini 's report ( A5-0312 / 2002 ) .
We agree that the EU should establish minimum rules for legal aid etc .
We are nonetheless aware of the fact that the directive is covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and does not apply to Denmark , cf. the protocol on Denmark 's position .
Activities of the European Ombudsman ( 2001 ) Deliberations of the Committee on Petitions 2001-2002
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report ( A5-0267 / 2002 ) by Mr Wyn , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman for the year 2001 [ C5-0296 / 2002 - 2002 / 2086 ( COS ) ] , and
the report ( A5-0271 / 2002 ) by Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2001-2002 [ 2002 / 2019 ( INI ) ] .
Mr Söderman , the European Ombudsman , has the floor .
Madam President , on 1 September 1995 the Ombudsman 's office started work .
From then until 15 September 2002 , the office received 10 535 complaints , of which 10 437 have been examined .
We carried out 1 385 full inquiries of which 19 were own-initiative inquiries .
1 149 of these cases involved the Commission , 137 cases involved the European Parliament 's administration , 53 concerned the Council and 12 concerned the European Investment Bank .
Looking at the results , 345 cases were settled by the institution concerned , after the Ombudsman had informed it of the complaint .
In 206 cases a critical remark was made , in 48 cases the inquiry resulted in a draft accommodation or proposal for a friendly solution , most of it achieved a success for the complainant .
In six cases a special report was made to the European Parliament , in four of these cases Parliament upheld the Ombudsman 's recommendations , and two other cases are still pending .
In 659 cases , a thorough inquiry resulted in the Ombudsman finding that there was no maladministration in the activities of the institution .
When cases are outside the Ombudsman 's mandate , we always try to advise the complainant of another body that could deal with the matter .
We advised the complainant to go to the national or regional Ombudsman , or petition a national or regional Parliament in 2 293 cases , to petition the European Parliament in 884 cases and to address the Commission in 913 cases .
Over the years , critical voices have been raised , saying that the Ombudsman is not sufficiently known , and that the results for citizens are inadequate because the institutions neither cooperate nor respect their obligation of good administration .
Some critical voices have also suggested that the mandate is too narrow and that the European Ombudsman should deal with complaints concerning Community law wherever it is applied in the Union or even be a People 's Tribune , always ready to condemn injustice wherever it occurs .
The European Ombudsman is certainly one of the best-known ombudsman institutions in the world .
Our information campaign is in 12 languages and addresses 350 million citizens and residents of 15 Member States .
We have visited every Member State , issued press releases , published information brochures and given many lectures and seminars to publicise the work .
One of the most effective ways of communicating with such a vast audience is via the Internet .
Around 2 500 websites contain an active link to the European Ombudsman 's site and nearly 42 % of complaints are now submitted electronically , many of them using the on line complaint form .
The steady increase in the number of complaints is the best proof that the Ombudsman is better and better known .
Almost 200 new complaints arrive each month , nearly a 300 % increase compared with the first full year of cooperation in 1996 .
The results of the Ombudsman 's work for European citizens are also impressive .
As well as obtaining redress in individual cases , we have achieved major improvements in the general functioning of the institution .
Three of these call for special mention .
First we persuaded the institutions and some bodies , including the European Central Bank and Europol , to improve public access to their documents .
Second , an own-initiative inquiry led 17 institutions and bodies to adopt codes of good administration , based on a draft suggested by us .
Following a special report , the European Parliament last year adopted a revised version of the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour .
We have distributed this improved version of the Code widely throughout the institutions and to European citizens , whose right to good administration the Code embodies .
As instructed by the European Parliament , we apply the Code in deciding whether or not there is maladministration .
The third achievement concerns the Charter of Fundamental Rights , proclaimed in Nice in December 2000 .
The Ombudsman proposed the idea that the Charter should include the right to good administration . This was included as Article 41 of the Charter .
The Ombudsman has also promoted the full and correct application of the Charter .
The Union institutions solemnly proclaim the Charter to the citizens as embodying their fundamental rights .
The Ombudsman therefore regards the institutions ' failure to respect those rights in their own activities as maladministration .
Furthermore , the Ombudsman 's proposals to the European Convention include the idea that the Charter should be legally binding wherever Community law applies .
Contrary to what the critical voices say , the institutions and bodies deserve credit for their mainly cooperative attitude to the Ombudsman .
They have usually responded properly , fully and promptly to the Ombudsman 's inquiries and have been willing to accept the Ombudsman 's friendly solutions and draft recommendations .
Problems have arisen in only a small number of cases .
In one case concerning access to information , the Commission rejected the Ombudsman 's draft recommendation and has failed to act on a resolution of the European Parliament supporting the Ombudsman .
I regret that this case seems to be part of a more general trend towards the misuse of data protection rules to halt or reverse the commitment to openness .
Most of the institutions and bodies have also adopted a code of good administrative behaviour .
I still cannot understand why Parliament 's resolution of September 2001 , calling for a European administrative law , has not been followed up .
To me , a uniform set of rules applying to all the institutions and bodies could only enhance the Union 's relations with its citizens .
I also regret that the Staff Regulations maintain the outdated requirement of prior approval of publications by civil servants .
I acknowledge that the European Ombudsman 's mandate is limited .
I have consistently maintained the view that a network of ombudsmen and petitions committees is needed to supervise the application of Community law by the Member States .
We have developed such a network , to share information , give advice and ensure that complaints go to the most competent body .
Further development of the network could help the Commission , as the Guardian of the Treaties , to focus its resources on the most important issues of principle .
The citizens can never fully believe in the European Union unless Community law is respected at all levels of the Union .
In future Community law , the Member States could include the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The network of ombudsmen in the Member States could also play an essential role in supervising the application of the Charter .
The European Ombudsman would be ready to accept responsibility for referring fundamental cases to the Court of Justice , if no solution could be found in a normal ombudsman investigation .
I do hope that Parliament 's representatives in the on the European Convention will support these proposals .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks to all the institutions and bodies , above all to the European Commission , which has cooperated effectively with the Ombudsman to the benefit of the European citizens .
I would also like to thank the European Parliament and its Committee on Petitions for their good advice and support .
Special thanks are due to the chairman of the Committee , Mr Gemelli and the rapporteur dealing with the Ombudsman 's Annual Report this year , Mr Wyn .
I thank you .
I welcome their proposals for closer cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions , which I hope will lead to a concrete outcome to benefit the European citizens .
Madam President , it is my pleasure in this report to endorse the annual report for 2001 submitted by the Ombudsman , which is a comprehensive and detailed overview of the activities conducted during the year and in particular of all the various cases processed .
After seven years , the role of the European Ombudsman - to enhance openness and democratic accountability in the decision-making and administration of the European Union - is well established .
By tackling maladministration in the Community institutions and bodies , the role of the Ombudsman has made an essential contribution towards a Union in which decisions are truly taken as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen .
The fact that the number of direct complaints is still on the increase again in 2001 clearly demonstrates that the Ombudsman is reaching more and more people in the course of his activities .
Despite this steady rise in complaints , the report welcomes the reduction in time taken to deal with each case .
The present Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , from whom we have already heard , has become a well recognised and respected figure in the European Union and his receipt of awards such as the Alexis de Tocqueville prize further demonstrates this .
He has even paid a visit to my own country , Wales , showing a commitment and dedication through his work to visit some of the most important places in the world .
During his time in office he has emphasised the Rule of Law , taking fundamental rights seriously and applying basic principles of good administration , such as transparency , responsibility and respect for citizens .
This has been done in no less than 15 Member States and through the medium of 12 Community languages .
He deserves his retirement !
The report very much welcomes the fact that the European authorities are increasingly taking action to settle a complaint once they are made aware of the problem in question and that , in other cases , a friendly solution has been arrived at .
The Ombudsman must also be commended for his efforts to inform more citizens of their right to complain .
This is a matter that the Committee on Petitions is continually aware of .
This means that the Ombudsman 's work has to include the continuous updating of his website with a view to making his role known to an ever-wider public and to establishing networks of links with regional ombudsmen .
In this regard the Ombudsman is faced with , on the one hand , wanting to inform as many people as possible of this right to complain and , on the other , remembering that the remit of his office is limited to the Community institutions .
We in Parliament have a role to play here , in ensuring that we remain aware of the Ombudsman 's role and informing citizens of this right .
The work of the Ombudsman , however , has not been without obstacles during this period .
In the field of good administration the European Parliament adopted unanimously last September the European Union Code on Good Administrative Behaviour and called on the Commission to propose a regulation on the subject .
I welcome the Ombudsman 's decision to apply the principles set out in this code in his activities .
I should like to express my disappointment here , however , that the Commission has yet to act on this important request .
The report calls for Parliament to consider drawing up a legislative initiative report on the basis of this model code under Article 192 and Rule 59 .
In relation to openness and good administrative behaviour this report notes attempts by certain institutions to use recently adopted data protection rules to impose confidentiality on their activities .
It must be made clear that data protection rules are mainly concerned with the protection of private and family life and certainly should not in any way restrict the information available to citizens on the activities of the European Union institutions .
With regard to the infringement procedure , the Article 226 procedure , in which the Commission investigates complaints about infringements of Community law by Member States , which continues to be the subject of complaints to the Ombudsman - and this is something with which we in the Committee on Petitions are all too familiar - the report finds that , despite recent improvements , this procedure is secretive , and that the complainant is still not recognised as a participant .
Delays occur because the Commission has too many cases to deal with .
The Ombudsman was on the record for criticising the Commission 's recent handling of the Greek environmental complaint , in this case involving infringements of Community environmental law by the Greek authorities ; enquiries revealed a catalogue of information being concealed , the wrong directive being applied and a failure to ensure that the case was dealt with impartially .
Whilst we appreciate the hard work carried out by the Commission , the Ombudsman and our Committee on Petitions depend on their investigations being effective , and we must be confident that such cases are being handled correctly .
Finally , I welcome the offer by the Ombudsman to develop joint activities with the Committee on Petitions with a view to reinforcing the contacts and exchange of experience with national and regional Ombudsmen and committees on petitions .
Closer cooperation between the European Ombudsman 's office and the Committee on Petitions is vital .
Our work is very much interlinked and we were provided with excellent examples of how this could be achieved when the Ombudsman addressed the Committee on Petitions in April .
I commend the report to the House and wish the Ombudsman a very happy retirement .
Madam President , the report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions in 2001-2002 , for which I have the honour of acting as rapporteur , and the parallel annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman , which are being debated jointly today , should not be seen as two routine reports .
And there are very specific reasons why not .
These reports concern two fundamental rights - the right of petition and the right of complaint - of European citizens .
These rights are inextricably linked to their nationality and are the main means of consolidating political control by the European Parliament of where and how Community law is being applied by the Community institutions and the Member States .
These petitions and complaints give us a very specific idea of the degree to which European citizens ' expectations of Europe are being fulfilled .
We can , to a large degree , give real expression to the aim of bringing Europe closer to its citizens , the promised strengthening of the democratic credentials of the European Union and , more especially , of the European Parliament , and the much-vaunted objective of greater transparency , by properly developing the institutions of petition and complaint .
This being so , I should like , if I may , to invite my honourable friends to carefully study these reports and the proposals , all of which are designed to increase the reliability of the Community institutions and ensure that measures taken are implemented more efficiently .
Many of these proposals can be implemented within the framework of the current Treaties .
Others need the Treaties to be revised and the report drafted by Mr De Rossa on behalf of the Committee on Petitions for the president of the convention on the future of Europe is of interest here .
In both cases , whatever else , these issues should be at the top of the agenda of the political groups .
As to the proposals contained in my report , which were adopted unanimously by the Committee on Petitions , I should like to start by commenting on one which I consider is of both practical and symbolic value .
Parliament examines three reports every year .
The first is the report by the Committee on Petitions , examining the petitions filed by European citizens on shortcomings in the application of Community law by the Member States .
The second , the Ombudsman 's report , examines complaints about the failure of Community institutions to comply with Community law .
The third , which is submitted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , concerns the application of Community law by the Member States .
In other words , three reports which are directly related and have common objectives and which do not warrant separate consideration .
They should be dealt with jointly in a part-session with as much publicity as possible .
At the same time , in view of the fact that , one way or another , all three reports involve national authorities , such as national parliaments , national courts and national administrative departments , and many of the issues touched on in them depend on their degree of involvement and control , I think that the possibility of these reports being debated in the European Parliament in the presence of representatives of the national authorities should be addressed .
This will improve cooperation , especially with the national parliaments , and the debate will gain maximum publicity and incite the interest of European citizens .
Another point to emerge from the study is the increased number of petitions and complaints which , from one point of view , is a good thing , because it shows that citizens are broadly involved in the exercise of these rights .
But , after a certain point , it creates practical problems which need to be addressed .
Obviously these problems will increase with enlargement . So , sooner or later , we will need to set these institutions on a new footing .
To be precise , we shall need to examine the possibility of decentralising services with the help of national ombudsmen or committees on petitions and , possibly , the offices of the European Parliament in the capitals of the various Member States .
There are other proposals which merit consideration , but there is too little time for me to comment on them .
I shall confine myself to a few words on the content of the report .
Social issues were again the most sensitive area in the year under review .
Problems connected with free movement , such as violation of the right of residence , double taxation , failure to safeguard insurance rights , environmental issues and the recognition of diplomas and skills .
What is encouraging is that , in numerous cases , once the relevant national authorities were contacted , petitioners obtained justice .
It is also encouraging that there has been an increase in the number of collective petitions , i.e. petitions with more than a thousand signatures .
The potential of collective petitions is something we should be looking at , because it also involves non-governmental organisations .
To close , it would be a huge oversight on my part , in view of the imminent departure of the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , if I were to fail not just to congratulate him but to express my admiration for the work he has done , work which justifies the institution of the ombudsman in the eyes of the citizens of Europe and leaves behind it an important heritage which needs to be safeguarded and strengthened in the future .
Madam President , the annual debate on the activities of the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman focuses our attention on the relationship between citizens and the institutions .
This relationship is fundamental , and forms the basis for all our policies since ultimately they are addressed to the citizens .
It is therefore important that once a year Parliament , the Ombudsman and the Commission take stock of how this dimension is taken into account in their regular and day-to-day activities .
However , this year the debate is different for two reasons .
Firstly , work on the Convention is in full swing .
It will map out the future of Europe , and both the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman have referred to that body the issue of citizens ' rights through proposals concerning , on the one hand , the right to petition , and on the other , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , an administrative law and means of appeal .
Secondly , the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , has told Parliament that he wishes to stand down at the end of March 2003 , so this is the last time that he will present an annual report to this Assembly .
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank Mr Söderman , on behalf of the Commission , for the work he has carried out since he was appointed in July 1995 .
As the first EU Ombudsman , he has played a pioneering role , helping to bring about a real change of culture within the Commission , and I am sure that this also applies to the other institutions and bodies .
In addition , his own-initiative enquiries have also had direct consequences , and resulted in positive administrative reforms .
I should like to mention some of them .
Firstly , the Code of Good Administrative Conduct which , it should be stressed , was the result of an initiative by Parliament when adopting the Perry report on the activities of the Committee on Petitions in 1996 .
Then in the recruitment sphere , there have been firstly the removal , in two stages , of the age limit in competitions and , secondly , the Ombudsman 's success in obtaining the right for any participant in a competition to have access to their corrected papers .
Both these things required quite a change in administration and tradition in the institutions .
Lastly , his efforts have prompted us to organise more structured relations between complainants and the Commission in infringement procedures .
These are the areas in which the institutional relations between the Ombudsman - often supported by Parliament , moreover - and the Commission have led to genuine progress .
I should like to return briefly to the Code of Good Administrative Conduct , because the reports by Mr Wyn and Mr Koukiadis raise this matter .
It should be pointed out that from the outset the Commission was receptive to Parliament and the Ombudsman .
It has drawn up various drafts starting in 1998 and now under the present Commission it has drawn up and adopted its own Code of Conduct aimed at the citizen , binding in nature and corresponding to many of the points in the Code of Conduct drawn up by the Ombudsman himself .
This important work led the Commission to amend its own Rules of Procedure in October 2000 .
Not all the institutions have acted in that way .
Of course there remain certain differences compared with the latter code , as the Ombudsman , Mr Perry , and now Mr Koukiadis and Mr Wyn have pointed out .


Be that as it may , the Commission code represents real progress .
Of all the codes adopted by the institutions , it is the one which corresponds the most closely to the Ombudsman 's proposals .
It entered into force in November 2000 , and a first evaluation report has now been finalised . It will be circulated shortly .
The Commission is well aware that , despite all its efforts , the European Ombudsman would like to go further .
He has in fact referred this issue to Parliament in a special report , with the result that a year ago Parliament expressed itself in favour of a single harmonised code for all the institutions .
This is still the position today of your rapporteurs , Mr Wyn and Mr Koukiadis

The Commission realises that the situation is not totally satisfactory at present since European citizens are confronted with different standards of good administration depending on which institutions they contact .
However , the Commission is not in a position at present to launch a legislative initiative .
The first report on the application of the Commission code covers only a few cases , as you will no doubt see , and we know nothing about how the other codes are being implemented by the other institutions .
In addition , as I have just mentioned , discussions are in progress at the Convention concerning the adoption of an administrative law , and we should undoubtedly wait for its results .
I notice in this connection that the proposal made by the Ombudsman to the Convention provides for the adoption of such a law within one year of the entry into force of the Treaty .
It seems to me that this gives us some room for manoeuvre .
Lastly , while it is true that an interinstitutional approach aimed at the adoption of a single code and a single law is no doubt useful , the fact remains that the situation in each institution is specific , and a degree of flexibility is called for .

I will not go through all the points raised in the reports by Mr Koukiadis and Mr Wyn , but I must say that relations between the Ombudsman and the Commission , although cordial and very productive , may from time to time give rise to disagreements in the context of institutional relations .
While the Commission pays tribute to the work accomplished by the Ombudsman , the fact remains that there are still differences of opinion on certain points .
Firstly , there is the question of the application of the relevant provisions of Regulation 1049 / 2001 to infringement dossiers and how to interpret the data protection directive .
However , I will not repeat here the position expressed on behalf of the Commission by Mr Bolkestein on this latter point or the opinion expressed by the Commission concerning the proposal to amend the rules governing the Ombudsman .
Both Parliament and the Ombudsman are well aware of these positions .
Nevertheless , I should like to return for a moment to the report by Mr Koukiadis on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's main concern of organising more efficient working and cooperation conditions between the Commission and the Committee on Petitions .
Incidentally , as the President and some Members will know , I have personal experience of very well-organised cooperation with the committee in a specific case .
Returning to the text , the prospect of enlargement should prompt us to improve our procedure still further and , in this connection , I would reiterate the Commission 's willingness to debate a review of the interinstitutional agreement with the Council and Parliament on the examination of petitions .
The Commission also agrees with the rapporteur about cooperation with the national parliaments and with the national administrations as part of the efforts to find solutions to problems raised by petitions .
Allow me to conclude with a few points which should be made at this time of institutional deliberations .
One of the objectives of the Convention is to bring the institutions closer to citizens .
In this context , there can be no question of reducing the possibilities with regard to exercising the right of petition , but rather of consolidating them or providing a framework for them .
In addition , it is clearly very important , as part of the clarification of the institutional system , that citizens should be aware of the various means of appeal available to them at the various levels of the institutional machinery .
The Commission therefore welcomes the contributions by the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions , and undertakes to examine them constructively .
Moreover , by adopting a constructive dialogue approach , the Commission , the Ombudsman and the European Parliament will make the best possible contribution to defending the interests of European citizens .
Madam President , we are debating the last annual report which will be presented to the Parliament by Jacob Söderman .
Today is not the time when we say farewell , but it is a moment to appreciate the work that Jacob Söderman has carried out and his efforts on our behalf and very much in the interests of Europe .
The European Union institutions are inevitably a large and complex bureaucracy and , of course , there are going to be mistakes and administrative errors .
The institutions seek to minimise those errors , and they must be prepared to listen to advice on how to do that .
The Ombudsman is there , as we all know , to act as the arbiter in a fair and objective way .
I would say to the Commission that they must think long and hard before they reject any of the Ombudsman 's findings .
I been appalled to come across examples where the Commission has blatantly rejected the Ombudsman 's findings .
Without going into details , I have a letter here from Mr Prodi to one of my colleagues .
The Ombudsman found there had been maladministration and the Commission flatly refused to reverse the situation .
Mr Prodi writes : ' I am convinced that the solution we offer is the most suitable in the light of the specificity of the case and I am disappointed that your constituent does not see it this way ' .
It is hardly surprising that the MEP concerned has written to me in the Committee on Petitions to say that the reply from the President of the Commission is preposterous .
It is impossible to defend that before the citizens .
I am sorry in some sense that it is Commissioner Liikanen who is here this morning .
I always appreciate his words and certainly acknowledge the good relations between his department and the Committee on Petitions .
I was very heartened to hear his words this morning about the Commission 's preparedness to look at the review of the inter-institutional agreement .
The time for that is certainly getting very close .
I want to make stronger points about the Code of Administrative Behaviour .
Last December , Commissioner Kinnock promised to this House that we would receive a review on the workings of the voluntary Code .
We are yet to see it , although we have heard it will come in the near future .
To my mind , it is already a year late .
A code has to be binding , it must not be a voluntary code ; and it also needs to be consistent .
The citizens of Europe do not distinguish between the institutions of the European Union .
To them , Brussels is one place , Strasbourg is somewhere else .
They want a consistent code across each of the institutions .
I have analysed the voluntary code of the Commission and compared it with that proposed by the Ombudsman .
In over 70 % of the articles , there are differences .
Some differences may be small , but some are very big indeed .
The Commission code does not explicitly recognise the need for courtesy .
There is no provision for an apology or correction of mistakes .
The Commission code is very weak on access to documents and on discrimination : it does not recognise that discrimination can be based on language , membership of a national minority or even appearance .
The Commission 's code says staff shall not be guided by personal interest .
The Ombudsman 's code says the official shall not take part in a decision in which he or she or any close member of his or her family has a financial interest .
I would urge the Commission to be more relaxed about it , to listen to the code that is proposed by the Ombudsman and endorsed by this House , and to accept it .
It should be in the forefront , it should not say : ' Well , none of the other institutions has done so ' .
I know that is the case .
Nevertheless , the Commission is in the driving seat here and should be much readier to accept the advice , coming from friends , which will enable it to face the citizens of Europe much more confidently .
I am delighted to say that the Committee on Petitions had a recent meeting with the Danish presidency at which the presidency expressed its willingness to look at the new interinstitutional agreement .
We have the communication from the Commission on complaints and petitions , and we now have Mr Liikanen 's proposals .
The time has come for us to have that new interinstitutional agreement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I join with Roy Perry in saying that we should not let this occasion pass without expressing our gratitude for the work of Jacob Söderman , the first Ombudsman of the European Union , and for the success with which it has been rewarded .
I would also like to say that we can congratulate ourselves on having had the courage , in 1995 , to entrust this great task to - if I may say so - a rather unknown representative of a new Member State .
I would like to congratulate Jacob Söderman on having focused our attention on the essential matters , namely the total reform of the European institutions , in which secretive dealings of one sort or another gave way to the principle of openness and transparency .
Above all , I also thank our Ombudsman for the very quiet , calm , but determined way in which he did his work .
We know the examples , and that we could not take an easier way , but we see from the successes chalked up by the administrations in the EU 's northern countries - Finland , Sweden and Denmark , which score lowest on the index of corruption - that there is no such alternative .
I share the disappointment expressed earlier at the spectacle , over and over again , of the hesitancy manifested by the so-called Brussels bureaucracy .
This is an area in which we need to press on .
It was not least this opacity , this inability to identify what was going on , that brought down the European Union 's last Commission .
By touching on sore points , Mr Söderman has done the right thing .
Let us recall the delayed payments .
The Commission is one of the worst bodies in Europe when it comes to paying up , yet see the self-assurance with which it lays down rules for all economic actors , while itself being in fact incapable of making payments in a proper manner !
In the most simple terms , this is about bringing administration closer to the citizen .
It is the experience of all of us , again and again , that the people back home talk about how big our bureaucracy is in Brussels .
We know that it is a very small one , but it acts big .
I have to say , as rapporteur for the Budget , that I am a little ashamed - although I am aware that it is mainly the fault of the Finance Ministers of the fifteen Member States - of our manifest inability to equip the European Ombudsman 's office with the staff its importance warrants .
We in Parliament are doing our best , and we will find a solution , but the finance ministers obviously think that enlargement is not actually in the offing and that the Ombudsman will not need extra staff .
This really saddens me , and it is something I have to say in the hearing of many members of the public .
Emphasis has been laid on the good cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
It is Jacob Söderman 's leadership that has given us the modern institution of a European Ombudsman .
Now , perhaps , it is our responsibility , and that of the Committee on Petitions and of Parliament as a whole , to bring our activities up to a comparable standard .
Madam President , the twin bodies of the Petitions Committee and the European Ombudsman form a key plank in bringing the European Union closer to its people .
Much has been written about the democratic deficit and voter alienation in the European Union .
As a directly elected representative of the people , I believe that we could go a long way to giving a more human face to the institutions of the European Union if we successfully promoted the work of these bodies to our constituents .
Much has been achieved over the past year through the close cooperation of the Ombudsman and the committee .
I would like to offer Mr Söderman my fullest congratulations on an outstanding tenure of office .
He came to Strasbourg with already considerable experience in defending citizens ' rights in his own country .
Indeed the notion of an ombudsman is originally a Nordic one .
There is no doubt that in areas such as openness , transparency and creating a public service that really serves the people , the European Union has benefited greatly from the Nordic perspective .
Mr Söderman indicated to us some time ago that he would be stepping down early next year .
He has done an outstanding job in establishing the role and function of the Ombudsman as the first person to hold this important post .
Informing citizens about this important office naturally requires time and resources , and it is true that work remains to be done in increasing the profile of the European Ombudsman .
Whoever Mr Söderman 's replacement might be , and we are all aware that the selection process is already under way , he will have a lot to live up to .
Mr Söderman has been most assiduous in executing his brief on behalf of the citizens of Europe .
He has not hesitated to tackle the European Union institutions head on at the highest level if he felt it right to overturn the decision resulting from bad administration .
I wish him well in his retirement and would like to assure him that if he is ever feeling depressed during the long , cold Finnish winters he would be most welcome to visit sunny Ireland .
Madam President , great praise has been showered on Mr Söderman and also on the two rapporteurs , Mr Wyn and Mr Koukiadis .

It is as a matter of principle that I wish to reiterate this , having read this great tome that comes out every year and found that he has achieved an enormous amount .
It is lamentable that the Committee on Petitions is prevented from playing the part to which it might do justice by the excessive inadequacy of the resources with which it is equipped .
The Committee on Petitions must be a real point of contact for citizens , but the Council should also take even more account of it .
The Nice Treaty states that the European Union must be brought closer to its citizens .
This might present an opportunity to do this at this level , and it is enormously important that the Ombudsman has offered to develop joint activities with local and regional ombudsmen and with committees on petitions .
The European Union will always find it difficult to be recognised in the Member States as the servant of the people that it is meant to be .
In particular , more attention needs to be paid to Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is where it is enormously important that the Charter should become legally binding and be incorporated into the Treaties .
If we do not manage to force this through , we will find the European Union 's credibility hard to defend .
Madam President , I am going to comment on the Koukiadis report .
Hardly a year has passed since we debated the report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions for 2001 - for which I was rapporteur - and I am pleased to note that the right of petition is increasingly strengthening the political control that the European Parliament can exercise in relation to excessive violations of Community law .
This also allows us to assess the state of the application of that law within the Union and the degree of satisfaction amongst the citizens with the Community institutions , which are absolutely essential in a Union which is so large , so multi-faceted and sometimes so disconnected from those institutions .
All of this is taken up superbly in the report by Mr Koukiadis which , furthermore , comes at an historic moment for the Convention , which should not sidestep - this would be a great mistake - the strengthening of the right to petition and the enlargement of a uniform administrative code of conduct .
For all these reasons , we congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Koukiadis .
However , we once again regret - and this aspect is also taken up in the report we are debating - the lack of attention the Council is paying to this inalienable right of the European citizens , since the Council is still absent throughout the process , and this at a time when it is trying to gain more power for itself , to the detriment of Parliament and the Commission .
Furthermore , we are delighted at the intention to introduce preventive measures to prevent abuses of cultural and environmental heritage - which , by the way , are issues which are at the forefront of the European citizens ' concerns .
I will end by insisting also that we should investigate procedures aimed at effectively remedying the national authorities ' lack of willingness to cooperate with the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament .
We must study them and implement them as soon as possible .
We have had enough of the lukewarm positions of the Council and the national governments .
As the rapporteur suggests and as has been proposed in corresponding reports in previous years , we should even go as far as to renounce , in press conferences , the obstructive and reticent attitudes of the governments to the resolutions of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
And I would also like to wish Jacob Söderman all the best for his Iberian retirement .
Mr President , the report submitted by the Ombudsman demonstrates that this is an important and necessary post .
We must safeguard the financial resources of the Ombudsman 's office .
This is something that is not always taken sufficiently seriously in Parliament 's Committee on Budgets .
I will use the same figure of speech the former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko of the former Soviet Union used referring to the present Chairman of the Russian Social Democratic People 's Party , Mikhail Gorbachov : the Ombudsman must have iron teeth .
With regard to human resources management in the EU the Members of the Commission act as both prosecutors and judges .
This is shown once again in the case of Martha Andreasen .
It would be appropriate if the impartial Ombudsman were also to look into that person 's punishment .
The present system does not provide legal protection .
It would also certainly be worth the Ombudsman 's while to undertake an own-initiative enquiry and report with regard to the administrative practices of the European Central Bank .
The bank 's openness and the transparency of its administration represent the worst standards in the EU .
It is regrettable that the Ombudsman in his annual report should have to state that the EU institutions have failed both to put the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights into practice and implement the decision on the European Parliament 's good administrative behaviour .
The remarks about administrative discrimination on the grounds of age or gender are particularly regrettable .
In the annual report there are 21 photographs of the Ombudsman , and in most of them he has a gentle expression on his face .
When it is a matter of a departure from good administrative practice the friendly exterior should deceive nobody .
Our Ombudsman acts fearlessly , like Jaakko Ilkka in the Finnish Cudgel War , against the tyranny of the administrative nobility .
Mr President , I will not use up my two minutes to thank the Ombudsman - because it would be quite possible to do so - but instead I will focus attention on a matter raised in Mr Wynn 's report .
The Ombudsman has appealed to the Convention proposing that he should in some cases be able to refer violations of fundamental rights to the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
This is a notion that should be taken seriously , because the Ombudsman seems to be the sole European institution that is really founded on the principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
All the other institutions seem instead to be backsliding with regard to its demands , although it is the very institutions themselves these demands should be binding on .
Secondly , I would like to raise a point made in the report drawn up by my colleague , Mr Koukiadis , which is absolutely crucial with regard to what Mr Kronberger said about strengthening the powers of the Committee on Petitions so that it could represent and defend the rights of citizens .
Point 5 of Mr Koukiadis 's report states the notion that the Treaties should provide the possibility for citizens to initiate reform of Community law by petitioning the European Parliament .
I ardently support this view and believe that , as we are discussing opportunities for citizens to have an influence , we should at long last include citizens as participants in the decision-making process and not just as the subjects of that process .
We might take an example from a country like Switzerland , where the people can indeed initiate the legislative process .
I believe we need such initiatives if we want the public to accept that the European Union has jurisdiction over their lives .
Mr President , the task of Ombudsman demands both great patience and considerable optimism in terms of getting the EU institutions to comply with basic demands concerning the Rule of Law and democratic accountability .
Mr Söderman has carried out his task with infinite patience , particularly in regard to the Commission which has shown no understanding of elementary administrative culture .
It is difficult to sustain optimism , however .
I do not want to suggest that Mr Söderman has given up , but the fact that the EU 's competent and patient Ombudsman has chosen to retire early is a signal that the Commission 's absolute power is too overwhelming .
Absolute power does not only result in passivity ; it is revealed in the active opposition to the Ombudsman 's efforts to introduce the Nordic countries ' administrative culture into the institutions of the EU .
A couple of examples : freedom of expression is practised as the freedom to employ several hundred million euro on spreading EU propaganda , in conjunction with the ruthless censorship of critical voices .
One has only to read about the latest victim of the arrogance of power . Her name is Marta Andreasen .
Data protection is used not to protect citizens ' private lives but to secure the Commission 's monopoly on knowledge .
The Ombudsman 's right to gather uncensored information is sabotaged outright by the Commission .
I would take the liberty of referring to the Ombudsman 's brilliant answer to the Commission 's scandalous statement of 6 March of this year , a statement characterised by the Ombudsman in terms of the negative points of view and false assumptions it contained .
There is a long way to go .
With his latest report , Mr Söderman deserves a big thank-you for having tried to make the way shorter , but his departure gives new topicality to the issue of whether we shall ever reach the end of the road or only remain at the start of it .
Is the EU system , characterised as it is by absolute power , simply resistant to the Rule of Law and democratic accountability ?
There are an appallingly large number of witnesses to the fact that the answer might be in the affirmative .
Mr President , Strasbourg has come to symbolise not only peace , but also human rights , civil liberties and parliamentary government .
It was here , fifty-three years ago , that the Council of Europe was set up , and where it still has a special concern for human rights .
It was here , fifty-two years ago , that the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted , our neighbour the European Court of Human Rights being its fruit .
It was here , fifty years ago , that a European Parliament met for the first time .
This week has found us observing its fiftieth anniversary .
It was here too that we had our first joint session with the European Council 's Parliamentary Assembly , which might well have been rather tricky in technical terms , but I must say that those responsible overcame the difficulties brilliantly .
This was also a long-awaited opportunity to build stronger links between these two institutions , the European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the European Council .
Strasbourg is also the seat of the European Ombudsman , who expresses our vision of a citizens ' Europe , a Europe of human rights .
It has already frequently been said that Brussels , being the home of the Commission and of the Council , is increasingly synonymous with bad administrative practice .
I consider this rather unfair , and have to say so too , as Brussels is where the administration of the Council and the Commission does much that is exemplary .
Indeed , the present Commission - and I have for some years been numbered among the great critics of the Commission - and Mr Liikanen as well , have done much to systematically improve its administrative practices .
Despite that , there is still a staggering amount remaining to be done .
Unlike Mrs Hautala , I do not believe that the introduction of more direct democracy will win the public over to European integration .
What works outstandingly well in the small democratic structure that is the canton of Appenzell , will not work in the same way in a Community with half a billion inhabitants .
The end result would be a society governed by hysteria , in which politics would be run by demagogues in television companies .
What we need is decentralisation and the Rule of Law .
A great deal has been said today about the Nordic culture .
I welcome that .
The Ombudsman is a Nordic invention , but we are not the Nordic community ; we are the European Community .
The concept of supranational law is a Roman achievement .
That is why I was very glad to hear something Mr Gemelli said .
' What is decisive , ' he said , ' is that people are aware of their European citizenship . '
You can say it in Latin just as well : ' Civis europaeis sum . '
Only when people can say that will the unification of Europe have been achieved .
That is why we need good administration , clear principles of human rights , and Europe as a Community based on the Rule of Law !
Mr President , I must also applaud the splendid work done by Mr Söderman as European Ombudsman .
I also want , however , to emphasise that Mr Posselt and Mr Liikanen have made an important point .
We must have institutions that fight for citizens ' rights in the EU .
We must have colleagues who show that they are in favour of securing citizens ' rights , but that is not enough in itself .
It is our task to ensure that citizens are also given resources to campaign themselves for their own rights .
It is our task to guarantee that the individual is not powerless before the institutions of the EU .
That , moreover , is precisely the job of the European Ombudsman .
It is therefore also our task in the European Parliament to ensure that the Ombudsman is given the opportunities and the tools that make for the right working conditions , including access to documents and the opportunity of talking with employees and obtaining clear answers .
I would urge the Danish Presidency to make efforts along these lines in order to ensure that the European Ombudsman is able to operate as intended .
Mr President , may I too start by congratulating the European Ombudsman on what is indeed a valuable job extremely well done , before commenting on the excellent report by my honourable friend , Mr Koukiadis , and drawing the House 's attention in particular to two points which , in my view , should be included in the Treaties on the occasion of the Convention .
The first concerns point 17 , calling for ways to be considered of persuading the national authorities to respond to petitions by citizens and questions asked by the Committee on Petitions and the Commission .
We often encounter indifference or have to deal with obstructionism .
The rapporteur and the Committee on Petitions unanimously adopted the following proposal which I had the honour of tabling : " In the event of indifference or obstructionism on the part of the national authorities , the national media should be informed of this negative attitude and of the content of the petitioner 's complaint . "
As we all know , nothing affects or upsets national and local authorities more than their illegal acts or omissions or even their indifference towards their citizens being publicly exposed .
This publicity could be achieved by issuing press releases in the language of the country in question and by organising press conferences in which national MEPs , especially the members of the Committee on Petitions , could participate .
Secondly , I should like to point out that the Committee on Petitions receives huge numbers of petitions complaining about works planned or under way or conduct on the part of national authorities which violate mandatory Community rules , often resulting in irreparable damage to the environment or European cultural heritage .
Proceedings resulting in convictions by the European Court are so time-consuming as to be useless , because the damage has already been done and cannot then be rectified .
That is why I believe we should find ways of preventing damage pending a final decision by the European Court , where a petition has been referred to it .
As you know , temporary prohibitory or mandatory injunctions can be issued under national legislation , preventing damaging activities from starting or continuing until a decision is taken on whether or not they are legal .
This motion proposes something along similar lines and we should ardently support it .
Otherwise , what happens if a natural habitat is destroyed , for example ?
It cannot be restored .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by pointing out that the protection of the citizens and their rights is one of the fundamental principles of our democracies .
I believe that if we safeguard the rights of the citizens and provide them with sufficient protection , we can also call upon them to discharge their responsibilities .
In my opinion , this should be the main consideration .
We must therefore consolidate these rights , and the way to do so is through the right of petition , which provides the individual citizen with the possibility of appealing to a dedicated body which can then carry out controls , whether it is the Parliamentary Committee on Petitions or the European Ombudsman .
I greatly welcome the cooperation between the two institutions , which I feel has been an extremely positive development .
The network is up and running and is constantly improving , and I therefore feel that access must be further facilitated .
Improvement has been possible thanks to the use of new technologies , but I believe that access is facilitated when information on accessibility is distributed as widely as possible .
Therefore , we still need to do much more in terms of disseminating information .
It would be useful , for example , for all the publications issued by the European institutions for the public to read to contain , in future , a section on how to contact the Ombudsman and how to contact the Committee on Petitions , so that the individual citizens are provided with the possibility of receiving help at those times when they consider that the public administrations are not doing their duty and that their rights have been infringed , and to ensure that they are aware of the existence of this facility .
This would help us to improve our structures because , in actual fact , if we are aware of real or alleged malfunctions , we will be able , not least as Members of the European Parliament , to take appropriate measures to address them .
I will end on a very personal note .
In 1995 , Mr Söderman , I voted for the occupant of the office adjacent to mine , who was not yourself but Mr Siegbert Alber .
It is therefore with even greater conviction that I thank you most sincerely for your work and for your efforts on behalf of the citizens .
Thank you and good luck for the rest of your term of office .
I too would like to thank Mr Söderman for all his work over the past few years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0278 / 2002 ) by Mrs Boudjenah , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the European Parliament 's recommendations to the Commission concerning the negotiation of Economic Partnership Agreements with the ACP countries and regions [ 2002 / 2097 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , the Commission appreciates and welcomes the strong interest the European Parliament takes in EU-ACP negotiations of economic partnership agreements , as witnessed by the report of the development committee by Mrs Boudjenah and the opinion of the industry and trade committee by Mr Titley .
I would like to thank the honourable Members for their work .
The European Parliament has also shown an impeccable sense of timing by tabling this report just before the launch of the EU-ACP negotiations on the economic partnership agreements tomorrow .
From the Commission 's point of view , the main strength of the report is that it puts ACP development at the centre of the EPA negotiations .
This is exactly where the Commission wants it to be .
EPAs shall be a tool for the smooth and gradual integration of ACP countries into the world economy , thereby promoting sustainable development and contributing to poverty eradication .
To this end , the ACP and the EU have decided to negotiate in a spirit of partnership the progressive removal of barriers to trade between them .
The resulting agreements will extend to all areas relevant to trade , notably non-direct measures .
The EPAs shall also be WTO-compatible and build on ACP regional integration initiatives as key instruments for ACP integration into the world economy .
This is in a nutshell what was laid down in the ACP-EU agreement signed in Cotonou in June 2000 , an agreement endorsed by the European Parliament .
In Cotonou the ACP and the EU agreed to enter into EPA negotiations and laid down objectives , principles and modalities for these agreements .
Some of the questions raised in the report had thus already been settled at the time of the Cotonou Agreement .
The Commission refers , for instance , to those parts of the report which call for the continuation of non-reciprocal trade preferences for the ACP .
Non-reciprocal preferences have not achieved , and cannot achieve , the closer integration of ACP countries into the world economy .
A more comprehensive approach is needed aimed at enhancing ACP supply and trading capacities and the capacity to attract investment .
This was the joint conclusion of the ACP states and the EU when negotiating the Cotonou Agreement , and that is why they agreed to conclude WTO-compatible trading arrangements to progressively remove all barriers to trade between them .
Trade liberalisation on both sides is an indispensable element of this undertaking , provided it is not pursued blindly but flexibly .
In short , our common objective is to use trade for development .
Likewise , retention , consolidation and possible extension of the commodity protocols is not in line with the Cotonou Agreement , which says we will review these protocols .
The Commission is of the opinion that we should not prejudge this review .
Lastly , any decisions on alternatives to the EPAs under the Cotonou Agreement are only to be taken in 2004 should the EPA negotiations show that EPAs do not offer the appropriate solutions for specific cases in the countries concerned .
The Commission agrees with the need , highlighted in the report , for analysis and assessment of the impact of the EPAs on sustainable development .
This will require a thorough and sustained effort throughout the negotiations .
The sustainability impact assessment foreseen in parallel with the negotiations is designed to achieve this goal .
It will enable systematic analysis of the impact of the different policy options considered in the course of the EPA negotiations as they evolve , and will thus inform negotiators ' choice .
Its ongoing results should keep the negotiations on track towards genuine sustainable development .
The Commission also supports ACP countries and regions that want to undertake their own studies .
We have ensured that considerable amounts of money are available under national , regional , and all other ACP programmes not only for studies but for trade-related assistance and capacity-building more widely .
Meanwhile the Commission is going ahead with the sustainability impact assessment and we will do so in full transparency with regard to the European Parliament .
Mr President , the Committee on Industry in general welcomes the Commission 's communication because the EPAs between the EU and different regions could reinforce economic cooperation between ACP countries and encourage their economic development .
Therefore , we particularly welcome the Commission 's proposal that treatment granted to the EU be extended to all ACP-EPA partners before trade liberalisation with the EU .
This is particularly important .
It is not going to be easy , and some of the reasons for that have been outlined .
We have to proceed with caution and with flexibility .
We must not put pressure on ACP countries to enter into negotiations they do not feel to be appropriate , and we must safeguard and respect the rights of LDCs to non-reciprocal trade preferences .
We need , however , in particular , to encourage technical assistance to achieve institution building , which will allow balanced results .
We need to ensure that we take into account the capacity constraints of the ACP countries and seek to build those as part of the process .
We need to bear in mind that the abolition of tariffs could well cause a loss of public resources and , therefore , create budgetary problems .
We must not lose sight of our objective in relation to the Cotonou Agreement of poverty eradication and sustainable development .
Thus the Committee on Industry 's position is very much to support the Commission 's point of view and welcomes the fact that negotiations are going to start tomorrow but to ask that we proceed with sensitivity and caution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the economic partnership agreement with the ACP regions represents an attempt on the part of the European Union at putting future development cooperation with these states on a new basis , one with better prospects and greater likelihood of success .
The intention is that greater economic exchange should combat poverty in the long term and eventually contribute to improving the earnings potential of people who live in the ACP States .
By means of regional cooperation on their part , the ACP States are to be put in a position to develop their own functioning markets , which are necessary if there is to be greater trade with us in both goods and services .
The mutual market opening , especially the opening of the great European internal market , is intended to enable them to achieve better sales in this market of their existing products , and perhaps also of those of higher quality yet to be developed , and thereby lay the foundations for the development of their national economies .
As part of this , the EU is holding out the prospect of generous technical aid to equip the economic and administrative actors with better qualifications .
The negotiations that are now getting underway should therefore focus on turning the ACP States into more effective economic partners , enabling social and cultural development , too , to be further accelerated .
Mrs Boudjenah 's own-initiative report would , I regret to say , need to be further substantially improved by the incorporation of various amendments if the European Union is to negotiate from a stronger position , rather than for that position to be weakened as it is at the moment .
In the long term , we have to attempt to reach a realistic accommodation with the interests of the ACP States .
There is little point in this if it involves what gleams through at various points in this report - attempts at levelling accusations at the Commission , which has , in recent months , stepped up dialogue with the ACP States and made proposals to them concerning their sustainable development , which have included technical aid .
What matters is that the Commission , with our help , is pressing on with the creation of the new ACP economic area .
Some better system must replace the outdated and inefficient system of preferences for certain imports .
The rules both of the WTO and also the Cotonou Agreement should be applied , but with flexibility , and without their objectives being turned on their heads .
In that respect , the position of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy - the Titley Report - is substantially in line with our way of thinking , but we demand that the opening of markets should - as provided for in the WTO rules and in the Cotonou Agreement - concentrate on goods and services .
For example , there is no internal market common to both Europe and Africa , which is why there can be no generally free movement of workers either .
Our demand is that liberalisation be handled flexibly , with transitional periods , but that liberalisation in important economic sectors should not be ruled out .
It is also our view that investment must be well protected in order to prevent this leading to the economic standstill and retrogression now evident in policies in Zimbabwe and other countries .
We have nothing against the EU providing technical assistance with assessing the impact of the establishment of free trade and economic regions in Africa , but we vigorously oppose the opening of negotiations being made dependent on this , which could lead to reform of relations between the EU and the ACP States being blocked for a long time .
We do not want to develop alternative rules for our relations with the ACP States ; we should abide by the WTO 's rules and the rules of our own Cotonou Agreement , which should be applied flexibly and with transitional periods .
We are therefore proposing amendments that , if accepted , will make it possible for us to support the report , failing which we will vote against it or abstain .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Boudjenah on this timely report .
We in the PSE Group strongly align ourselves with her sentiments in relation to trade being a means to an end , not an end in itself .
The end is development of the ACP economies and poverty reduction for the poorest people in those countries .
One test of the Commission - I think Mr Liikanen was disingenuous in what he said this morning - is whether there is a genuine openness to alternatives .
It was never part of the Cotonou Agreement that the proposal for alternatives to EPAs would be delayed to 2004 and I hope he will withdraw that point when the debate is closed .
We also want to record strong agreement for what Mrs Boudjenah puts forward in terms of the need to advance the impact assessments so that we can genuinely see the impact of these negotiations .
The Commission again , in relation to the sugar industry , and the ' Everything but arms ' proposals of a year and two years ago has not got a particularly strong track record in relation to impartial impact assessments and trade matters .
I have been selected as the nominee to chair the trade committee in the Joint Parliament Assembly between the EU and the ACP . We are very much looking forward to playing an active role in overseeing these trade negotiations and promoting their transparency .
The Commissioner will agree that the Cape Town Declaration agreed by the Joint Parliamentary Assembly earlier this year gives us a strong opportunity for parliamentarians and civil society more generally to play a far greater role in the discussions that these crucial negotiations entail .
We want to see CAP reform being discussed .
The Commission is wrong there .
There are difficult issues for the ACP that the Commission forced on to the agenda .
There are difficult issues for the European side as well and what right do we have to prevent that being discussed ?
Lastly , in relation to ACP-wide issues , the ACP want to establish some principles as a complete block .
They do not want to be subject to divide and rule and only to discuss issues with their regional groups .
If we believe in partnership in development then we should respect their wishes .
Mr President , I should like , first of all , to congratulate the rapporteur , Yasmine Boudjenah , on her thorough and timely work , which provides us today , on the eve of the opening of negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements , with a high-quality report on a particularly important and topical issue .
Incidentally , the content of this report - and I wish to emphasise that it was given unanimous approval in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , in contrast to what Mr Schwaiger appears to be saying - and the introductory words of the rapporteur herself make my intervention easier .
I shall , therefore , restrict myself to discussing a few aspects of this complex issue .
First , I wish to state the need not to play down , in order to fall in line with the WTO , a partnership that has already been around for decades and which I believe must be continued and focused particularly on one key objective : the development of our more than 70 partner countries and meeting the fundamental needs of their populations .
This highlights another issue : the Economic Partnership Agreements laid down in the Cotonou Agreement and the trade dimension of this agreement as a whole cannot prevail and even less replace a form of cooperation that must encompass various other fields and which , as I understand it , must be extended and seek to achieve better results than in the past .
Secondly , I wish to emphasise that I consider it crucial to ensure that total respect is given to the forms , timing and means of regional integration undertaken by these countries which , as we know , are not always easy or even obvious : and that it is necessary to pay special attention to the new development that is the recently constituted African Union .
And , fundamentally , I think it is crucial to ensure that there is no deterioration in the positive situation represented by the current ACP group .
Thirdly , and taking account of the disparity in levels of development between the two parties in the negotiations and , in particular , the well-known limitations in terms of the ACP countries ' capacities , I wish to state that we must have studies on the predictable impacts of the new agreements on their various options and at various levels drafted and , if they are already drafted , presented as rapidly as possible , in addition to the fact that those limitations themselves reveal how crucial it is to ensure these countries special and differentiated treatment , which guarantees levels of protection able to ensure their development .
Fourthly , a more specific issue , however , that I feel is important and which Mr Titley has already mentioned : I am referring to the fact that customs revenues represent a substantial , if not almost exclusive contribution to the ACP countries ' budgets , which means that the measures we adopt on trade liberalisation must take account of this extremely important fact .
Mr President , I am pleased to participate in this debate on the economic partnership agreements with the African , Caribbean and Pacific nations .
I would like to commend the rapporteur on her excellent work .
It is important that these economic partnership agreements contribute towards placing the ACP countries in a position where they can be progressively integrated into the world economy .
Building capacity both in the public and private sectors , enhancing production and conforming with the WTO provisions should lead to increased investment in developing countries , in particular external investment and expanding economies .
We all hope for a successful negotiating process , which is due to be launched at an all-ACP level within the next couple of days .
On the key question of market access , we must move towards improved access to EU markets for exports from developing countries , so as to ensure that negotiating proposals take account of the economic interests of all parties .
I would urge the Commission to carry out an impact assessment of all the proposals .
I would also urge the Commission in its negotiations to strongly promote the importance of increased assistance for trade-capacity building .
I would , however , like to take issue with the rapporteur 's insistence that a reform of the common agricultural policy is a necessary part of the process of integrating the developing countries into the world trading system .
Issues surrounding the external effects of the CAP will be dealt with in the context of the Doha round of the World Trade Organisation talks .
European farmers have had a very turbulent few years , following on from the BSE and foot-and-mouth crisis .
There was a major reform of the CAP with Agenda 2000 , and we are now faced with review proposals that will profoundly disrupt our production and our markets if carried through .
Stability is needed , and suggestions that a new reform is necessary will only bring about more uncertainty .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Boudjenah on this successful report which highlights as something positive the fact that the Commission wishes to introduce a free-trade area between the EU and the ACP countries .
Customs barriers are not , however , the most important problem for the ACP countries .
Instead , this is , as several other fellow MEPs have also pointed out , the EU 's heavily subsidised agricultural exports .
To give just one simple example , it costs Europe slightly less than EUR 700 to produce a tonne of sugar , but it costs only a little under EUR 300 to do so in many African countries .
Simple economic theory therefore tells us that African countries would have a superior position in the sugar market and that opening up the markets would be the route to growth .
Because of the EU 's export subsidies , the conclusion is not , however , quite so simple because the EU backs up European exports to the tune of EUR 1 104 million so that European farmers are able to sell their sugar much more cheaply than the developing countries .
Nor , of course , will the situation change through the ACP countries ' developing internal markets .
It has been said before , but it cannot be repeated too often : the EU is not a credible partner as long as we retain the agricultural subsidies .
They stand in the way of any development and of any fight against poverty .
Mr President , I warmly welcome this report and congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work , particularly in expressing so clearly Parliament 's understanding that trade is only a means to an end , and that end is sustainable development .
All too often , in these institutions , there is a massive incoherence between European trade policy on one hand , and European development policy on the other , with trade concerns all too often undermining development objectives .
With this report Parliament sends a very clear message that development concerns must come first .
There are some key points I would like to underline .
First , capacity .
It simply beggars belief that some of the poorest ACP countries can possibly have the financial and technical resources to pursue the WTO 's Doha agenda , the GATT 's agenda , the NEPAD or FTAA agenda , at the same time as the EU economic partnerships agenda ; and still at the same time still somehow pursue their own regional integration processes .
Yet it is these very regional integration processes that the Commission says that it wants to support .
We must get away from externally imposed timetables of which countries need to adopt new arrangements , and instead allow them to adapt at their own speed , according to their own development needs , just as the industrialised countries were able to do .
Finally , I cannot over-emphasise the importance of waiting until we have the results of the impact assessments of these proposed economic arrangements .
These must be conducted with the full participation of local people and we must have the results of those impact assessments before negotiations start .
If necessary , we should be prepared to delay negotiations until we have them .
Only in that way , can we be sure that the initiative will genuinely contribute to poverty eradication and sustainable development .
Mr President , this report is on the face of it well-intentioned and recognises the need for ACP countries to export their goods .
There are many fine phrases such as : ' worldwide inequality must be remedied ' .
But , as ever , it is all hot air and naïve idealism .
In fact , what really strikes me here is the large element of sheer hypocrisy .
Agricultural produce is a large element of ACP exports .
Yet , despite all the fine words , the tariff regime makes the EU a difficult market-place , with 16 % being a fairly typical entry price for ACP goods .
It also means that consumers pay far too much for food here .
Of course , the solution to all of this - real reform of the common agricultural policy - is nothing more than a mirage .
How can we even talk about partnership agreements with these countries , given the continuing scandal of the European Union fisheries deals ?
This Parliament continues to give its overwhelming endorsement to deals that involve huge sums of taxpayers ' money going straight to corrupt African regimes : up to EUR 1.4 billion in the last few years alone , and little or none of it going to the local communities that need it .
As a result of all of this , hundreds of indigenous black African fisherman are continuing to die .
I have raised this point here before , and I am met with aggression from the Spanish and with indifference from Commissioner Fischler .
To satisfy the greed of large companies in Europe , this place turns a blind eye to a humanitarian disaster .
I do not expect many people here to agree with my view about political integration in the European Union . On this one area of fisheries deals , please surprise me and let us see some reform and let us give these struggling African coastal communities some sort of chance .
Since 1994 there has been repeated documentary evidence about all this and it is high time that something was done .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .

Mr President , I would like to table an oral amendment to paragraph 5 , the last sentence of which reads : " considers in consequence that signing such an agreement is incompatible with membership of the European Union " .
I would very much like the word " signing " to be replaced by the word " ratification " .
That makes it much clearer and also means that the States that have signed still have a chance to refrain from ratification .
That is why I would prefer the word " ratification " instead of " signing " .
Mr President , as you have very rightly said , the current situation in the Middle East has led my group to withdraw Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , which were tabled on another basis and at a time when we were more optimistic .
Instead , we want to bring in an oral amendment to insert the following after paragraph 4 :
Mr President , I would like to add to Mr von Wogau 's amendment an oral supplementary amendment which reads : " this is to be in the form of a protocol to the constitution , and adherence to this protocol shall be a matter for the sovereign competence of each Member State . "
Mr President , as we , in this Parliament , tend less towards the intergovernmental side , I would replace the word " Council " here by " Commission " .
I would , by the way , like to congratulate Mr van Orden , by dint of whose initiative Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union is to be incorporated into the constitution in its entirety , without any derogation !
I have voted in favour of this report , firstly because I believe that the role of the European Ombudsman is of enormous importance , especially considering the increasing distance , in decision-making processes , between the institutional bodies of the EU and the citizens of the Member States .
Secondly , I wished to pay tribute the outstanding work of the outgoing Ombudsman , Jacob Söderman .
Thirdly , because I support some of its most striking guidelines , specifically its call for the principles enshrined in the EU 's Code of Good Administrative Behaviour always to be applied and for the institutions to strictly apply Regulation 1049 / 2001 / EC on public access to the documents of the European institutions .
Nevertheless , I feel bound to severely criticise the attempts made , also here , once again , to give what is known as the Charter of Fundamental Rights jurisdiction ' by force ? , in a move that can only be seen as an attack on the Rule of Law and on European democracy - if the IGC , the only body that has competence in this matter , has not taken such action , because it did not see fit , no Community organ , court or body has the right to do so , at the risk of seriously contravening the law .
I have decided to support this report and its motion for a resolution bearing in mind , specifically , some points that I wish to highlight : its request to the European Convention to also look into consolidating the right of petition ; its call for the adoption of new data-processing tools enabling petitioners to follow the processing of their own and other petitions over the Internet , its criticism of the lack of enthusiasm in the Council for cooperation with the Committee on Petitions ; and also its call for petitions to be studied and processed more rapidly .
I believe that petitions could become an important tool for the exercise of citizenship and the protection of the rights and legitimate interests of persons and institutions and I find the idea put forward by the rapporteur that it could be possible ' for citizens to initiate reform of Community law through petitioning the European Parliament ? extremely interesting .
Mr President , the British Conservatives support the thrust of this directive .
New engines with lean-burn or common-rail technology need low-sulphur fuels as a technology enabler to allow advanced catalytic converters to function .
It is a mistake , however , to extend this to non-road mobile machinery , for example , tractors and construction equipment .
These are not fitted with catalytic converters yet , and so do not need this type of fuel .
In fact , more CO2 will be produced at the refinery by additional processing .
Fuel costs will go up by at least 10 % - another burden for hard-pressed farmers to carry at a time when they can least take it .
We are very disappointed that Amendments 10 and 13 were passed by Parliament .
For Portugal , and more precisely for the tourist region of the Algarve , recreational craft are a daily reality .
It is in this context that I wish to express my unconditional support for the rapporteur , Mr Callanan and for the Commission proposal that seeks to make recreational craft more compatible with environmental standards in force , particularly exhaust emissions and engine noise , which damage both the environment of the region and the well-being of its holidaymakers .
Making existing craft compliant with legislation will involve substantial costs that cannot be either disproportionate for boat owners or the sole responsibility of the shipbuilding industry .
I therefore also consider the obligation for annual craft inspections to be unnecessary .
. ( DE ) As a German and Bavarian Member of the European Parliament , I am sorely disappointed by the outcome of this vote .
On behalf of my honourable friends in the CSU , with whom I voted for more stringent limit values , I must say quite emphatically that an opportunity to limit water pollution from recreational craft has been missed for many years to come .
Unfortunately , it is our impression that recreational craft engine manufacturers are deliberately holding back on modern engineering - we have an example of this in Switzerland - so as to be able to argue as the rapporteur has done .
It should be a cause of concern to anyone who supports motor-boat and sailing sports , knowing that more and more people enjoy these sports and leisure activities , that they are practised in as environmentally-friendly a manner as possible .
This dubious outcome in plenary today is certainly nothing to write home about .
. ( DE ) The dismantling of agricultural export incentives and barriers to food exports from developing countries mean that the countries in the south can take their rightful place in world trade .
However , the interplay between trade , environmental pollution and development which results from EU agricultural policy is often overestimated .
Disturbances on agricultural markets affect few products and should therefore be examined for any effect on lasting development .
We need to act by pushing ahead on so-called non-trade related concerns during WTO negotiations .
The WTO should stop evading the issues of consumer protection , the environment and animal protection standards .
This includes implementing the development work of the 15 EU Member States , as formulated on more than one occasion .
The decisions taken in Doha ( on trade ) and Monterrey ( on finance ) should be examined in detail immediately .
Now that the Summit is over , the vital work of ensuring sustainable development has to continue .
Johannesburg did not achieve everything , but there has been genuine progress nonetheless .
I believe that the Summit will make a significant difference in key areas such as water and energy .
The only way to deal with these issues is through common action at a global level .
In the EU , we know how much more we can achieve by pooling our resources and setting common standards and by tackling together environmental problems which have cross-border implications .
We can be proud that the EU played a crucial role in Johannesburg , presenting a very ambitious sustainable development agenda .
Without the EU 's efforts , I do not think the Summit would have made as much progress .
The Summit was unable to achieve a satisfactory outcome on a target for increasing the share of renewable energy in global energy production .
This is essential if we are all to meet our commitments under the Kyoto Protocol .
Even if some countries in the developed world are not pulling their weight on this score , I believe that the EU and other like-minded countries should , nevertheless , work for more ambitious action in this area .
The EU may make grandiose statements , but the pitiful outcome confirms that Johannesburg was nothing more than a meeting steeped in hypocrisy and crocodile tears between the countries of the so-called developed world on the misery which their capitalist interests have imposed on the third world .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament resolution , for all its wishful thinking and " sensitivity " , is merely a mouthpiece for the same hypocrisy .
It is infuriating to hear claims that capitalist globalisation will work to the benefit of poor countries , given that the unrelenting terms on which international capitalist trade is conducted do absolutely nothing to improve the life of the people on this planet .
Not a word on the foreign debt which brings developing countries to their knees or the responsibilities of the multinationals ; just disgracefully hypocritical self-satisfaction when the same multinationals are called on to demonstrate " sensitivity " !
The claim that subsidies for agricultural produce in the EU are responsible for the underdevelopment of the third world and should therefore gradually be abolished has been swallowed hook , line and sinker in a frenzy of hypocrisy .
The same wishful thinking , the same begging for " sensitivity " and no progress on applying the Kyoto Protocol , while the capitalist world , and especially the USA , turns a provokingly blind eye to impending catastrophe .
We shall vote against the resolution in protest against those paving the way for even greater exploitation of the masses .
The aggressive stand taken by the Americans on the International Criminal Court is the product of its warmongering , imperialist plans .
It is perfectly consistent with its general attitude towards the UN which , when it has trouble getting it to fall in with its plans , it ignores completely .
Thus , having adopted a bill granting immunity to American personnel , even if they commit war crimes or genocide , it is now coercing various countries into signing bilateral agreements containing immunity clauses .
Just what is the so-called international community doing in the face of this galling provocation ?
The UN has rushed in to satisfy the Americans by granting them immunity for their crimes for at least a year and by excluding the crime of attack from the jurisdiction of the ICC .
The ? U remains firmly pro-Atlantic , refusing to take a stand on the rushed plans for war against Iraq , one member ( England ) is actively involved in preparing for war and 3 other Member States have come out openly in favour of war , with no reaction whatsoever on the part of the ? U.
In view of the foregoing , as members of the Communist Party of Greece , we consider that the ? U 's interest in the ICC , as expressed in the resolution put to the vote , is hypocritical and is just part of the game of standoff between the imperialist powers as they squabble over the spoils and we shall not be voting in favour of it .
I voted against this resolution solely because I do not think that the European Parliament , which is not a signatory to the Statute of Rome , has competence to interpret any of the provisions of this Statute , specifically the provision that has enabled the USA to hold negotiations and conclude agreements with some of the States that are signatories to it .
I am also profoundly disappointed at the position adopted by this Parliament of implicitly threatening the countries that are candidates for accession , and others that benefit from financial aid under agreements and partnerships established with the EU , so that they abstain from adopting positions , in the context of their legitimate external policies , that are not in line with the EP 's unilateral interpretation of Article 98 of the Statute establishing the ICC .
This aim of this explanation of vote is also to point out that one of the countries covered by this resolution is East Timor , which would not have survived as an independent State without massive external military aid against the invader , aid that we doubt would have been made available if , at the time , the position adopted in this resolution had prevailed .
. ( FR ) The joint resolution states that ' the EU is the main trading partner and the leading investor in the countries of Mercosur ? .
We should take a further look at these investments .
They are directly related to liberal policies of structural adjustments .
For example , French companies such as EDF , Suez Lyonnaise or France Telecom have taken advantage of the wave of privatisations of public services in order to enter into these ' markets ' with the sole aim of making profits .
That is translated into redundancies for workers and increases in charges for users .
The last straw is that a company such as Edenor in Argentina , the main subsidiary of EDF , is today asking the government to renegotiate its debt as well as an agreement to increase its charges !
Privatising profits and nationalising losses , that is what the ' Union 's strategic and supportive commitment to the countries of Mercosur in relation to their economic and political integration projects ? , which the policy praises , really looks like !
Mass redundancies , insecurity , unemployment , poverty , the dismantling of public services ; that is what the IMF policy which the countries of Mercosur have implemented means .
For our part , we reaffirm our complete solidarity with popular movements developing in these countries , Argentina in particular .
The first minimal measure Europe could take would be the complete cancellation of the debt of the Mercosur countries .
Since none of this appears in the resolution , I have voted against it .
Mr President , my group has voted , with good reason , for the whole of Amendment No 3 to the Brok report , including the section in which Parliament urges Iraq to implement all relevant Security Council resolutions to avoid the implementation of these resolutions having to be enforced .
The resolution links this to a statement by the Security Council about the result of the inspections .
As I highlighted in my contribution to yesterday 's debate , the ELDR Group too is of the opinion that explicit permission from the Security Council is required for military action .
This is , in fact , how the ELDR 's entire amendment should be interpreted .
In general , we believe that Mr Brok 's report is sound .
We do not however agree with certain points in it .
Paragraph 11 : For reasons of efficiency and to increase the likelihood of the EU 's speaking with one voice , we are , like the report , well disposed towards merging the tasks of the High Representative and those of the Commissioner for External Relations .
On the other hand , we are not prepared at this stage to state in which institution this merged office is to be set up .
At all events , the Common Foreign and Security Policy is an intergovernmental matter .
Paragraph 14 : We are in favour of the rule enabling the Member States to act within the framework of enhanced cooperation , but it should not be possible to apply this rule in matters of security and defence policy .
Paragraph 20 : The report should not encourage the Member States to increase their defence budgets .
Paragraph 23 : We do not agree that Article 28 of the Treaty should be changed so that the costs of military operations within the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy can be funded from the Community budget .
Paragraph 26 : We do not oppose closer institutional relations between NATO and the EU as a prerequisite for the EU 's actually being able to carry out military operations relating to crisis management , but we wish however to draw attention to our view that any military intervention must be preceded by an appropriate UN mandate .
.
( FR ) In relation to the institutional organisation of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) , the Brok report is typical of the European Parliament 's traditional positions : it pushes the CFSP as far as possible towards communitarisation , in particular calling for ' a common , though not single , European diplomacy ? ( paragraph 12 ) , qualified majority voting in the Council ( paragraph 14 ) and the transfer of the post of High Representative for the CFSP to the Commission ( paragraph 11 ) .
These proposals are the result of a desire to impose on Europe an abstract concept of a federal State , and not a considered understanding of practical realities .
The common foreign and security policy cannot draw its strength from artificial Community procedures .
It can only draw its strength , if necessary , from the support of the nations .
It must therefore be based on those nations , which means : maintaining the coordinating role of the Council ; unanimous decision-making , or otherwise variable geometry ; the instruments must fall within the responsibility of the Council and not of the Commission .
If the Convention meeting under the presidency of Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing wants to be effective , it must remain lucid by resisting federalist bombardment .
In broad terms , the report on the CFSP is part of the approach extending its communitarisation and the militarisation of the European Union , implementing a Common Security and Defence Policy - as the European pillar of NATO , within the framework of our partnership with the USA .
Amongst various troublesome aspects , I feel bound to highlight the ' ambiguous ? and supposedly ' neutral ? way in which the current situation on the Middle East is addressed , glossing over the Israeli Government 's considerable responsibility for the intolerable situation that exists in Palestine , due to its policy of terror and violence against the Palestinian people and their representatives , its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories and its failure to comply with UN resolutions .
Equally negative is the position adopted by the current Danish Presidency which , in the debate held in this plenary , did not condemn the Israeli Government for the unacceptable siege imposed on the Palestinian National Authority and the blackmail practised against President Yasser Arafat , and did not call for an end to it and the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli army .
I also feel that the failure to adopt the amendments tabled by my group seeking to reject any military aggression against Iraq , to lift the embargo on that country and to promote negotiations between Iraq and the UN to find a solution to the current situation is a mistake .
Hence our vote against .
The report on progress with the CFSP is being debated to the sound of war drums beating on the other side of the Atlantic .
The USA has stated that it is determined to proceed with its attack on Iraq , its aim being to control the oil supply in the area and impose its supremacy .
The report points the way for ? U action : closer collaboration with the USA and stronger trans-Atlantic relations .
Greater militarisation of ? U institutions , more military spending by Member States , military action to prevent and manage crises .
Alliances under the umbrella of ? ? ? ? and the orders of the USA in order to silence the people and anyone who gets in the way of their imperialist interests .
The EU 's imperialist policy has already shown its face in Bosnia , Serbia , Afghanistan and elsewhere .
The objections expressed so far to the EU 's again becoming involved in an attack on Iraq are objections by imperialist interests and hence objections to the unilateral nature of the action by the USA rather than the war itself .
We are worried that the ? U is prepared to take part in this dirty imperialist war if it is promised a share of the spoils .
We say no to war .
We want peace , de-escalation and disarmament .
We are fighting alongside the people of Europe to put a stop to more imperialist wars .
The Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the Brok report .
.
( NL ) In the Netherlands , my party , the Socialist Party , supports the initiative launched by a large number of peace and development organisations to institute an arms embargo against Israel by means of a temporary injunction .
This is in the light of the ever-increasing violation of human rights by the Israeli army in the occupied Palestinian territories and the destruction caused there .
Parliament 's resolution on the third annual report with regard to the code of conduct on arms exports is founded on the assumption that the EU 's external policy is guided by values of democracy and human rights , and that arms exports may not worsen the region 's instability .
Moreover , a majority voted today for the amendment in which military-industrial relations with conflicting parties in the Middle East are condemned .
Meanwhile , the Dutch Schiphol airport remains the link and focal point of the arms trade between the USA and Israel .
This is bound to cause enormous bitterness amongst the victims and also further instability in the region .
The systematic oppression of the Palestinians gives every reason to refuse licences for the export of arms within the framework of the European code of conduct .
I call on the Commission to help put an end to the escalation of violence and to support actions by citizens against Israeli violence in the Palestinian territories as a matter of urgency .
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , we are absolutely astounded that the Commission has tabled a proposal to water down the stability criteria without first agreeing the matter with the European Parliament in the relevant committees .
I would ask that we debate this Commission proposal as quickly and efficiently as possible here in Parliament , because the current position does not , I think , have the support of this House .
Your proposal will , of course , have to be laid before the Conference of Presidents , which I am afraid took place this morning instead of on Thursday afternoon as usual .
If you had made the proposal this morning , we might have been able to persuade the Conference of Presidents to examine it in today 's meeting but , in any case , it will be recorded in the Minutes and will be examined so that the point can be included in the agenda of one of the forthcoming part-sessions of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I must stand up for my honourable friend .
He could not have raised it this morning , because the Minutes are not approved until the afternoon .
But I wanted to say something quite different .
As you can see from yesterday 's Minutes , there was no Question Time and yet the sitting ended at 10.20 p.m. , i.e. considerably earlier than planned .
So there would have been time enough for Question Time .
I know you will probably say that the decision would have been taken by the Conference of Presidents , but the Bureau - and I should like to ask you to convey as much to the Bureau - is responsible for keeping to the Rules of Procedure . And it states quite clearly in the Rules of Procedure that there must be one Question Time during each of the twelve plenary sessions in Strasbourg - at least that is how I understand it .
That is a parliamentary right and it is non-negotiable .
Hence , cancelling Question Time to the Council and Commission this week was , in my eyes , both an infringement of our fundamental parliamentary rights and an infringement of the Rules of Procedure , despite the fact that there was time enough .
This afternoon we have just one more debate .
So we could easily have held a topical and urgent debate this afternoon , but that too has been cancelled .
There has been a coup in the Côte d 'Ivoire .
We are due to debate it on 9 October , when it will already be history .
I urge you to organise Parliament 's work differently from the way in which it has been organised this afternoon and this week .
I feel that your comment should be relayed to the President - I will bring the matter before the President as a first port of call rather than referring it to the Conference of Presidents - so that it receives careful consideration .
It is true that we usually follow the practice you have described of holding one part-session per month , and this month there have been two part-sessions .
In any case , I feel that your comment is well-founded and that there needs to be reflection on the matter , on the part of our President first of all .
( The Minutes were approved )
The next item is the oral question ( O-0040 / 02- B5-0254 / 02 ) by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , to the Commission on the action taken by the Commission on the MHP ( Multimedia Home Platform ) .
Mr President , Mr Posselt may have plenty of time , but I have to leave as I am booked on a flight departing from Frankfurt at 3.30 p.m.
Tomorrow I shall be speaking at a conference in Greece on this very subject .
I apologise in advance to the Commissioner , and I will be much briefer than the chairman of our committee might have been , had he been here .
Normally our colleague Mrs Junker would have replaced him , but she has been unwell and in hospital .
I am sure the House would wish her well and a speedy recovery .
I must declare an interest as a director of a television company that will certainly be involved in digital broadcasting and the broadband communication field - though probably long after I have ceased to have any connection with it .
Would the Commissioner like me to repeat Mr Rocard 's question ?
And will the Commissioner be replying to the debate as a whole at the end ?
The Commissioner is scheduled to speak immediately after your speech , Mr Whitehead .
Mr President , I would like to say a few words about the reason for this question and for its urgency .
Essentially it concerns the pace at which we will be able to open a full and proper debate on the standards for a single MHP , were we to have one .
The Commissioner will , I think , be saying in his reply today when the necessary standards are going to be introduced and published .
The reason for the urgency is that this subject also relates very much to the ongoing debate about media concentration and to development in the field of broadband communications , particularly in the light of what is happening in television and broadcasting at the moment .
In my own Member State we have had ambitious plans , aiming to have the most competitive broadband system in the developed world by 2005 .
However , there have been stumbles along the way to the intended creation of a real competitive market for digital broadcasting and towards a measured advanced analogue switch-off .
That serves as a warning to many of us - certainly those in the Committee on Culture , which is unanimous in the view that I am expressing - that the consumer and the citizen need to benefit from an open and wide debate , taking some account of the problems we have had in past attempts at regulation , as well as of those that we face now .
There need to be clear markers on the ways in which a system of non-discriminatory interconnection and oversight of the gateways of broadband broadcasting and other systems can be operated in the public interest .
I am painfully aware of the fact that one of the first attempts to set standards for early satellite broadcasting came adrift because the most powerful broadcasters in the field at the time - and they are still there today , but stronger and more powerful - deliberately decided to bypass these standards and to go their own way .
With effective use of the market and less advanced technology , they were able effectively to end that first attempt at common standards .
We do not want to make that mistake again , and I believe that in this situation we want to know how we are proceeding .
I would ask the Commissioner to indicate how the European Union as a whole can take an active role , so that the operators of APIs are encouraged and helped to come together .
He must know of the suspicions in this regard and precisely where they originate .
The APIs are likely to be repeating in some ways what happened in the debate about conditional access and the gateways for satellite broadcasting .
Many - particularly in my country would say that you do not need to have a single mandated standard , and that it would be better to encourage the APIs to come together .
For the sceptics who believe that it would be very much against some of their interests to do so , and it has to be acknowledged that we would then be gambling everything on a strategy which some of the big operators , once again , would not want to cooperate with .
How would the Commissioner square the need for competition that guarantees plurality with the technical advances which - according to those who operate it and profit by it - will come from the unregulated market ?
I do not believe that we can take this matter further without a proper consideration not just of the technical debate but also of the way in which monopolies are currently developing .
Mr Rocard 's questions , I hope , will take the debate further and I will at least be able to listen to the Commissioner in the time available to me .
I do apologise again for the fact that I have to leave before the conclusion of this debate , which I am taking part in , as you can see , at very short notice .
We would like to join you , Mr Whitehead , in wishing Mrs Junker a speedy recovery .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your detailed reply to the question put by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which has been considering how we can find a way of guaranteeing a free flow of information and freedom of choice for viewers in the digital era .
How can we achieve this objective ?
No further debate is needed , we held our debate when we passed a resolution on the telecommunications package and , more particularly , on the framework directive .
Today , and this is why we asked the question , we wanted the Commission to tell us what it can do to help implement the resolutions we passed then .
And I am grateful because I think the Commission 's statements have pointed to a constructive way forward here .
However , I should like to reiterate that we have three basic resolutions .
First , open interfaces , so-called APIs are not enough ; these open interfaces need to be widely accessible , i.e. they must be interoperable .
That is the objective we decided on together in the framework directive .
Secondly , we decided that the Member States should promote the introduction of interoperable technology .
Thirdly , we decided that we had until July 2004 for this voluntary procedure .
Parliament is pushing for action in order to bring about a voluntary , user-friendly solution which also guarantees real freedom of choice and pluralism .
For that , as you announced today , Commissioner , we need the technology , the standards which meet these requirements , to be published .
There is a standard which has already been licensed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute , which is responsible for the standards , namely MHP , which is why Parliament 's demand is perfectly clear in the resolution we are voting on today .
What we want to do is promote the technology that incontrovertibly meets the requirements .
Hence the demand and the call in the resolution for the Member States to submit an action plan as quickly as possible - we are saying by the end of this year - as to how this objective can be achieved , so that we have real results by July 2004 .
So , as you see - and my thanks here to all my honourable friends in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport and in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy who helped here - we refer to the resolution and voluntary implementation of this resolution , but in the time specified and for the purpose specified .
That is the point of this resolution .
We trust that we have the agreement and support of the Commission and the Member States , in the interest of our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your statements today ; for us they are a really important step forward in the joint voluntary procedure , as Ruth Hieronymi has pointed out .
We have not raised the question of comprehensive interoperability in the telecommunications directive , but we know that it is of huge importance to Europe , which sets standards in media policy .
The Commission and the regulators , like the European Parliament , were not perhaps decisive enough in the early days .
But we are now , because time is running out .
The summer of 2004 will be here before we know it .
Let us call it guidance that we need in this voluntary procedure ; what our institutions are waiting for and what we are jointly calling for is a clear media policy message .
We have mentioned a single standard .
We have consistently avoided the word simple .
We do not want to jump the gun .
But this is not jumping the gun , it is being logical .
As my honourable friend , Mrs Hieronymi said , we could have set one standard that speaks this common language , a single language , in the MHP .
We need more clear political signals here .
We opted for a single system for mobile telephones and we should do the same here and now .
Before the industry invests any more and we have various other APIs which cannot talk to each other as we would like , because the more economic facts , figures and data there are on the table , the harder it will be for politicians to intervene directly here .
This common voluntary procedure needs clear signals from us .
Again I read a quotation in a technical journal recently in which you pointed out that the Commission can lay down binding European standards here if appropriate freedom of choice for our citizens and interoperability are not achieved by 2004 .
I do not think it will come to that .
We should be able to find a joint solution before then .
We need to meet each other half way .
A large majority of market players are in favour of MHP and we should say so clearly .
I think that is the answer expected of us .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be participating in this debate , not as a member of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport but as one of the rapporteurs on the electronic communications package and a member both of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I should just like to say to colleagues from the Committee on Culture who are present that this is not an issue for that committee alone .
It would be good if they encouraged more participation in their work within Parliament .
This question was developed entirely within their committee .
I am glad to have been able to work with many colleagues and to make a contribution .
However , there is a much wider range of issues at stake here .
Firstly , I sense a perception that this whole idea about a multimedia home platform ( MHP ) is somehow a silver bullet , a magic cure that will , in one sweep , create universal accessibility for digital television .
Mrs Echerer gave us a hint of that just now .
That is far from the reality .
It is not like mobile telephony ; it is not like introducing a GSM standard , because we already have digital television systems in the market , delivering services that consumers want to quite a high interactive standard .
In my own country nine million people already have systems operating under other standards than MHP .
Indeed , the final standard - the full interactive standard - for MHPs has not even been published , and yet colleagues here want to rush ahead and standardise it .
That is not realistic .
I also find a lack of realism about the whole idea that somehow we want to impose a particular business model on broadcasting .
This resolution contains a rather unnecessary attack on vertical organisation and my group , and I hope Parliament , will reject that element .
As the Commissioner said earlier , this is an issue on which I and other Members have worked in connection with the electronics communications package .
We have put competitive instruments in place to stop vertical operators from abusing their dominant position in the marketplace .
There are also must-carry obligations that we expect member governments to enforce .
The first thing we should be saying to the Commission is that we want them to be enforced .
They are critical .
It is not up to us to enforce a particular business model .
We are not there to do that .
On the question of application interfaces and the technology , the key word is ' interoperability ' .
It is not a single standard , and just having a single standard does not mean you automatically get simple authoring or interoperability .
We have three mediums in the United Kingdom already - cable , terrestrial digital - a powerful access for people to get onto the digital system - and satellite .
Each of those has a different interface .
The Commission needs to encourage what I call a toolkit for digital authors .
That will allow digital authors to come on and have a common set of principles within which they can develop programmes for any platform .
That is the sort of practical thing the Commission needs to work on .
It certainly needs to monitor how MHP is developing and to see whether that needs further encouragement .
However , we are already well down the road to the digital revolution already , and the sort of interference that is being implied by some colleagues here - I am pleased to say not in the resolution - will not help the way forward .
We must be realistic about what is going on in the market-place and what consumers are buying now .
Mr President , as the representative of a thriving but also highly endangered media centre - namely Munich - I welcome this question by the Committee on Culture and today 's debate .
I must make one thing quite clear : the European Parliament has a very long tradition in media policy , especially on television issues in Europe .
It dates back to the beginning of the 1980s with the highly prophetic report on European television by the former Culture Minister of Baden-Würtemberg , Professor Hahn , who was MEP for Heidelberg at the time .
It was way ahead of its time , even if some of the proposals made then have long since been overtaken by events .
But in the intervening years , this House has lobbied consistency for European television , through to the telecommunications directive and the Television Without Frontiers directive .
What were the two core elements ?
First , we have stated quite clearly that we want to prevent this necessary , proper and important technology from being abused , by setting unequivocal ethical standards .
And secondly , we have constantly reiterated that this is a question of competition , and not just competition within Europe , but the competitiveness of Europe per se .
Today we can see that this European market stands in increasing danger from non-European suppliers and non-European monopolies .
I therefore take the view that we really do have to go the way proposed today , namely the way of voluntary convergence and harmonisation , but that this should not be used as an excuse for doing nothing .
I therefore emphatically support what Mrs Hieronymi has said .
We really do need a deadline .
We know from the Member States - of which there are presently fifteen but of which there will soon be twenty-five or thirty - that they are not exactly quick off the mark when it comes to action plans .
Having come down in favour of voluntary action , we really should set this deadline for the Member States by the end of this year , as far as submitting action plans is concerned .
Otherwise we will have to come up at the beginning of next year with ways of speeding up the process .
I share the view expressed by Mrs Echerer , that hopefully there will be no need for the Commission to step in with binding proposals and standards , but I fear it may come to that .
I should therefore like to again urge the Member States to submit their action plans by the end of the year .
We need to make it quite clear that we are as concerned about the competitiveness of Europe per se as we are about cultural diversity in Europe , the cultural diversity that makes Europe what it is and - and this too is an important point in this resolution - the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises .
And the challenge here is for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We in the European Parliament see ourselves as the champions of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are perhaps still shying away from a great deal in the dimension facing us .
Commissioner , thank you for your clear and detailed reply , but may I say quite unequivocally that , if the Member States fail to submit their action plans by the end of the year , we shall have to meet again in January in order to discuss how the European Union is to proceed .
Mr President , honourable Members , unlike Mr Posselt , I do not represent the endangered media centre of Munich , I represent the media centre of Cologne .
And if I am not from Cologne itself , then neither is Mr Posselt from Munich itself ; however , as a Rheinlander like Mrs Hieronymi , I have a regional connection just like Mr Posselt .

And the only reason I am standing here talking on cultural policy issues is because I have had to jump into the breach and replace my honourable friend Karin Junker who is ill and whose illness is too serious for her to be here .
So , Mr President , if you hear me making a speech that is completely off the mark , attacking my honourable Christian Democrat friends in the usual battle of principles between left and right , it is because I am not the expert in this particular field that I consider myself to be in other areas .
Thank you for your friendly show of agreement .
Mrs Junker has instructed me to say the following on her behalf : the audiovisual sector is a growth market and a powerful economic factor .
Mr Harbour made it perfectly clear in his speech that this is not just a question of the configuration of the market , it is a question of who on the market is exercising what influence and where .
To give you a statistic : EUR 65 billion is the estimated turnover in the audiovisual sector alone this year in terms of gross domestic product .
And the audiovisual industry is an employment sector , employing 950,000 people .
It is this sector that will regulate access to information for the broad mass of people in the future .
The average person , so Karin Junker tells me , watches 206 minutes ' television a day and listens to the radio for 3.5 hours .
I do not qualify as an average person .
( Applause )
The objective we must work towards , as several honourable Members have explained , is that of a single European API or Application Programming Interface , to give it is proper name .
So just as we have a single mobile telephone system , the so-called GSM system , we need one API and not 15 different APIs in the European Union .
If we want a competitive market , then we need a single system .
Which is why the difference between us and Mr Harbour is easy to explain , because what Mr Harbour has said is precisely the position of someone who insists that isolationism , of an insular nature , will obstruct the creation of this API .
MHP is the only open , interoperable standard which meets the requirements which need to be imposed on this system .
The European Commission should , as the Commissioner has already explained in detail in his reply to the five questions put by Mr Rocard , quickly take the initiative and introduce this standard .
I share Mr Posselt 's view : if the Member States fail to make a move on this issue in time , then we must take the initiative .
The comment that television is the number one source of information does not just hold true for viewers during election broadcasts on the eve of elections in the Federal Republic of Germany ; access to television , access to this democratic , pluralistic information system is a fundamental democratic right of all European citizens and needs to be anchored in the plurality of democracy .
Access must be guaranteed , irrespective of the form of television on offer in the future .
And if the future of television is digital , then access to this digital television system is a basic question of democratic rights , plurality and the freedom of self-determination of our citizens on information matters .
This is the only way of guaranteeing in future that , on the one hand , market suppliers will be able to offer all consumers a complete range and , on the other hand , our citizens the consumers will be able to make use of what is on offer with the greatest possible freedom of choice .
We European Socialists here in this Chamber would like to remind Commissioner Liikanen that he promised to implement a single standard by 2004 .
If the media sector cannot agree on a uniform approach , then we shall go one step further .
As Mr Posselt said and as Mrs Echerer said .
Commissioner , the European Socialists in this Chamber therefore call on you to act as quickly as possible so that we can make progress on one of the fundamental questions for the future of a European information society as quickly as possible , but also in as pluralistic and democratic a manner and , my dear Mr Harbour , as uniformly as possible .
( Applause )
Mr President , seeing as there is so much interest in this issue I cannot pass up the opportunity to comment on the resolution that is to be put to a vote .
I agree fully with the European Parliament that digital television as such , including interactive television , has tremendous potential for extending the reach of the information society .
The Commission is already actively involved in advancing the role of digital television and promoting interoperability .
In particular I would like to mention the eEurope 2005 action plan .
This fully recognises the role of digital television in helping to achieve the Lisbon agenda for instance , as an alternative platform for citizens to receive on-line public services .
Member States are asked to publish switch-over intentions by the end of 2003 .
Next year , the Commission also intends to adopt a communication on digital switch-over .
Another communication , on which we are working now and which should be discussed at the Copenhagen European Council later this year , will analyse remaining barriers to open platforms in digital television and 3D mobile communications .
The answers I have just provided to various parliamentary questions have outlined all the steps we are currently taking regarding interoperability in interactive television .
It is important that interoperability evolves hand-in-hand with the development of the interactive television market .
Given that interoperability in the field of interactive television is covered by the Electronic Communications Framework Directive we should avoid duplicating regulations by also covering this in the Television Without Frontiers Directive .
Together with my colleague , Viviane Reding , we will ensure that complementarity and coherence are maintained between the electronic communications package , dealing with transmission and access issues , and the regulation of contents - for objectives of general interest covered by the Television Without Frontiers Directive , which will be the subject of a review next year .
In conclusion , the Commission welcomes the resolution and calls for the development of digital television and the availability of digital television to the public at large to become a top priority on the political agenda .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wanted to say that I was going to vote against .
I wanted to say it publicly .
You are , of course , within your rights in informing the House of which way you were going to vote , but that does not change the outcome of the vote .
Mr President , I know this does nothing to change the outcome but a great many Members entered the Chamber after the vote .
May I suggest that we also return to fixed , reliable voting times on Thursday afternoons , especially as there are several places where the bell cannot be heard .
I therefore urgently request that the timetable be rescheduled so that the honourable Members know when there is a vote and where there is not .
Mr Posselt , thank you for your first comment , in particular , to the effect that the outcome of the vote is as it stands and cannot be changed .
Mr President , I should like to go one step further than Mr Posselt .
I should like to protest against the fact that the vote is being held now .
According to the agenda , we should be voting at 4.30 p.m. and I can assure you that you cannot hear the bell upstairs in the offices .
I do not know where your office is and whether or not you can hear the bell from there .
We have arranged to vote at 4.30 p.m. and it is wrong to hold the vote now because not everyone in the building has arrived in the Chamber yet .
Mrs Sommer , the Agenda clearly specifies that the vote will take place at 4.30 p.m. or at the end of the debate .
My office is on the twelfth floor and I have to say I found the bell ringing rather a nuisance , since they rang it for 15 minutes without a break today .
That is too much !
Mr President , you have in principle anticipated my point .
Nonetheless , Mr Posselt is right .
We need to discuss Thursday afternoon 's agenda .
I have no wish to gainsay my honourable friend Mr Whitehead , who said at the start of the debate that he had to give his speech and then leave to catch a flight , but to me it is absolutely unbelievable that a Parliament should arrange its schedule to accommodate Members ' flight connections .
We in the Group of the Party of European Socialists shall therefore be discussing this with our Rules of Procedure experts .
Other groups should do likewise , so that we can return to the old schedule for Thursday afternoons .
Otherwise we might as well spare ourselves the effort .
( Applause )
Mr President , I think there are more fundamental questions to be asked following on from what our colleague said .
If you look at the total amount of debating time that we had at September I and II and the fact that we are finishing now , the question is why did we need to have two sittings in September at all ?
It simply is not necessary with the new Rules .
I would ask you Mr President to take back to the Bureau that we are already seeing the highly desirable impact of the Corbett report on the Rules changes .
We need to evaluate how many weeks we need to be working here , because , President , we are desperately short of committee time in this Parliament .
We have a ludicrously small amount of committee time between now and Christmas to deal ...
( Protests from Mr Posselt )
It is true Mr. Posselt , and I will show you the agenda for my committee .
We have a ridiculously small amount of committee time , and we should not be wasting time sitting around here waiting for something to happen , when we could be doing serious political work in Brussels in committee .
Contrary to what Mr. Schulz is saying a true democratic Parliament would have a serious look at its workload and - I thank you for the interruption Mr Posselt - I believe there are many people who agree with me .
Most of them have gone already , because they do not want to waste their time here on Thursday afternoon .
Mr President , at a more mundane level , I should like to support those who are complaining about the change in time of voting in one regard .
When the bell rang - and I did hear it in my office - I looked to the screen to see what was happening .
And what did I see , but my esteemed colleague , Mr Harbour , speaking with great authority on the issue in hand with no indication that the votes were to follow next .
For all I knew , it could have been a fire alarm or something else .
Perhaps the screens could have given us better information about what was coming ?
It was clearly indicated on the screen , Mr Chichester .
There might be something wrong with yours - I do not know - but the time of the vote was clearly displayed on the screen .
Mr President , I can confirm that the votes were indeed announced on the television screens .
And it was thanks to that that I realised it was time to come to the Chamber to vote .
Having said that , I have requested the floor simply in order to say to the British Members that if they think they are wasting their time here and do not have enough time to dedicate to the work of the committees , I suggest that they miss the Brussels sittings .
In that way , we will have enough time in Brussels to work in committee and we will be able to dedicate all our time to the plenum here in Strasbourg until Friday morning .
I believe that would cause no more problems : we would not waste our time and we would be working under very good conditions .
I can see that feelings run high , and rightly so .
If there are no objections , I will give the floor to another two Members who have asked to speak as well , and then we will stop .
Mr President , this is a very naïve discussion by those who are always opposed to Strasbourg .
And just what has been decided ?
More mini plenary sittings have been convened for the next session in Brussels .
In other words , there are a few people who never miss a chance to turn everything against Strasbourg .
There is something , however , which I consider to be far more serious : we were told we could not hold a topical and urgent debate this Thursday because we held one during the first session in September .
Do you seriously believe that questions of world history , urgent questions should depend on whether or not we have the honour of expressing ourselves on current affairs ?
I would have thought it more important to use the time available this afternoon to deal with other urgent topics , which normally go by the board because we never have time for them .
We would have had time today for anyone with any inclination to notice what we should have .
Members of Parliament should be able to speak on important matters when the occasion arises .
Today would have been a perfect opportunity .
I therefore urge that urgent matters be allocated the time needed to ensure that human rights issues are not sacrificed just because a few people are in a hurry to get back to their constituencies .
They can spend hours in their constituencies .
But those who wish to speak because they think it is the right thing to do must have the chance to do so , especially on Thursdays .
Thursdays do not end with a few 4 o 'clock flights ; they should end at 6.30 .


The issue you have raised , Mr Mann , has already been raised just now by Mr Posselt , with great feeling , feeling equal to yours , moreover .
Mr President , I should like to pick up on what Mr Harbour said .
First , my dear Mr Harbour , you are one of those who sets great store by the Treaty and if you read the Treaty , you will see that we have 12 regular plenary sessions a year and that , if necessary , we can hold additional plenary sessions in Brussels .
If we were to take out these six days in the autumn , we would have time for committees , time for week-long surgeries and all the rest , instead of which we could use the time here really profitably .
Secondly , this afternoon 's agenda should have included a topical and urgent debate , for example on the coup in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Today we were told this would be discussed on 9 October .
In other words , the Conference of Presidents decided that this urgent matter should be debated on 9 October , i.e. in a fortnight 's time , instead of this afternoon , when it could have been slotted in without further ado .
Thirdly , there was no Question Time this week , either to the Council or to the Commission .
That , as I said earlier , is a fundamental parliamentary right and the fact that there was no Question Time was a violation of the Rules of Procedure .
My dear Mr Harbour , I am very proud of Question Time ; it is an achievement which mirrors a long parliamentary tradition in Great Britain .
This line of reasoning , which appears to be common to the different groups , is extremely interesting !




Mr President , to return to our same topic of conversation , listening to Mr Harbour , Mr Mann , Mr Posselt and Mrs Grossetête , I now know why group chairman Poettering always looks so pale .
Discussions within the European People 's Party are so lively that it is a pleasure to listen to them .
Perhaps you will invite us into your group one day so that we can share in your joy .
( Applause )
But there is one thing we should learn from the debate , and I address this comment quite pointedly to the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The Corbett reform has been a help , we can see that every lunchtime when it comes to the vote .
We have saved time .
But to save time and then not use it for parliamentary business is wrong .
( Applause )
I therefore think - and we shall be doing as much in the Group of the Party of European Socialists - that both you , Mr Vice-President , in the Bureau , and the groups at the Conference of Presidents should retable the question of the agenda , because if today is anything to go by , we cannot go on like this .
( Applause )
My response is addressed to you , Mr Schultz , and to Mr Harbour and the other Members who mentioned the Bureau .
The agenda is drawn up by your heads of group , by our group chairmen , at the Conference of Presidents .
It is not decided by the Bureau , which has other , less important tasks .
You should therefore reintroduce this debate in discussions within your groups so that the chairmen are informed of the situation which has arisen this afternoon , which , regardless of the different points of view , everyone has found a little odd .
Now , Mr Schultz has issued a challenge and Mr Elles is going to respond to it .

Mr President , on a point of order , firstly as Mr Schulz will well know , as he sees the lively debates in our group which go on in public and in private , we have already attracted one of his members , Mr Balfe , who is a member of our group now .
We welcome any others who wish to cross the floor because we would like to have an overall majority in this Parliament , as we have in the Quaestors !
Secondly , Mr Schulz is quite right that we need to fill up the time .
Perhaps that is why Mr Poettering is looking a little pale , perhaps it is overwork .
As far as time is concerned , while we are in Strasbourg we should use it to full effect , otherwise it just influences the other part-sessions where we then have to do things that we would not otherwise do .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have achieved the goal you set yourselves of continuing until 4 p.m. for it was clear that that was your aim .
Tribute
During the night of 26 and 27 September 2002 , a Senegalese vessel , Le Joola , carrying more than 1 000 people , sank near the Senegalese-Gambian coast .
Now , nearly two weeks later , 476 bodies have been recovered from the sea and 500 remain missing .
On behalf of Parliament , I wrote to express our sincere condolences to President Wade of Senegal and to invite him to convey our condolences to the families of the victims .
It is important today that we should , in a solemn moment of silence , show our respect for the dead and the bereaved and to connect , from the northern hemisphere , with this African tragedy as an act of reassurance and solidarity that the south matters to us .
I ask you to observe one minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Last Sunday , 6 October 2002 , his Royal Highness Prince Claus von Amsburg , husband of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands , died in Amsterdam after a long illness .
Prince Claus committed himself to Dutch society with strength , seriousness , dedication and , when appropriate , with humour .
We are well aware of his dedication to the cause of international development cooperation .
I would like to inform the House and our Dutch colleagues that , on your behalf and on their behalf , I have transmitted our sincere condolences to Her Majesty , Queen Beatrix and to the Dutch people .
The Danish Presidency , represented by Mr Haarder , Minister for European Affairs , has expressed its willingness to make a statement on behalf of the Council on the situation regarding Iraq .
Mr Haarder and the Danish Presidency are stepping into this at short notice .
I want on behalf of Parliament to thank the Council and personally to thank Mr Haarder for doing so .
The first item is the Commission report on the progress made towards enlargement .
These reports were adopted before lunch today by the European Commission .
With the adoption and publication of the accession country reports , we are now one significant step nearer to the creation of a truly continental-scale European Union .
We are entering the final stage of a process which began with such inspiration almost thirteen years ago with the collapse of the Berlin Wall .
Our Member States and not just the accession states must individually and collectively summon up the necessary political will to overcome the last remaining obstacles .
In this House we are determined to use our best endeavours to ensure that insofar as we can make a contribution , this House will contribute to the removal of any remaining obstacles between now and the Copenhagen Summit in December .
This enlargement represents for Europe an extraordinary and unparalleled act of reconciliation , healing and opportunity .
It is the first time in millennia in our old continent that , by the free wills of free and sovereign people , we will be coming together neither forced at the point of a sword nor through the barrel of a gun nor any other oppressive force but by the use of reason , conviction and shared values .
Today 's debate is an important staging-post in this exercise .
I would like in particular to pay a tribute to the European Commission and its services and to all of those in leadership positions and in the public services of accession states who have engaged in such extraordinary work of transformation .
The Commission will remain central to the management of this exercise right to the end .
We are coming to a time when we , the political class , must undertake our political responsibilities to reach out to our publics in terms of the calculus of consent .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great emotion that I take the floor to speak to this House today .
When I took office , I made a commitment - before this very House - to make enlargement the top priority of my Commission , to make my Commission the Commission of enlargement , because in enlarging the European Union we will be consolidating an area of peace , security and democracy throughout the European continent .
Three years later , I am standing here before you once again to tell you that this commitment has been honoured .
The Commission has done its job and kept its promise .
The Commission has carried out a careful study of the progress made by the candidate countries and I can now announce the names of the countries with which we recommend the Council should conclude negotiations by the end of 2002 .
I will now , if I may , read out the key points of the recommendations we adopted today .
' Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , the Slovak Republic and Slovenia fulfil the political criteria .
Bearing in mind the progress achieved by these countries , the track record in implementing their commitments , and taking into account their preparatory work in progress and foreseen , the Commission considers that these countries will have fulfilled the economic and acquis criteria and will be ready for membership from the beginning of 2004 .
The Commission therefore recommends to conclude the accession negotiations with these countries by the end of this year with the aim to sign the Accession Treaty in spring 2003 . '
In view of Bulgaria 's and Romania 's progress over the last year , the Commission notes the date - 2007 - that those countries have set themselves for accession .
The Commission will do everything necessary to ensure that this objective can be achieved .
Through constitutional reform and a series of legislative packages , Turkey has made considerable progress as regards the Copenhagen criteria .
However , further efforts are needed .
The Commission is therefore recommending that the European Union give more support and allocate more resources to Turkey 's pre-accession preparations .
To this end , the Commission will propose a revised Accession Partnership and step up legislative scrutiny .
Turkey is encouraged to pursue its reform process and so advance its candidacy for European Union membership .
Ladies and gentleman , just 13 years ago , Berlin was still divided by the wall of shame .
The wall has been pulled down and Germany has been reunified .
This re-establishment of freedom has allowed us to restore the historical unity of the peoples of Europe .
Our common destiny is once again to build a common future , a future built on the fundamental values we share of peace , democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and the protection of minorities .
In 1993 , the Copenhagen European Council offered the countries of Central and Eastern Europe the chance to join the European Union .
Since then , these countries have gone through a huge process of change , moving peacefully from dictatorship to stable , participatory democracy .
Their achievements are extraordinary .
In the space of a decade , we have seen the holding of dozens of transparent , democratic national , regional and local elections , the adoption of thousands of laws and regulations giving shape to the new democracies and incorporating the Community acquis into national law , the training of tens of thousands of civil servants and magistrates to interpret and apply the new legislation and the participation of hundreds of thousands of elected officials , specialists and members of professional organisations in EU-financed training and cooperation projects in order to learn about our policies .
All 12 countries satisfy the political criteria laid down at Copenhagen and democratic institutions are stronger everywhere .
Lastly , the overall performance of the economies of the ten first-wave countries is gradually improving : their growth rates are higher than ours , their inflation rates and deficits are being managed and kept under control and direct foreign investment is flooding in . This proves that the markets have confidence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we adopted today also highlights the remaining deficiencies in some sectors , for some countries .
These failings have to be remedied before accession : the Commission will work with the authorities of these countries to ensure that the problems are resolved in good time .
Our concerns continue to be centred on the administrative capacity of these countries and their justice systems , which are undermined by a lack of financial and , above all , human resources .
We have endeavoured to address these problems through a EUR 250 million support programme .
This programme is starting to bear fruit .
Another weakness we have identified is inadequate preparation for implementation of the acquis in a number of crucial areas , namely customs services , taxation , veterinary and plant-health controls , the institutions managing and supervising agricultural policy and , lastly , the departments in charge of managing and controlling the Structural Funds .
I should also mention a further two extremely serious problems : the corruption affecting many of these countries , with a few exceptions , and the shameful issue of the trafficking of human beings .
This does not mean that nothing has been done in these fields .
On the contrary , a great deal has been achieved already and the operation is almost complete in some countries .
However , our report stresses the scrupulous monitoring the Commission has undertaken to conduct up until accession .
We shall publish a final evaluation six months before the date of accession .
To cope with the complexities of enlargement , the Commission will take all the necessary measures to reorganise its departments , increasing monitoring and support for the new Member States after accession and providing pre-accession aid for the countries that will follow those covered by today 's recommendation .
Mr President , our objective is still to sign the Accession Treaty in spring 2003 .
We are therefore entering the final stages of the process .
In this regard , the Commission hopes that the Brussels European Council of 24 and 25 October will take the necessary decisions on the chapters still open , namely agriculture , financial issues and institutions .
In this way , we can negotiate and conclude these chapters before Copenhagen .
As regards Bulgaria and Romania , the Commission will put forward proposals for an enhanced pre-accession strategy in good time for adoption by the Copenhagen Council .
Then for Turkey , which does not yet meet the accession criteria , the Commission will propose an enhanced pre-accession strategy with extra financial resources in the new year .
The Treaty of Nice is still crucial and cannot be sidestepped .
I therefore place my confidence in the Irish electorate , which will be voting on the Treaty again in a few days .
I hope that the achievement of the historic objective of unifying our continent will not be jeopardised by this vote .
Lastly , let me focus on the issue of Cyprus .
Let us hope for real progress towards reunification of the island , even though the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council do not make it a precondition for entry .
The Commission wants a reunited Cyprus to join the EU and believes this is the best solution for all .
In recommending that the Council conclude negotiations speedily with Cyprus , the Commission is issuing a fresh appeal to the parties concerned to work towards reunification of the island .
We call upon everyone to support the process now under way under the auspices of the UN Secretary-General so that a solution can be found before the year 's end .
The Seville European Council has already affirmed that the European Union ' would accommodate the terms of such a comprehensive settlement in the Treaty of Accession in line with the principles on which the European Union is founded . '
Ladies and gentlemen , all too often , I hear talk about the risks and costs of enlargement .
I believe we can and must discuss this calmly and openly , for the costs have been analysed in detail and they are in line with the resources available .
However , we should also - and above all - be telling the public about the benefits of enlargement , which are stability in Europe , unification of an artificially divided continent and the creation of the biggest single market in the world .
Enlargement will unite us with economies that have lower incomes than the present Member States but which have greater growth potential .
The situation was exactly the same in 1985 , when the accession negotiations with Spain and Portugal were concluded .
Now , nobody could doubt the validity and farsightedness of that decision , although at the time it was controversial .
Enlargement is the new front line of the European project .
It will give impetus to trade , investment , education and research . And to economic growth .
As regards the costs of enlargement , we know that they are sustainable until 2006 because they are included in the Berlin financial perspective .
I shall not hide the fact that the accession of ten countries will entail a significant financial burden , within the framework I have described , but this will be more than fully offset by the benefits brought by the consolidation of enlargement .
Enlargement is not just about economics , however . It is important primarily for political and ethical reasons .
Enlargement is the culmination of the process of European integration : the process that has given us half a century of peace and prosperity must be extended to the whole continent .
Consider the recent events in the Balkans , where there have been thousands of deaths , whole communities have been forced to flee as refugees and entire cities have been destroyed .
Enlargement is our political masterpiece since it will prevent such things happening .
From this broader and more accurate perspective , the cost of enlargement is very slight compared with the cost of non-enlargement .
In the coming months , we need to conduct a realistic and positive information campaign . We must touch the hearts and minds of our citizens .
Enlargement has been made possible by great determination , tremendous political courage and a farsighted vision of history .
Moreover , it will be a test of our commitment to our principles , for accession will force us to change as well as bringing big changes for the new Member countries .
This is the task of the Convention .
The institutional reforms that come out of it will have to be just as courageous and farsighted as our endeavours have been .
It must be understood that , without radical , intelligent reform of the institutions , the success of enlargement could turn out to be unsustainable . Indeed , the new Europe needs a clear , stable geographical shape and institutional framework that all our citizens can understand .
In other words , the time has come for a European constitution . A constitution that guarantees the rights of all the citizens and the role of the Member States .
A constitution that preserves cultural and linguistic diversity whilst reinforcing solidarity . A constitution that completes the creation of a democratic European Union , a genuine union of peoples and States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to conclude by looking beyond the impending enlargement , beyond its historical and geographical limits .
We are inviting the new countries to join our Union because we want peace and stability across the whole continent .
However , this process must not result in new barriers being erected just when we are trying to break down the old ones .
We must keep this in mind when building new relations with our neighbours after enlargement .
Here , I am thinking of Russia , Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova . They will be the new neighbours of the enlarged Union , which will one day extend to the Balkans region too .
Focusing on our new European neighbours , however , should not make us any less receptive to the ever-increasing expectations of the Mediterranean countries , expectations that we have not yet managed to fulfil .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the process of European integration that started half a century ago has earned us the admiration and respect of the entire world .
We alone are building a genuine , practical model for managing globalisation , if only across our continent .
This globalisation is a democratic globalisation with a human dimension , a globalisation in which all citizens have an equal role .
Our enlargement is an example to the whole world and a visionary act : it unites the whole continent for the first time and it makes us protagonists of history once more .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's recommendation by the Commission that the negotiations on accession should be concluded with ten candidates by the end of this year is perhaps the most important staging-post on the road towards the completion of what is currently the major project on the European Union 's agenda .
There is only one justification for our recommendation today - the ten countries have earned it !
The ten countries have succeeded , through their own efforts , in meeting the incredibly difficult and challenging criteria for accession to the European Union .
I attach great importance to the comment that the Commission did not see it as its task to justify a desirable political accession scenario ' after the fact ' .
What we did see as our task was to provide you , the Members of the European Parliament , the Council and the Member States , with neutral and objective information showing which countries are ready and prepared for accession and the conditions under which this will take place .
The progress reports were not produced on the basis of political stipulations .
The Commission staff were given just one instruction : they were not to conceal , omit or prettify anything , and they were to indicate clearly where problems still exist .
In our reports , we identify the problems by name .
However , the key point here is that we have not identified a single problem which could not be solved by the end of 2003 .
Please do not be misled by the sometimes very critical tone .
Of course , the issues which have still to be resolved must be put into the context of what has already been achieved , and if we look at what has been achieved in the accession countries over the last ten years in the transformation process and the preparations for accession , I must say that the progress made by the people in these countries is a truly magnificent and historic achievement which deserves our greatest respect .
The Commission has developed a methodology which allows us to determine , as precisely as possible , where we are and what has still to be done .
The Commission has also made a number of proposals concerning the ongoing monitoring of the commitments undertaken and the introduction of a safeguard clause in the Accession Treaty .
Let me explain this in a little more detail .
First of all , I must point out that our recommendation naturally contains something of a prognostic element .
After all , the new Member States are not obliged to meet the criteria for membership today ; they must do so at the time of accession . In other words , what we have to do today is to assess whether the remaining tasks can be completed within the timeframe .
This assessment is not based on a feeling or mood ; it is based on sound knowledge of the pace and quality of the preparation process in these countries .
We will continue to apply all the tried and tested monitoring instruments after the conclusion of the negotiations and the conclusion of the Treaty , in order to ensure that all the commitments undertaken are fulfilled .
We propose that for the first two years after accession , an entirely new clause should be introduced into the Treaty , one which has never appeared in any other enlargement treaty to date . This clause will ensure that rapid and targeted measures can be taken if it becomes apparent , within the first two years of accession , that the internal market is disrupted in any area , or if policies are not working properly in any area relating to the internal market .
In this context , the phrase ' internal market ' should be interpreted in the broadest possible terms ; in other words , it relates to all policies with a cross-border dimension .
I do not believe that this clause is necessary because the candidate countries pose a risk - they do not . I believe that this clause is necessary because this enlargement is quite unlike any other we have previously experienced and - if we are honest - we cannot tell precisely which adjustment problems are likely to occur within the first two years .
This is why it is necessary to have an instrument enabling us to respond quickly and flexibly .
I also think it is necessary in terms of the public debate in our Member States .
Before we get to the stage of being able to welcome Members from ten new countries to our plenary here , several important steps must be taken .
First of all , the Treaty of Nice must be ratified , and I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to the voters of Ireland and ask them to consider , when they make their decision , that what is at stake here is the European future of nations in Europe . What is at stake is the European future of nations which did not voluntarily dissociate themselves from the European unification process , but which were forced to do so , which were forced to live separated from us behind the Iron Curtain , and which now wish to belong , once and for all , to the family of democratic nations in Europe
( Applause )
Secondly , at the European Council meeting in Brussels in a few days ' time , the Member States must come to an agreement on the common negotiating positions which are still open .
I was a little concerned , when returning from the Council of Economics and Finance Ministers in Luxembourg yesterday , about the complete lack of movement there .
The Member States too must now be urged to show the necessary flexibility and willingness to compromise .
If the timeframe is to be adhered to , we need to reach an agreement in Brussels on the financial package and institutional issues .
Thirdly , the candidate countries must continue their work and continue their efforts . In doing so , they will undoubtedly be heartened by the Commission 's recommendations today and by our debate here this afternoon .
Finally , let me say a few words about Bulgaria and Romania .
I am gratified by the progress made by these two countries .
We did not decide that Bulgaria and Romania would not be included in the first round of enlargements .
It is their own decision .
They said that they wanted to be part of the process in 2007 , and all the commitments which they have undertaken during the negotiations relate to 2007 , not 2004 .
The Commission solemnly pledges to do all it can to help these two countries achieve this goal .
The current enlargement process will not be complete until Bulgaria and Romania also have Members representing them in this House .
( Applause )
Finally , let me comment briefly on Turkey as well .
I take issue with the people who say that the Helsinki strategy was a mistake .
On the contrary , it is apparent that since the Helsinki strategy came into effect around 18 months ago , Turkey has made more progress on human rights , democracy and the rule of law during these 18 months than in the previous five decades .
We should - and we do - recognise this fact .
( Applause )
Turkey , however , could not be expected to fulfil all the political criteria for entry to the accession negotiations within these 18 months .
I do not wish to imply any criticism of Turkey when I say that it has not yet fulfilled all the criteria .
On the contrary , I think it is remarkable that Turkey has achieved so much in such a short time . This is why Turkey must be encouraged to continue along this road , and the Commission will put forward suitable proposals to ensure that Turkey can continue along this road and the door remains open for Turkey .
Let us not be distracted from the real task , however , namely to reform the country in such a way that it is ready for EU accession .
Let us not be distracted from this task , and let us not enter into a fruitless statistical debate whose outcome is bound to be unproductive .
Today 's outcomes will be received in many countries of Europe with great interest , excitement and hope .
Our task now is to ensure that Europe 's citizens do not just understand but wholeheartedly endorse and welcome this project . There is still considerable scepticism surrounding this issue in many Member States , and this should not take us unawares .
My impression is that the scepticism is often greatest in those areas where there is a serious lack of information .
It is extremely important to ensure , over the coming months , that we supply people with information , information and more information and enable them to use the range of information productively .
If this does not take place , we may have a very , very nasty surprise in a whole range of countries just as enlargement becomes the central issue on the domestic agenda , if people turn round to us - after the Treaty is concluded , at the very latest - and say : ' Why weren 't we told about this ?
Why did you do this without us ? '
Involving the citizens is the key task facing us now .
( Applause )
Mr President , the train that began its journey in Helsinki is now only two stations from its destination .
It is very gratifying indeed that it has been possible to push ahead with the Commission 's progress report to such an extent that it has appeared a month earlier than last year 's , and it is also gratifying that we now have a complete basis for making decisions as to which countries are ready to conclude the enlargement negotiations .
To begin with , I should like to thank the President of the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen for the commitment and the energy they have shown right from the start in carrying out this historic task .
I followed their efforts from my position here in Parliament as soon as they took up their offices .
It has been a pleasure to note and observe their commitment , which also shines through here in Parliament today .
We have been given an objective account of the candidate countries ' level of preparation .
The Commission has come to the view that ten countries are ready to conclude the negotiations .
They fulfil the Copenhagen criteria , and it is considered that , before the date of accession in 2004 , they will be able to fulfil the economic criterion , as well as the criterion of being able to implement the acquis communautaire .
On certain points , there is a need for further efforts with regard to administrative capacity , and the Commission proposes that consideration continue to be given to the candidate countries ' preparations for membership .
The recommendation to conclude the negotiations with ten countries is to be debated at the Brussels European Council in 14 days ' time , and discussions regarding the final decision are to take place at the Copenhagen European Council in two months ' time .
According to the Commission , Bulgaria and Romania have made good progress since the last reports , but are still not so far forward that the negotiations can be concluded .
As is well known , it was decided in Seville that special efforts should be made on behalf of these two countries , and a decision on this matter too needs to be made in Copenhagen .
The Commission notes that Turkey has made great progress towards fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria .
This is a gratifying development that must be maintained .
It is also noted that there is still some way to go , and Turkey is therefore being encouraged to carry out further reforms and to implement reforms already adopted so that it continues to improve its prospects of membership .
With regard to the Seville conclusions , Copenhagen will be the decisive moment in the development of the relationship between the EU and Turkey .
In the run-up to the Brussels European Council , we must not now pre-empt the decisions to be made in Copenhagen .
With regard to Cyprus , the Commission fully supports the EU 's efforts .
The Commission calls upon all the parties involved , and Turkey in particular , to take active steps to bring about a solution before the conclusion of Cyprus 's negotiations for accession to the EU .
The conclusions from the Helsinki European Council still form the point of departure for adopting a position on the issue of Cyprus 's accession .
Finally , I want to endorse what the President of the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen have said about the Irish vote , and I want to concur with the words of the President of the Commission about the risks and costs of not enlarging the EU , for the risks and costs of non-enlargement are much greater .
That , of course , was why the track was laid in Helsinki .
That is why the train is now travelling on towards peace , democracy and prosperity throughout our continent .
The next station is Brussels and the last station is Copenhagen . The Danish train drivers are ready , and the whistle has sounded today .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important debate since it concerns the greatest challenge facing the European Union , namely the accession of ten countries in a first round of enlargement .
I therefore find it especially regrettable that the substance of today 's debate was revealed in the European press some days ago , and I would ask you , Mr Prodi , to ensure that in future , Parliament is informed first , and then the European public .
I think this is the right way round if a debate like this is to be meaningful .
Notwithstanding this criticism , however , which is meant very seriously , I would like to say a word of thanks to the Commission : to its President , Romano Prodi , to the Commissioner responsible , Günter Verheugen , but also to the previous Commission under Jacques Santer , together with Commissioner Hans van den Broek , for after all , the present Commission did not start from scratch ; it built on the work begun by the Santer Commission .
I would like to voice my warm thanks to all concerned for their great work .
( Applause )
We are in broad agreement with the conclusions and also with the listing of the ten countries recommended for accession by the Commission , but there is a massive amount of work ahead of us .
The accession countries - as has been stated , and for which we express our great respect - after 50 years of communism , communist mismanagement , communist tyranny and dictatorship , have made massive efforts , and this deserves the greatest credit and our greatest respect .
However , there is still a massive amount of work to be done , not only by the accession candidates but also by the European Union itself .
I think that what is important now is to ensure that we do not shatter the confidence vested in us by the accession countries . Anyone who now sets new accession conditions for the Central European countries , Malta and Cyprus - for example , by demanding reform of the European agricultural policy first of all - anyone who demands this is sinning against the accession countries , because it undermines their confidence in the European Union and its pledges .
This is why we must now honour the confidence vested in us by the accession countries and not impose any new conditions .
Poland is without doubt the most important accession country , for its population - almost 39 million - is larger than in the other nine candidate countries .
We must also remember today that this great transformation in Europe would not have been possible without Poland , without Solidarity - and let me also say this , lest we forget - without the great intellectual power of the Pole who occupies the papal throne , John Paul II , who told the Polish people : ' Don 't be afraid ! '
This was the basis of Europe 's intellectual and political transformation .
( Applause from the right )
We must never forget this !
It was also the basis on which Germany could be united twelve years ago .
Without Poland , this would not have been possible .
We therefore hope that at the negotiations , Poland will be able - also in the coming weeks and months - to master the difficult problems still arising in the accession process , and we support the Commission with its proposals on direct payments .
There are several unresolved questions to which we would welcome answers from the Czech Government .
What is the Czech Government 's position on the question whether , for example , legislation still exists in the Czech Republic which does not treat all persons in the European Union equally ?
Is there discrimination here ?
It would be helpful if the Czech Government provided an answer to this question .
We hope that Bulgaria and Romania , which are not part of this enlargement round , will continue to make progress so that we can close negotiations with these two countries within a foreseeable timeframe as well .
We endorse the Commission 's position in declining to give Turkey a date for the start of negotiations .
On behalf of our group , I would like to point out that we have divergent views on the issue of Turkish membership of the European Union .
It is important to state this clearly , and it is the same in other groups .
However , we are united in our view that Turkey is a key strategic partner for us , and that we must always maintain our links with that country in a close and well-functioning partnership .
There is the problem with Kaliningrad , and I recommend , as a matter of urgency , that in overcoming this difficult problem , we prioritise the issue of security , and also Lithuania 's sovereignty , which we must not call into question .
On this basis , flexible arrangements with Russia must be found .
I also warn against the creation of a new Iron Curtain , for example between Poland and Ukraine ; in the region around Lviv in Poland and in other areas , there are close regional and family ties with Ukraine and we must arrive at flexible arrangements which guarantee security but also enable people to meet .
The President of the Commission referred to the Mediterranean region .
I have just visited Morocco , and there is great concern there that as a result of enlargement , we Europeans will forget about the Mediterranean .
The Mediterranean region is our neighbour just as much as the accession countries in the heart of Europe , and I recommend that we take our cooperation with the Mediterranean as seriously as we take our relations with Eastern Europe .
( Applause )
If twenty years ago , someone had asked : ' We are offering you the chance for Poland and other countries to join the European Union - what are you prepared to pay for this ? ' We would have been willing to pay any financial price at all , and so I say to you : Let us all be happy that today , the accession of Poland and the other countries to the European Union , to our community of values , to democracy , the rule of law and a social market economy is possible , and let us welcome our colleagues warmly when , as we hope , they are elected to this House at the next European elections in 2004 .
This is a great day for Europe , for we have a shared and , it is to be hoped , a good future ahead for our European continent .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Socialist Group supports the Commission 's proposals which have been outlined today .
Today is an historic occasion . In many ways it marks another stage down the road begun by Willy Brandt when he was mayor of Berlin .
Before dwelling on the historic nature of today , I would like to acknowledge that it has only been possible to get where we are thanks to the determination of the Commission .
When President Prodi launched the new fast-track method of negotiation , it radically changed the enlargement negotiations .
I would also like to pay tribute to Commissioner Verheugen , who has pursued his brief with great determination and with a unique ability to master the detail while holding on to the big picture .
He has also been a model of transparency and openness .
Enlargement is first and foremost a security issue .
It is about admitting countries to a political and economic system which has brought peace , stability and prosperity to countries which spent much of modern history trying to destroy each other .
In our discussions about the details , we must not lose sight of that fact .
We have it in our power to reunite Europe and to create a genuinely Europe-wide Union dedicated to building stability and prosperity , not only for its own citizens , but also beyond its borders .
Inevitably , as enlargement approaches reality , the voices of doubters are beginning to be heard .
Some say enlargement is too costly .
To those I would point out that in the period of 2000 to 2006 , we will spend one thousandth of one percent of the EU 's GDP on the candidate countries .
We will spend ten percent of what Germany has spent on its reunification .
What we spend is a fraction of the cost of defending Western Europe during the Cold War .
The real question is - what is the cost if we do not enlarge the European Union ?
What will it cost in terms of the social , political and economic dislocation which will inevitably follow ?
Some say they are in favour of enlargement but not yet .
They say we must wait for the reform of this or that policy .
But politics is not like that .
We do not sit around waiting for perfection .
Enlargement is a dynamic process which itself will drive forward the process of reform within the EU .
Enlargement is actually the solution to the problems which concern our voters - the concerns about crime and drugs , about the environment , about jobs and a better future for our children .
We have a window of opportunity to enlarge .
If we miss this moment , it will be lost for a generation and the cause of reform will be lost with it .
Enlargement and reform go side-by-side .
I do not wish to underestimate the very serious issues that must be addressed .
The core of the EU is the Single Market and there can be no weakening of it .
There can be no question of admitting countries that cannot or will not enforce the aquis in this area , particularly in relation to state aids , competition policy and respect for intellectual property .
There can be no question of admitting countries whose judicial system is corrupt or inept , or whose administrative capacity is not up to the task ahead .
There can be no question of admitting countries unable or unwilling to take effective action to combat crime or the traffic of people and drugs .
That is why I welcome the safeguards that the Commission has announced . I welcome in particular the economic safeguards in relation to the internal market which we have never had before , and also the commitment to have a further progress report six months before the date of accession .
If there are problems then , we and the Council must have the courage of our convictions to act effectively in those circumstances .
There are , of course , serious issues to be addressed in relation to agriculture .
Firstly , there have been profound delays in the implementation of SAPARD .
Money must be spent before accession to strengthen structures in the rural areas and to avoid a rural exodus and mass unemployment .
The central eastern-European countries will have problems co-financing SAPARD because they will have to incorporate budget resources which they had set aside for 2000-2001 into their budgets for 2002-2003 .
Therefore , the Commission must take appropriate measures to ensure that SAPARD funds are not lost because of late implementation .
The agricultural sector and the interests of the rural population are important to both the EU and the candidate countries .
That is why we need a balanced solution to financing agriculture which does not offload the costs onto the weakest .
Therefore , we strongly support the proposals Commissioner Fischler made in January because they are fully compatible with the Berlin Agreements and the roadmap for enlargement .
In discussing further reform in the CAP , we must ensure that the accession countries are involved in an advisory capacity as soon as possible .
We must have reform before Agenda 2000 runs out in 2006 .
Reforms , however , cannot be a further hurdle to concluding accession negotiations , just as enlargement should not hold up the reform of the CAP .
As a former chairman of the Lithuanian JPC , I must raise the issue of Kaliningrad .
I would urge that we find a solution which is deliverable for the Lithuanians and does not drive them into the ' no ' camp .
Today is not the end of a process .
Today is , hopefully , the beginning of the end of a process .
We must scrutinise the path forward very closely .
We must remember that no other enlargement has been as well-prepared as this one has , but we must seize this moment in history to make progress .
I would like to call upon the inspiration of the late , great Elvis Presley at this moment - it is now or never , tomorrow is too late .
Thank you Elvis !
Mr President , many of us never thought we would witness in our lifetimes the fall of the Berlin Wall .
That event changed the face of Europe and heralded a process of emancipation for our neighbours in central and eastern Europe which is nearing its conclusion .
It is worth reminding ourselves of the 13 long years this process has taken as the siren voices of the sceptics seek to dash enlargement on the rocks .
In a previous debate , I described enlargement as a process of continuous assessment , not a one-off exam .
I thank Mr Prodi for presenting today the Commission 's assessment of the readiness of the applicant states to join the European Union which marks those countries ' completion of a major assignment in that process .
They are now approaching the final examination at the Copenhagen Summit .
The prospects look good although they still have some hard work to do in the months ahead if they are to make the grade .
The Liberal Democrat Group has always sought to apply the Copenhagen criteria and the timetable , not to elevate one above the other .
We , therefore , welcome the Commission 's conclusion that the ten applicant states will be ready to join the European Union by 2004 , but that monitoring of their preparations will continue .
A reinforced monitoring system is necessary because the overview provided by the Commission clearly shows that there are deficiencies in the readiness of those applicant countries and we should be open about this .
If we are to convince our own people of the case for enlargement , it must be clear that we are not sweeping problems under the carpet .
Openness about those problems and the measures taken to tackle them will make us better able to reassure the doubters .
I therefore call on the Commission to transmit to Parliament all the regular enlargement reports which it will make to Council .
If we await the comprehensive monitoring report six months before enlargement , the Commission may have no alternative but to impose safeguards since the nuclear option of suspending enlargement may not be viable .
I hope that the threat of those safeguards will be sufficient to ensure that they are not used .
Neither should we forget , however , that it is not only our own voters who have to be convinced .
There are referenda to be won in the applicant states .
Critics in those countries who compare the European Union to the old Soviet Union are confusing a jacket with a straightjacket .
Yet we must show those countries that they will benefit from enlargement from year one . This means a generous financial settlement which precludes them becoming net contributors in the short term .
By introducing a secession clause in a new constitutional treaty , we would also assuage any fears that to join the European Union is to throw away the keys to freedom .
My group is deeply worried that corruption remains widespread and that much work must be done to implement the acquis in justice and home affairs .
We must be firm on the failings of the candidate countries , yet we must recognise that the report before us today is only a progress report .
My own country struggled to meet the criteria 15 months before accession .
Thirty years later , some might say that it is still struggling .
One thing is clear , however .
The monitoring of compliance with EU laws and respect for the Union 's values is not a process which should end upon accession .
The Liberal Group welcomes the date of 2007 along with a roadmap for Bulgaria and Romania .
The steps which they need to take must be clearly outlined by the Commission in time for Copenhagen , so that they are clear on what needs to be done .
The recent reforms undertaken by the Turkish Government represent a real breakthrough and , while no date can be set for Turkey 's accession until the political criteria are met , we will watch with interest the implementation of these reforms .
Turkey must be offered a pre-accession strategy accompanied by more financial support and a friendlier political environment .
We must show the world that we are not an elite Christian club .
The question of Cyprus will also have to be resolved to smooth the way for Turkey 's entry .
Here we look to Greece and Turkey to help broker an agreement before the Copenhagen Summit .
The prospect of the whole of Cyprus joining the EU would start the Greek Presidency on a positive note which we hope would conclude , in Thessaloniki , with a summit symbolising reconciliation .
In conclusion , the enlargement marathon is nearing the finish line .
Despite the exertions thus far , the participants must be prepared for a sprint finish .
Once they cross the line in Copenhagen , they will have little time to celebrate , the training for the next marathon begins - the marathon of meeting the acquis communautaire and achieving democratic endorsement of the enlargement process .
Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we are preparing to take an historic decision .
The headlines of a Brussels newspaper yesterday said that in just over a year we will have to talk about the Twenty-five instead of the Fifteen .
This is in itself good news .
I think I speak for my group as a whole in welcoming all these European nations .
We shall have to rise to the common challenge of successful enlargement .
In order to succeed , however , we must address each and every problem if we want to avoid providing grist to the mill for people-pleasers or the shameful opponents of enlargement .
And there is the rub .
President of the Commission , I feel your presentation failed to address some serious problems .
Let us take as an example the Community acquis , the most taboo subject of all .
To you , and to many of my fellow Members here present , it is all or nothing .
Any candidate country that questions any part of it would be excluded from negotiations .
We all know , however , that some implications of the acquis will lead to acute , serious , dangerous social crises in these countries .
We will not solve these problems by burying our heads in the sand . Quite the opposite .
Transposal under pressure will solve nothing in the long run .
There are some States among the Fifteen that have obtained compromises on matters concerning their specific identity , and even among the founding countries of the Community , there are signed texts that are now being called into question again , such as the Stability and Growth Pact .
The citizens of the Union , meanwhile , as you know , are contesting the acquis even more .
The liberal structure of Europe , and the non-transparent way it is being created from the top down without the involvement of the people , is increasingly unacceptable .
Such debates are also taking place within the candidate countries , at the highest levels . This is borne out , for example , by the essential conflict between the Polish Government and parliament and the Polish Central Bank , which is considered too liberal and too independent .
For her part , the President of Latvia goes so far as to express her feeling , and I quote , ' of colonisation ' within the population with regard to the Commission 's position on the agricultural chapter .
You are aware of all that , yet you say nothing .
I think that this is a mistake .
You cannot bring down a fever by breaking the thermometer .
There is another aspect that I would like to highlight .
Our counterparts in the candidate countries have told me about some unfortunate incidents .
Apparently , a Commission negotiator , when faced with a few reservations , settled the debate in substance with these words : ' either you sign , or you wait ' .
What is achieved by the arrogance of the strong towards the weak ?
You achieve a signature now and ill feeling later .
That is not the solution .
We need to talk about this .
I shall simply note a third problem , since everyone is familiar with it , but I do think we need to talk about it because overall success depends on it to a great extent .
This is the problem of funding for enlargement .
If my memory serves me correctly , the Commission , in 1999 , set aside EUR 40 billion for the period 2004-2006 , when six countries were involved .
The same sum is now set aside for ten countries .
How can that work ?
And why are we not publicly reminding Member States which refuse the necessary financial solidarity that , over ten years , they , together with these countries , have benefited from an outrageous trade surplus of EUR 100 billion and that their companies are making substantial profits , the details of which we would like to know .
Forgive me for being so frank , but our only chance of achieving successful enlargement in future is to address real problems now .
Mr President , President of the Commission , the winds of change seem to be blowing in this Chamber .
Having lived through a few historic changes , I am a little disappointed by the cold wind blowing in this Chamber .
Exactly thirteen years ago today , the first demonstration which led to the fall of the Berlin wall took place in Leipzig .
You , Mr Poettering , with your usual skill , recalled Solidarity , with which we are all familiar .
I admit that as far as the Pope is concerned , you can have him .
I shall , nevertheless , mention two other groups of Polish heroes that you forgot : the Polish resistance that fought against Nazi barbarism and the Jewish resistance that also fought in the Warsaw ghetto against Nazi barbarism .
If we are talking about Poland and the fight against totalitarianism , we should mention all the Poles who fought against all types of totalitarianism .
Let us come now to enlargement .
I admit to being somewhat surprised , occasionally , by the condescending tone we use when speaking of the candidate countries .
Clearly , they need to reform .
Clearly , the change from a totalitarian culture to one of democracy and a market economy is difficult .
But what I would have expected , wished , imagined , dreamt of , from the Commission at an historic moment , is for it to say that as enlargement is an exciting historical project , we , as Europeans , should try to project ourselves into history .
What will the Europe we want be like in fifteen or twenty years with the Twenty-five ?
And what are these petty debates taking place among the Fifteen today with regard to enlargement , when we hear what took place at the last general affairs meeting , with regard to giving two more seats to the Czech Republic , for example , or two more seats to another State ?
When you think that we have still not managed to draw up a financial draft for agriculture , that we cannot draw up a financial draft for the Structural Funds ? and why ?
Because the Fifteen today are afraid of history and are in fact creating a policy of selfishness .
Let us call a spade a spade .
Most of the governments steep themselves in history on Sundays , and on Monday they are afraid of what they dreamt the day before .
That is why we are unable to progress .
Mr Verheugen , as you said , you are asking for greater flexibility from the candidate countries with regard to financial problems .
I would like to say that I personally am asking for greater solidarity and passion for history from the Fifteen .
It is only through solidarity and passion with regard to enlargement that we will find the solutions to the more difficult issues .
In a word , I would have liked to have received an explanation today , not of the old debate - should we first reform and consolidate before enlargement - but of the sine qua non conditions for successful enlargement , reforms and the consolidation of Europe prior to enlargement .
This does not mean building a new barrier , but quite simply , Mr Poettering , making enlargement possible .
If Europe continues to operate as it does at the moment , with the right of veto of one country or another in certain situations , we are heading for disaster and we are going to miss our date with history .
That is the lesson to be learned . That is what I would have liked to hear so that we would be forced to act more quickly and carry out the process of the Convention in greater depth , with regard to agricultural reforms , Structural Fund reforms , reforms of the legal establishment in Europe , in order to make this establishment more democratic .
Lastly , this should have been clearly stated .
I myself am saying it on behalf of our group : what we dream of is , in ten or fifteen , or I do not know how many years , achieving social and ecological harmonisation across Europe , from Portugal to Hungary , from Poland to Italy .
Total social harmonisation .
I know that will take time , but is that our aim ?
Is that our dream ?
Or is it something we do not want , because we want to retain the differentiation between nations ?
That is what I think is somewhat lacking in the speeches made by the Presidency and the Commission .
But that does not matter , history can sometimes force us to be more enthusiastic .
And you will see , you too , with your enthusiasm , will one day go down in the annals of history .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to say briefly to Mr Cohn-Bendit that passion is a wonderful thing but if passion is not based on pragmatism and common sense , it is wasted .
If Mr Cohn-Bendit has passion in abundance at the moment , perhaps he would direct some of it to his Green colleagues from my country who are trying to convince the electorate that they should vote against the Treaty of Nice .
If we want to be passionate , then let our passion be based on facts .
The fact is that if the ten applicant countries proposed by the Commission - for whose efforts I am grateful and I thank Commissioners Prodi and Verheugen in particular - are to be part of the enlarged Europe which Mr Cohn-Bendit is dreaming of , then please tell the people of my country , on behalf of the Green Party of Europe , that they should vote ' yes ' to the Treaty of Nice .
We would welcome that .
There is little point in being all things to all people at all times .
Let us base our advice to the electorate on facts .
It is wrong of Green Party Members to say to the people of my country that the Amsterdam Treaty provides for the enlargement process which we are talking about .
It does not provide for the accession of ten new Member States .
If we must have ten new Member States , as we want to , and then perhaps Romania and Bulgaria as soon as possible and then Turkey in due course , then let us put the truth to the people that the Treaty of Nice must be accepted if that is to happen .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on the tremendous work that it has done in dealing with all the applicant countries and the fact that it is now in a position to recommend ten countries for accession .
I want to compliment Commissioner Verheugen for what he said in relation to Turkey .
It is important that this Parliament recognises that over the last year and a half , tremendous progress has been made in Turkey and this should not be forgotten .
Turkey 's position today should not be seen as a rejection by the European Union in any shape or form .
As far as Cyprus is concerned , I am glad that Cyprus has made considerable progress and that it has been recommended to us .
I would also like to endorse what has been proposed to us by the Commission in relation to the political problem in Turkey and Cyprus , with the northern part of Cyprus occupied by Turkey .
We should use all our influence to ensure that a role for the United Nations is accepted in this respect because there is no other way .
Finally , I would like to say to this Parliament , to my colleagues and friends , that despite the best efforts of those in this House who have been trying to confuse the issue of the Treaty of Nice in relation to my country , the Irish people totally support enlargement .
We will have a majority by the end of next week for the Treaty of Nice .
( Applause )
Mr President , Ireland is one of the two countries in which a majority of people would regret the EU 's being dissolved .
The Treaty of Nice has been tested in the country which is most favourably disposed to the EU , yet 54 % of the population voted against it .
It would , then , have been more natural to have asked the inhabitants of other countries whether they cared for the treaty but , instead , the Irish were asked to vote on it again , as in fact they are doing , faced with the threat that , if they do not , enlargement will come to a halt .
In all honesty , is there a single minister who would put the brakes on enlargement if the Irish were to vote ' no ' .
Of course not . Enlargement will continue .
The situation is anticipated in the Treaty of Amsterdam in the form of a protocol which , by giving them a double majority or more votes in the Council , will compensate the five largest countries for the loss of their second Commissioner .
This outcome was negotiated on the spot in Nice . It is not something to boast about , but it exists in a special declaration which is not part of the treaty and has not therefore been rejected , either .
It can be called into play , irrespective of whether the Irish vote ' yes ' or ' no ' .
I must also call upon the Brussels Summit to correct the figures .
It is a scandal that Hungary and Turkey are being offered fewer places in the European Parliament than countries with smaller populations .
The new weighting system is impossible to remember , even for ministers . Instead , a straightforward system should be devised which can be explained to the people of those countries that are shortly to vote on membership .
There should also be more flexibility in relation to the candidate countries .
The EU should not receive them like a steamroller that crushes everything they themselves have devised in the way of laws .
We should be content to lay down requirements concerning their conduct in the common market and allow them to retain their freedom in all the areas in which there is no documented common need for cross-border laws .
They should be allowed to decide for themselves whether to keep their national currencies .
Agricultural land in the Czech Republic costs 10 % of that in Germany .
Why not allow the candidate countries to keep their laws concerning the purchase and sale of land .
What would the Czechs say if Sudetenland were to be bought up with German euros .
I come from that part of Denmark that was occupied by Germany .
Today , we have an excellent relationship with our neighbours , which I commend and consider to be a model for Northern Ireland and other areas with national tensions .
The Danish summer house protocol contributes to the good relationship between Danes and Germans .
Without this , the best situated houses would be bought up , because the price of a German summer house is several times that of a Danish one .
The transitional arrangements agreed with the candidate countries encourage unnecessary division and will give rise to many ' no ' votes in the referendums .
My group has different attitudes to enlargement .
The Danish June Movement is heavily critical of the conditions we are offering the candidate countries , but those of us in this Chamber will vote in favour of them because we respect the candidate countries ' own decisions .
We hope that the many new democracies can breathe some democratic life into us so that we might obtain a slimmer , freer , open and decentralised Europe for all .
With greater flexibility , Bulgaria and Romania could also join .
It is a little sad to see them excluded , because they have been left to languish in poverty for a far longer period .
Mr President , needless to say , we have always been in favour of a united and strong Europe in which each European people has its place and can retain its cultural identity .
This also applies to the peoples of Eastern Europe who , for decades , lived under the Communist yoke and who for decades were unable to count on the solidarity of anyone in this hemisphere , of not a single one of the political families in this hemisphere who are now , however , all holding forth .
I am therefore not opposed to the principle of European enlargement , provided that it is , of course , a European enlargement and not a small Asian enlargement to include a country such as Turkey , which does not belong to Europe , whether that is understood geographically , historically , politically or culturally .
I am , however , opposed to a hurried and dogmatic enlargement such as is being prepared for today and which , I fear , is set to lead to major social , economic , cultural and social problems .
Problems will arise in the current Member States , which will undoubtedly be faced with a major , fresh wave of immigration , but also in the candidate countries when their highly trained people , engineers , doctors , nurses , construction workers and many more will almost certainly , for financial reasons , leave their countries to find a better paid job elsewhere in Europe .
If the free movement of persons , goods and capital will , in reality , generate more poverty , more immigration , more crime and more uprooting both in former Eastern Europe and here , then the responsible politicians should really first consider a method of guaranteeing a more harmonious unification process .
Let us therefore take some time-out , let us go ahead with this enlargement , but let us admit : today , at this moment , the free movement of persons is not yet possible .
If not , we are in danger of placing a time bomb under Europe which may go off more quickly than we realise , or to use La Fontaine 's words : let us ensure that Europe does not await the tragic fate of the frog who at one time dreamt of being able , very quickly , to turn into an ox .
Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I would like particularly to thank the Commission for preparing for this occasion so outstandingly well over recent months . It has put forward a proposal , based on all the analyses that have been possible to date , which is viable - so viable , indeed , that it will be possible , in December , to take the decisions to invite ten countries to join the European Union .
As the chairman of the committee responsible , let me say that we are making preparations to shape the parliamentary procedure as speedily as possible so that there is no delay on Parliament 's part , and so that the date envisaged for the signing of the Treaties can be adhered to .
I am convinced that overall , Parliament will endorse a positive outcome .
This is a great moment , but this great moment does not mark the completion of the work , for the difficult negotiations will continue until December .
It must be clear that we cannot hold the accession countries hostage to problems we face in one Member State or another .
It must be clear to us that reforms must be undertaken in areas such as agricultural policy , but these reforms must not be framed in such a way as to give rise to an alibi for delaying the enlargement process .
The internal process within the European Union must be shaped in a way that ensures that there are no trumped-up new grounds for delay .
This is why we also call on the governments of the Member States to ensure that in those specific areas - such as agricultural policy and financing - where they have still not reached agreement , to do so as quickly as possible so that it is not down to us if there is a delay in the enlargement of the European Union .
As part of this process , for example , we must try to resolve the Cyprus issue in a way that ensures that there are no new tensions or delays .
I realise this is like squaring the circle , but I believe that this issue , too , can be resolved .
It must be clear that , outside the European Union , there is nothing by virtue of which any of the accession candidates has any right to influence the timetable for enlargement as it affects any country whatever .
There are many cases in which we too must have a clear awareness of this , regardless of the direction in which this is meant .
In my view , the accession candidates also need to continue their efforts , and I would like to thank the Commission for placing such emphasis on implementation through appropriate administrative and judicial structures .
The accession candidates still have a great deal of work to do before accession comes in 2004 .
Transposing Community law into national law is not enough .
Capacity to implement this law in practice is also required .
This means providing the necessary aid , but it also means making the necessary efforts .
These efforts cannot end in December , for otherwise , we will find ourselves in a very difficult situation .
This also means making it clear - also with regard to the Czech Republic - that we have a legal system which does not tolerate discrimination .
In future , no EU citizen may suffer discrimination on any grounds whatsoever .
The European Union is not there to settle old scores but to make a new start and break through the cycle of violence in Europe , and this means that everyone must be willing to make their contribution .
I hope that the relevant reports commissioned by Parliament will be duly noted by all sides and the opportunity taken to unite this with appropriate signals , gestures and actions so that it can work well in practice .
Let me just add one more sentence , which should really be the longest part of my speech .
We too still have our homework to do , for we are not yet ready for enlargement either .
For this reason , the Convention preparing the European constitution must be a success next year : this is a prerequisite if an enlarged Community is to function . We too are therefore called on to make a particular effort in this context .
Mr President , in its communication on the progress made in accession negotiations , the Commission confirms that Cyprus will be part of the first wave of accession , as decided at the Copenhagen Summit .
I would like to thank the Commission , and in particular Commissioner Verheugen , for this proposal which responds fully to the expectations of the European Parliament and which should surprise nobody .
Throughout the negotiation process , we have seen complete agreement between the Commission and the European Parliament over the fundamental elements of the Cypriot dossier .
It also appears now that accession negotiations with the Republic of Cyprus have been a powerful catalyst in the United Nations ' efforts to solve the political problem of the island in accordance with the rules of international law .
Although nothing has been achieved as yet , and despite the threats of annexing and crisis from Ankara , the recent communication from the Secretary-General of the United Nations is still based on the idea that a political framework solution can be found by the end of the year .
Parliament , in its latest resolutions , clearly listed the conditions with which such an arrangement would have to comply for Cyprus to be able to fully meet its obligations as a Member of the EU .
The Cypriot federal state must possess a central government as well as a parliament to control it , which is able to take all decisions within the framework of the Treaty , as well as participating in these policies .
It would also have to guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the island 's territory .
The awakening of civil society and the surveys carried out in northern Cyprus confirm that the majority of the Turkish Cypriot population is also in favour of a pro-European policy .
I therefore hope that vigorous political will will make it possible to overcome the remaining obstacles and that the forces of the Union will triumph over the forces of division .
In the absence of this policy , or if it were hindered by external interference , the Copenhagen European Council would have to take its decisions in accordance with the Helsinki conclusions .
Mr President , Commissioners , we in Flanders have been dreaming of being Flemish and of becoming European since the nineteenth century .
With the accession of ten new countries , the European area of peace and stability is growing , and so is the scope for human rights and democracy .
This is a reason to rejoice .
Candidate countries were given powerful incentives to bring about the necessary changes .
We , however , have not shown the same level of commitment to forcefully implementing the changes that are necessary to fashion this real Europe .
Former enlargements have shown that prosperity has increased , both in the countries concerned and for EU citizens .
Mr Prodi has stated that the costs will be reimbursed , but our citizens are not all convinced of this . Quite the reverse .
It will require courage and powers of persuasion to remove the feelings of uncertainty and fear , particularly at a time of economic decline .
Moreover , there are still flaws in the system .
Mr Prodi himself mentioned fraud , corruption and the trafficking in human beings .
The problems surrounding Cyprus and Poland 's internal problems were also mentioned , and the discussion on Turkey is overshadowing everything else .
We should not arouse false expectations .
Hence the need for us to inform our citizens of what is at stake .
We as regionalists and peoples without a state are very sensitive to the problems that still exist with regard to discrimination against peoples and cultural minorities .
We are sensitive to the non-recognition of regional and historical realities in the different accession countries .
All of this raises the question of whether we still have the time and resources to put these things right before accession becomes a reality .
However , we are giving accession the green light today because a red light would be a sign of hostility , while we are , quite rightly in fact , dreaming of this area of peace and stability .
Mr President , thirteen years after the liberation of Central and Eastern Europe and after a number of years of serious negotiation , we have now reached the penultimate stage prior to eight new Member States acceding from that region , and two from the Mediterranean Sea area .
The candidates which , all things being equal , will be taking part in the European elections as fully-fledged members in 2004 , will soon be able to send observers to this Parliament , something to which we are very much looking forward .
The result presented to us by the Commission deserves warm congratulations , as especially does the person primarily responsible for this , Commissioner Verheugen .
We said in Parliament at the time that the loose ends should be few and short .
This is exactly what we are seeing in the transitional stage : loose ends that are few and short , except - understandably - for those that have to do with the environment .
Casting our minds back to 1989 , we can recall the general enthusiasm that greeted the return to Europe of peoples who had long been oppressed .
This enthusiasm is still among us in copious amounts .
It is therefore all the more painful to see how at some ministries , this return has been reduced to nothing but a money matter .
Some hold the false , yet persistent , belief that the European Union , and particularly the addition of new Member States , would be costly and would require huge sacrifices on our part .
Some xenophobic instincts also persist , and are the subject of shameless speculation .
Communicating the truth , namely that the European Union only costs 1.27 % of GNP and that , on account of internal savings , another 0.14 % has been freed up for enlargement , that it has been settled in Berlin and fixed until 2006 , in other words that the whole budgetary procedure is running smoothly , is a virtually impossible task .
If some of this does manage to trickle through , there will always be some Finance Ministry or other which , by sketching worst-case scenarios , combined with strong exaggerations and their own interpretation of the figures , is prepared once again to awaken latent fears , put enlargement in a bad light and even to use the candidate countries as bargaining counters in the political wrangle with other Member States about the review of agricultural policy .
This is transgressing the rules of decency .
The care that the Commission has exercised on behalf of the Council is manifested in various ways , one being the statement that the permanent , sustainable implementation of the negotiation results must be monitored for the time being .
In the coming years , there will certainly be reason to assist some new Member States , or show them the right way , particularly on an administrative level .
What they have already achieved is indeed to be applauded .
Such a clause was already used during the preparatory stages of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We then introduced the well-known article which even provides for sanctions if a Member strays from its path in terms of rule of law and democracy .
This article applies to us all .
As has often been established scientifically , including by our former fellow MEP Mr Burenstam Lindner , enlargements always bring economic benefits to all parties involved , to the existing Members more so than the new ones .
More important , however , is the gain in terms of a fairer , more peaceful legal order in Europe and the establishment of a European community of values .
The contribution to this by new members may be significant in this respect too .
I hope that the same spirit which prevailed at the start of Europe 's integration will also inspire the new and old Member States in future too .
Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's report shows a great deal of optimism but is also very realistic .
I agree with Commissioner Verheugen : much has been achieved , but many more reforms are required and we as parliamentarians in particular must study and evaluate the reports with vision , but also with precision and pragmatism , just as we must scrutinise the outcomes of the negotiations .
I would like to make one thing clear from the outset : without further efforts to establish the internal market , to integrate minorities - such as the Roma and Sinti - and enforce the rule of law , enlargement is unlikely to succeed .
However , let me also say , on this point , that it is down to us to behave in a way which is likely to build bridges .
Since the phrase ' Bene ?
Decrees ' has already been mentioned , let me say that I am very gratified by the studies commissioned by this Parliament , which show that there are no legal obstacles to the Czech Republic 's accession .
At the same time , I believe it would be conducive to the climate of the negotiations and the decision-making process if the Czech Republic could find the courage to clarify the situation , which would entail a reappraisal of the Bene ? Decrees from a modern perspective - not as a demand or a condition , but rather as an offer .
Let me make one comment in my capacity as a former rapporteur for Turkey .
I understand that many people in Turkey , especially the pro-European forces , are disappointed by the Commission 's proposals since they do not set a specific date for accession negotiations .
However , I understand and endorse the Commission 's position , and I see a great opportunity for Turkey if it does not simply fixate on a possible date but is prepared to work with the European Union on building a genuine economic and political partnership with the EU until accession is possible .
The Commission 's proposals are a starting point .
However , more can be done , and we can work on this together in the coming months .
I was asked today : what do I say to my constituents ?
What does the Commission 's proposal mean ?
I would say that it means a resounding ' yes ' to accession , and ' yes ' to accession in 2004 .
However , it also means that it is up to the countries themselves to decide whether they want to fold their hands in their laps or whether they are willing to continue working on the reforms .
My hope is that all the candidates are willing to continue working on the necessary reforms .
Mr President , I would just like to thank Parliament for the immense , sincere support it has given us in our endeavours to make enlargement a reality at last .
Without Parliament 's support , we would not have been able to achieve the objectives that we have , and as well as the European Parliament I would like to thank the parliaments of the candidate countries .
I have been present at many of the meetings they have held to prepare for enlargement and I can assure you that never before has there been such a deep-rooted , such a well-supported , such an important democratic process .
It bodes very well for the future that this enlargement is being launched with such strong , such unanimous , such fine democratic intention .
Mr President , in my former speech , I said how very grateful I was to the Commission .
I should also like to say a big thank-you to this Parliament and to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy which quickly reached a decision , with very broad agreement , to support this enlargement project .
Parliament showed the way and Parliament can now see the result .
Credit where credit is due .
I have heard many debates in this house , but never have I seen such huge consensus on a project as many-faceted as that to which we are here giving further impetus .
There was of course one dissenting voice and , since I am the only Dane speaking today , I should like to provide a little consumer information to Irish voters .
In Denmark , no one is surprised at the fact that Mr Bonde is now conducting a campaign against the new treaty .
He has conducted campaigns against all the treaties .
He adopted an oppositional stance during the Cold War when he was against everything that strengthened the Western democracies against the Communist dictatorships .
He was opposed to Danish membership of the EC .
He was in the opposition camp when we voted for the first time on the Maastricht Treaty , as he also was when we voted on it for the second time .
He conducted a campaign against the Treaty of Amsterdam , and now he is conducting one against the Treaty of Nice .
That is fair enough as far as it goes , but it is not fair enough if the Irish electorate is unaware that , in supporting Mr Bonde , they are supporting someone who is against the whole set-up and who has been opposed to every single aspect of European cooperation .
I just thought there was no harm in saying that .
My apologies .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for the opportunity once again to discuss this very topical and difficult subject with the European Parliament .
As I said during the last questions on Iraq on 3 and 4 September , this debate comes at a time when there is a lot of international attention and debate on policy in relation to Iraq .
When I was last here , I reported in broad outline on developments in the situation since the Gulf War .
I emphasised that the EU 's position is clear .
It was expressed in a declaration by the Presidency on 20 May of this year , stating that the EU is calling upon Iraq to comply with the resolutions without delay including , specifically , the resolution whereby the weapons inspectors would be able to return , as anticipated in Security Council Resolution 1284 .
In this connection , the EU is well disposed towards the meetings between representatives of the UN and Iraq .
We unreservedly support all the efforts on the part of the Security Council and the UN Secretary-General .
This attitude was confirmed at the informal meeting of EU Foreign Ministers on 30 and 31 August in Elsinore and also at the meeting of Foreign Ministers on 30 September and 1 October in Brussels .
The EU also welcomes the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1409 of 14 May , that is to say the resolution on the revision of the oil for food programme .
With what I have just said in mind , I want today to talk mainly about current developments in connection with Iraq and to concentrate on the Security Council negotiations concerning a new resolution , as well as on the negotiations with Iraq concerning the return of the weapons inspectors .
The permanent members of the Security Council are currently engaged in negotiations concerning a new resolution on Iraq , based on an American draft .
The United States wants to see a resolution that tightens up the demands made of Iraq in earlier resolutions , making them more specific ; that sets earlier deadlines for Iraq 's compliance with the demands ; and that provides a mandate for a possible military intervention in the event of Iraq 's not meeting the demands .
The United States has stated that it wants the weapons inspectors to have unconditional access to all areas , including the so-called presidential palaces .
Two subjects are absolutely crucial , namely the issue of a renewed mandate from the Security Council on the use of force , and unconditional , free and unfettered access by the weapons inspectors to all installations and areas in Iraq , including the presidential areas , which is to say the palaces .
We in the EU are satisfied with the Iraq issue 's remaining on the agenda of the UN Security Council .
The hope is that the Security Council will reach an agreed position on the matter .
On 30 September and 1 October in Vienna , the chief UN weapons inspector , in the form of the Swede Hans Blix , together with the Director-General of the IAEA , Dr El Baradei , who is responsible for the investigations into Iraq 's nuclear weapons programme , met representatives of the Iraqi Government to discuss the practical arrangements in connection with the unconditional return of the weapons inspectors .
Agreement has apparently been reached on a range of issues , based upon the demands made of Iraq in the Security Council resolutions already adopted .
The issue of access to the presidential areas is still unresolved , however .
In addition , there are outstanding issues concerning the ways and means of the weapons inspectors ' return , such as the way in which the Iraqis are to be questioned by UNMOVIC , that is to say the UN weapons inspectorate , and the way in which UNMOVIC is to report back .
The weapons inspectors will presumably not be sent to Iraq until a new resolution has been adopted and accepted by Iraq .
It is still too early to establish the content of a new resolution .
It is crucial , however , for an inspection regime that is effective and credible to be established .
The EU attaches importance to going down the UN route , both in order to secure broad international support for the disarmament of Iraq and with a view to the credibility and effectiveness of the Security Council and of multilateral cooperation .
Against that background , it is encouraging that , in his speech yesterday , the American President , George Bush , again emphasised the United States 's readiness to go down the UN route .
So much has been said . I should like here finally to say that it would of course have been better if this debate had taken place at a time when Mr Solana could have been present .
Since Parliament insisted , however , on debating the matter in any case , I accepted the President 's earnest invitation to take part in the debate .
Mr President , I have already spoken twice about Iraq in this Chamber .
My last intervention was just one month ago , on 4 September , right after the informal meeting of EU Ministers in Elsinore .
Since then , Iraq has , for obvious reasons , remained the most important topic of international debate , though there is not all that much of substance that the Commission can add to what has just been said , or , frankly , to what is reported daily in the press .
The most encouraging development since I last spoke was President Bush 's speech which I heard at the UN General Assembly on 12 September and the Presidency referred also to the speech that he has just made in Cincinnati .
It was important , of course , because Mr Bush signalled the American administration 's wish , if possible , to work through the UN framework to tackle the threats posed by the Iraqi regime .
From all corners of the globe , leaders of the world welcomed the US decision , and virtually everyone has put strong pressure on Iraq to comply with UN Resolutions .
Of particular relevance was the extent of the renewed diplomatic efforts of the Arab world to press Iraq to allow the resumption of the inspections .
These growing pressures have clearly helped drive Saddam to offer the return of the inspectors , even if his offer needs to be treated with a good deal of scepticism .
We have been here with Saddam Hussein before , watching him in due course resile from promises made and commitments given , behind a smoke-screen of ifs , buts and maybes .
The European Union has warmly welcomed President Bush 's decision to deal with Iraq through the UN system .
As a Union , we believe this is by far the best and incomparably the most effective way to take things forward .
There is no real alternative to the UN system of values and international rules that was set in place and agreed by world leaders to preserve global security .
It offers the best hope of avoiding the potentially disastrous consequences of a spread of unilateral actions allegedly to ' solve ' regional disputes .
Working through the UN confers legitimacy and a sense of moral consensus on the actions that it is sometimes necessary to take .
Also in the last couple of weeks , one of the EU Member States - the one as we say coyly that I know best - has made public a detailed assessment of Iraq 's possession of chemical , biological and , possibly , nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them .
This report has shown the risks that these weapons pose to regional stability in the Middle East .
A number of eminent institutes have also shared their assessments of the threats to global security posed by the Iraqi regime .
They all agree on Saddam 's attempts to rebuild his capabilities in weapons of mass destruction , taking advantage of the absence of the inspectors over the last four years .
I would like to point out , incidentally , that these inspectors had previously done a better job than they are sometimes given credit for .
There may be room for debate about how imminent a danger is posed by this armoury of lethal weapons , but I do not detect any serious dispute about its existence .
Currently , discussions are taking place with and between EU Member States on the terms of a new UN Security Council Resolution designed to pave the way for a completely unconditional return of UN inspectors to Iraq .
As honourable Members well know , there are various options under consideration , some of them at the instigation of Member States .
As the Presidency made clear , European Ministers last discussed the situation of Iraq on Monday 31 September at the General Affairs Council .
They reiterated the position set out one month earlier in Elsinore , including the overall aim of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction , the need for the unconditional return of UN inspectors with unfettered access to every part of Iraq , and the need for the situation to continue to be addressed along the UN Security Council track .
Against this background of intensified international diplomacy , I believe - and I hope the Parliament shares this view with me - that the following considerations should be uppermost in everybody 's minds :
First , over recent weeks , leaders around the world have continued to repeat their calls for a multilateral response to the challenge posed by Iraq .
They have clearly argued that the alternative of a unilateral response would be very unwise .
And it is not just world leaders ; our citizens clearly believe strongly that this is the right way to solve the problem of Iraq .
Recent polls in Europe and the US , as well as public demonstrations , show that citizens would like any decision on Iraq to be taken within the framework of the United Nations system .
Second , the main reasoning behind any UN intervention is the perception that the international community is confronted with the possession of weapons of mass destruction by a dangerous regime .
There is a genuine and justified worry about both use and proliferation .
In addition it has been suggested that these weapons could be supplied to terrorist networks , though some notable public figures , for example Brent Scowcroft , National Security Advisor to President Bush Senior , have expressed scepticism on this point .
Others still have argued that there may be some links between Iraq and terrorist organisations with global links such as Al-Qa 'ida .
I am not aware of any convincing public evidence on this point , but perhaps I have overlooked something .
The resort to the pre-emptive use of force is not a new idea .
The international community for example decided to intervene in Kosovo on humanitarian grounds .
The concept of humanitarian interventions was supported by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in an outstanding speech three years ago .
Through the action in Kosovo , the international community made clear that it was no longer possible for world leaders to hide behind the concept of national sovereignty to do whatever they wished within their own borders .
It was recognised that people too have rights , not just the states in which they live .
That seems to me to be a welcome advance .
However , what is clear from the debates going on around the world is that we need to develop some kind of framework of international law to address such circumstances .
Iraq cannot be seen in isolation from other equally sensitive cases .
Should we not look at the principles to guide our international action and identify the circumstances that may justify international intervention when there is a clear and present danger , either within a sovereign state or outside its borders ?
The view of international law that has more or less prevailed since the Treaty of Westphalia - as students of the work of Dr Kissinger will know - is no longer wholly valid .
But I find it difficult to believe that any acceptable alternative view should not rest principally on UN mechanisms and procedures .
Third , I am sure that those who are considering the need for a new resolution will be taking into account all options and scenarios .
The international community needs to address how to frame a UN Security Council resolution or resolutions on Iraq .
But they also need to think about what to do in case of non-compliance .
This is a general issue of the utmost importance since it is related to the credibility of the multilateral system .
We need to preserve the authority of the UN and the Security Council whose resolutions we have seen defied again and again .
In this case , it is defiance by Iraq , but there are others in a similar situation of non-compliance .
We have now reached the point when such lack of compliance with UN decisions needs to be addressed in an objective , serious and coherent manner .
I hope that as events unfold in the coming months , we see a re-assertion of the authority of the UN with beneficial effects for Iraq , for its region and indeed for the whole world .
We may then , in addition , be able to focus our efforts more constructively on the continuing bloody crisis in the Middle East .
I cannot say that I find any alternative outlook anything other than profoundly disturbing .
Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are issues relating to the current situation in Iraq which are uncontentious , which we all share and where we have a broad consensus .
The first is that Iraq must comply with all the UN Security Council 's resolutions in full and without any ifs , buts or maybes .
I am very grateful to you , Commissioner , for saying that it is not only Iraq which should do so , but we are talking about Iraq here today .
Secondly , we all agree that the weapons inspectors must return to Iraq and that they must have unfettered access to be able to do their job properly .
In particular , they must search for , and then destroy , weapons of mass destruction and delivery systems .
I am most grateful to you , Commissioner , for making a further point on this consensus , and I am especially gratified that you did so by pointing out that the response to this situation , to the problem of Iraq , should be sought multilaterally and through the United Nations framework .
That is the opportunity for us genuinely to resolve this problem once and for all .
There are other issues where we do not have this consensus .
They include , for example , the question whether the weapons inspectors who now have a mandate to go to Iraq must wait until the Security Council adopts a new resolution .
I think that a definition of their mandate by the UN Secretary-General would suffice .
If it is indeed the case that a major threat emanates from Iraq , then it is logical , after all , to ensure that these inspectors go to Iraq as soon as possible .
At the same time , the UN Secretary-General must look at the issue of the embargo .
While the inspectors are searching for weapons in Iraq , conditions must be re-established for the embargo to be abolished entirely , and for the embargo to be ended .
I think this is axiomatic , but I would like to reiterate and underline this point here once again .
While the weapons inspectors are searching for weapons in Iraq , the bombing campaign by the US and the United Kingdom , which is not based on any UN resolution , cannot continue .
It should be suspended - I am phrasing this carefully - until we have the inspectors ' report .
Finally , the UN should prepare a roadmap for the destruction of weapons and for the inspections , and a roadmap for the embargo and for Iraq 's reintegration into the international community .
This would be an important step which could be initiated by the UN .
In the context of the UN , let me say that if we opt for the UN , we cannot have a UN à la carte . In other words , we cannot comply with the resolutions which suit us and ignore the ones that do not !
We must be very clear about this , and I am in favour of our respecting and implementing all the UN resolutions accordingly .
Mr President , we know that one reason for military intervention is the search for weapons of mass destruction , but there are , of course , other reasons .
Parliament 's resolution of May 2002 made a proposal which still has not been taken up .
It suggested that an international ad-hoc tribunal be set up to try Saddam Hussein and his officials , and that the Commission should set up an office of human rights to collect the evidence .
There are , of course , different reasons for intervening : humanitarian interventions , self-defence , Article 51 , as was used in Afghanistan , and now a new proposal of anticipatory self-defence - the so-called pre-emptive strike - discussed by President Bush for regime change .
Even the ' bullet in the head ' option has been discussed .
But this Parliament , surely , should have one thing in mind : the people of Iraq .
Here I call for a prosecution of Saddam Hussein and his officials under the 1948 Genocide Convention .
This is a crime against humanity of such a scale that it can never be forgiven and we must invoke justice and the rule of law .
The Genocide Convention to which we and all our allies are parties imposes a duty upon us to punish all acts of genocide ordered by constitutionally-responsible rulers .
It expressly envisages that an international court may be established for that purpose , preferably in the territory in which the crimes were committed and if not , elsewhere .
In this way all perpetrators may be tried by such international panel tribunals which may have jurisdiction with respect to those contracting parties which have accepted its jurisdiction .
The Nuremberg precedent reminds us that a torturer is a torturer even if you are in a uniform and you have accepted an order to torture one of your fellow men or women .
In other words , being an official does not exempt you from prosecution .
This means that we have an absolute duty to look not just at Saddam Hussein but at all of those officials .
What are Saddam Hussein 's genocidal acts ?
In the past , we have seen the use of chemical weapons in the north , the decimation of the gypsies , the persecution of Jews , the Assyrian Christians , over three-quarters of a million displaced people , assaults on Shia Muslims and those of Iranian descent .
Thirty years of murderous assault and still he goes after the remnants of those unfortunate people .
Genocide now concerns the marsh Arabs : over half a million people destroyed in the last few years .
They have lost their place , the people , the fish , the animals , the water , the land , their homes , their farms , villages , towns , boats and agriculture through killing , burning and draining .
We have seen the total destruction of a unique , distinctively different and ancient tribal people .
That is genocide .
A UN resolution is required but we need the evidence to be brought up front , in front of the peoples of the world , to alter the perception of why this course of action is required .
The establishment of the Office of Human Rights was accepted in principle by Commissioner Patten at our debate in May 2002 .
I urge him to set up this office without delay - we have already lost too much time .
Mr President , Commissioner Patten , President-in-Office of the Council , as we speak , there is reason to hope that the new war with Iraq will not take place .
It is not absurd to imagine that the resolution currently in the process of being adopted by the United Nations Security Council could finally be drawn up to encourage disarmament in Iraq rather than to legitimise a military intervention there .
That would be a great victory of wisdom over irresponsibility , but there is still a long way to go .
And can we do anything , while the decision is that of the member countries of the Security Council ?
I am sure that we can , as it is clear that the requirements of our societies and the political initiatives taken by various States have greatly influenced the development of the positions of the main Heads of State , starting with George Bush himself .
His goal was to change the regime in Baghdad .
Apparently today the international community has only one possible objective , the disarmament of Iraq .
He ordered the UN to either be on the side of the US or to stay on the sidelines .
He nevertheless seems to understand that the framework of the United Nations is difficult to circumvent .
He had put forward a theory of pre-emptive war .
He now stresses that military action is not necessarily imminent or inevitable .
Nobody is fooled .
The American President has not given up any of his plans , but he is perhaps beginning to realise that international political life is not a western in which he can play the role of sheriff .
I believe it is time to promote the mission of disarmament inspectors as an alternative solution to war .
It was these inspectors who , until 1998 , prevented Saddam Hussein from acquiring the atomic bomb and who destroyed stocks of chemical and biological weapons and their means of manufacture , military research installations , missiles and launch pads .
Today , they say , their experience is greater still and their equipment more sophisticated .
They are ready to start work again immediately .
One of them , however , the American Scott Ritter , opportunely suggests that , upon their return , the embargo should be lifted . This mercilessly cruel burden was imposed twelve years ago on the population .
My group , in conjunction with others , is going to take initiatives in this spirit , which you are all welcome to join .
Furthermore , my group would consider highly useful a further declaration by the Council and the Commission on the new strategic doctrine published by the Bush administration on 20 September .
I find it inconceivable that the European Union is silent on this text which magnifies what is described as the unparalleled force of the United States and emphasises their determination , to paraphrase , to act alone , if necessary as a pre-emptive measure , to extend the triumph of freedom .
We cannot remain inactive in the face of the official confirmation of a doctrine which would undoubtedly lead to war in Iraq and which would lead to nothing less than the destruction of the collective security system set up around the Charter of the United Nations following the victory of democracies over Nazism .
Lastly , we are still waiting for the beginning of the first stages of the implementation of the last parliamentary resolution on the Middle East .
While George Bush draws the world 's attention to Baghdad , however , his protégé , who , not long ago , he classed as a man of peace even though he is violating all the resolutions of the Security Council concerning his country , is attacking the Palestinians with indescribable cruelty , thereby exposing his own people to a new infernal cycle of vengeance and hatred .
Europe still needs to prove itself on all these points which , in fact , form a whole .
The status of world player cannot be decreed ; it must be earned .
Mr President , the European Union is an observer rather than an active player in the events currently taking place , and it may be because we are speaking as observers that , in many of our speeches , we are getting the facts all wrong , congratulating ourselves on what will probably be avoided - military attacks on Iraq .
We should instead ask ourselves what we have done , what we ourselves have managed to do , as the European Union , to bring about a situation in which it will be possible to achieve that which we all hope for , to reach a point where military attacks are not necessary and the inspectors have full access to the Iraqi sites .
It is my view that we have done nothing and that , if the situation we are observing has now improved , this may be partly , principally or wholly due to pressure from the United States and the ways in which that pressure has been exerted .
Well then , it may be that what we have to do is endeavour to cast off our role of observer : we must do everything we can to avoid military action rather than just sitting here watching others make mistakes , running the risk , once again , that Europe will become not the Europe of Churchill but the Europe of Chamberlain , the risk that we will find ourselves once again in a position of impotence and inertia where we lack institutional and even maybe military resources and instruments and are thus unable to take any action .
Do we want to develop alternatives to weapons , violence and destruction ?
Then let us make a start !
We must explore the possibilities provided under international law for raising awareness and providing information , for defeating a regime which is waging a constant , daily war against its own people , a war which is constantly causing deaths in Iraq and which is a danger to the international community .
We must see what we ourselves , as the European Union , can do rather than sitting here applauding or criticising the actions of those who do , at least , have the courage to shoulder responsibilities .
Mr President , Commissioner Patten has referred to the dossier that was produced by the United Kingdom Government prior to the debate in the House of Commons .
That dossier makes for some interesting reading .
The most significant thing I found in it was a picture of the footprint of one of Saddam Hussein 's palaces .
Superimposed on this was a footprint of Buckingham Palace . Buckingham Palace was a minute corner of whole footprint of Saddam Hussein 's palaces .
This is quite important because it is said that Saddam Hussein does not want anyone to go into his palaces . Well , none of us want people coming into our houses .
We do not realise that these palaces are basically cities in their own right and that is why all aspects of the UN inspectors ' mandate must be adhered to .
They must be able to go anywhere because palaces the size that he has , and he has quite a few , have the capacity to conceal major weapon sites .
We must be clear that there should be no interference with the ability of the inspectors to go in .
We know Saddam Hussein is a threat to the region and to his own people , but we know that for the interests of world peace we must act through the United Nations .
This must not be unilateral action .
UN resolutions , however , must clearly hold Iraq to account and there must be a willingness to follow through with action .
It is not enough to threaten .
We must be prepared to follow through with that threat if everything else fails .
We must keep the pressure on Saddam Hussein .
We must continue to enforce a no-fly zone , including giving the pilots the right to self-defence .
If the UN sees this through , we will change international politics .
There will be a whole new environment pushing towards multilateral action .
If the UN is not capable of seeing this through , the whole multilateral element of international politics would be discredited and the world would become a much more dangerous place .
Mr President , I have now been told several times that the EU wishes to go down the UN route , and I should therefore like to ask where that route is heading and for how long it is intended to follow it .
We are agreed that Iraq must , as Mr Patten said , comply , like everyone else , with UN resolutions .
Must not , however , the EU and the United States also comply with international law ?
Can we , on the one hand , demand that a country comply with UN resolutions and , on the other hand , accept actions that are not approved under this legal system ?
In short , I do not have a clear answer to that question .
Will the EU demand a UN mandate from the UN Security Council before it supports possible action against Iraq ?
What , moreover , will happen if the weapons inspectors really and truly do not find anything ?
There has not of course been a shred of proof anywhere that weapons of mass destruction exist .
If the inspectors really do not find anything , will the EU , then , work towards having the embargo lifted ?
We know that the oil for food programme means that the Iraqi people are being kept on the verge of starvation .
A host of false rumours is being spread as to how much money is coming in , but the calculations made on the basis of the actual figures show that every penny is going into the oil for food programme and that that is not enough .
It will not do anything to take the Iraqi people off the breadline .
The programme has managed to eradicate the Iraqi middle class and is responsible for Iraq 's not having been in a position to repair its water supply , resulting in a steep increase in infant mortality .
Will the EU make efforts to have the embargo lifted and will it , in that connection , remember Iraqi Kurdistan ?
Will it remember that there is a people in the northern part of Iraq that will be vulnerable as soon as Saddam Hussein has the opportunity to express his anger ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even though many people have spoken out against a war in Iraq , the United States are continuing their threats with new demands , on the pretext of combating terrorism .
Calls for American national unity have not been able to mask the social and economic difficulties there , its crisis of political confidence and its restrictions of democratic freedom , which are condemned by many American citizens .
We are all aware , beyond the undeniable arguments concerning the reality of Saddam Hussein 's power , supported thus far by Westerners , that one of the main targets of this war is oil .
Such a war would also allow other objectives to be targeted , such as strengthening the direct hold over oil and gas resources in the Middle East , in order to kick-start growth in the United States , strike a blow to OPEC , one of Washington 's pet hates , and weaken the Arab world , depriving it of any possible political opposition force .
Furthermore , we cannot ignore the matter of the current context of the whole region .
This war can only destroy the United Nations ' efforts to consolidate international law in favour of fair , lasting peace .
We know it will have further tragic consequences for the Palestinian people .
This is borne out by Ariel Sharon 's stated support for Bush , for whom the international situation represents an opportunity to strike further blows against the Palestinian resistance .
Moreover , commencing military action in this region will set the Arab world ablaze , plunge the people into decades of poverty , and send weakened political regimes into the arms of fundamentalism .
Do not think that our continent will be spared by this war .
Europe will be the first target for terrorism and will be a breeding ground for tension , and racism and islamophobia will only increase .
It is not too late to prevent this war .
To do so , people everywhere , as widely as possible , must express their rejection of the US unilateral policy and it is time for the European Union to shoulder its responsibilities , and forcefully and vigorously restate its commitment to peace , the reason for its construction .
Mr President , no one is in any doubt that Saddam Hussein is a brutal dictator . That is not sufficient justification for launching a pre-emptive attack on Iraq .
If it were , we would be attacking many countries around the world .
We need to be clear that the motivating force for this war is primarily about trying to ensure secure access to oil . President Bush cannot , of course , admit this .
Instead , we are told we must go to war in order to destroy Saddam 's weapons of mass destruction .
Let us be clear about this , our moral authority might be a little stronger if we did not also have weapons of mass destruction .
I also want to talk about the United Nations .
Commissioner Patten said that working with the UN confers legitimacy .
I agree it is a step towards legitimacy .
It is a necessary but insufficient requirement for any action because the UN process is itself highly imperfect .
In order to get agreement from the UN Security Council for the first Gulf war , the US used bribery , blackmail and threats and they will do it again .
The resolution which the US is currently trying to get through the Security Council is not designed to avert war but rather to provoke war .
Leaked drafts resemble nothing so much as a plan for unopposed invasion .
A just war to the extent that any such thing might be claimed to exist can only be pursued when all peaceful means have been exhausted .
In this case , peaceful means are not only unexhausted , they are being deliberately avoided .
Mr President , it would be a grave misconception to look at the imminent attack on the Iraqi state as a new state of affairs .
We all know that the attacks on Iraq are already underway on a massive scale in the no-fly zones in the country .
I do not know under which international agreements they have been allowed to continue , but such attacks have only intensified and worsened the situation in the country .
However we view , as a Parliament , the proposed attack on Saddam Hussein , we cannot look at it in isolation .
The attack would be seen , along with the incursions against Palestine , as an attack on the Arab world itself .
It would , along with the threat to oil supplies , globalise an already-escalating conflict .
We condemn Saddam Hussein unreservedly for his regime which oppresses minorities and offends democracy in Iraq .
A more sensible and productive international approach , however , would be to defend and ensure self-determination for all minorities in Iraq , especially the five million Kurds in the north of the country comprising one quarter of the Iraqi population .
Human rights and freedom in Iraq would be better served were we to take that course of action , uniting minorities and the international community behind a common front to topple Saddam and all other world dictators .
Mr President , a variety of things have been said .
For my part , I have a number of questions to put to the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council , for it would appear that , once again , Europe and the European governments are very divided , and that is not good .
Moreover , despite the endeavours of the Presidency , we see the range of positions of the European governments described in the press every day .
My question is this : since France is part of the Security Council - and it is the only European country to be part of it - is there any form of coordination between the other European governments in respect of the French position ?
What will a second resolution add to the agreements which have already been adopted regarding the sending of inspectors to Vienna ?
Thirdly , the citizens of our countries are asking a lot of questions , ladies and gentlemen , including on the subject of the embargo .
The public is wondering , in good faith , how it is possible that , in ten years of embargo inflicted upon the civilian population , the dictator , Saddam Hussein , has been able to rebuild his military and even his nuclear arsenal .
Given that this has been possible , I believe we should open a UN investigation to find out who has broken the arms embargo that has caused the Iraqi people such great suffering .
If it has been broken by members of the Security Council , then , clearly , the Security Council will also lose its credibility .
I therefore feel that we must be quite consistent in our actions ; we must find the best way to achieve the greatest success without , indeed , causing further suffering or further deterioration of international relations .
This is Europe 's role in my view but , once again , this time we have failed to realise it .
Lastly , I feel that Europe must address the issue of combating terrorism and producing legal instruments for prosecuting terrorists , acting with complete honesty towards both the United States and the authoritarian regimes .
Mr President , over the last few days the European Union has faced - indeed it is still facing - two crucial political questions which bear on its common foreign and security policy .
The question of the International Criminal Court on War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity did not , I think , receive the best attentions of the Council of the European Union .
Now we have the crisis in Iraq , which really must be given the Council 's best attentions .
And just what does that mean ?
The UN and its decision-taking procedures have underpinned the international legal order for the last 50 or 60 years and have been used to resolve the most serious of political issues .
We must not rock this boat under any circumstances , because finding a new legal order to underpin international relations will not be an easy or straightforward matter .
This being so , when faced with varying opinions on how to deal with the problem of Iraq , the European Union must not under any circumstances go beyond the bounds set by UN Security Council resolutions .
Secondly , it must lay down limits , down to the last detail , on how far we can go in controlling Saddam Hussein 's arsenal .
However , if it turns out that he has no weapons of mass destruction or the facilities to produce them , it must have a ready , unconditional answer to the question of the embargo , while monitoring developments to ensure that Saddam Hussein or anyone else in Iraq does not revert to procedures involving weapons of mass destruction .
Nonetheless , we must admit that , as the European Union , we ought to be independent when it comes to certain decisions with crucial international implications .
We cannot just fall in with whoever happens to be in power in America at the time , with the Clinton administration taking one tack and the Bush administration taking another .
And , the investigation to find out if Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction should extend to anyone who has provided materials or know-how .
They too must take their share of the blame .
Finally , let us not forget the millions who are suffering , let us not forget the children who are dying and let us not forget that we , the European Union , must not be inhumane .
Mr President , I should like to summarise my answers in a few points which are not new but which it is important to put into words .
I should like to warn against trivialising the Iraq problem by comparing Iraq with various other countries .
Saddam Hussein is fortunately a very special case with a very distinctive history stretching back a long way .
Experience clearly shows that we shall not get anywhere with Saddam Hussein if the use of force is excluded in advance . Iraq must and shall comply with the demands made by the Security Council .
There must be unconditional access for the weapons inspectors , including access to Saddam Hussein 's extensive palaces .
The EU will continue to support the efforts of the Security Council and campaign for a unified approach . That is important for the UN 's and the Security Council 's credibility and effectiveness , and it is important in relation both to Iraq and to future multilateral cooperation .
The EU therefore continues to support the Security Council 's work along the lines of finding a peaceful solution , insofar as that is possible .
It is encouraging that the American President has recently said that war is not inevitable and that he wants to pursue the option of going down the UN route .
Turning finally to the lifting of the embargo , the oil for food programme has in fact been revised .
It is Saddam Hussein who has not so far made use of the opportunities it presents and , in that way , subjected his people to starvation .
That is because , in this matter too , he is completely indifferent to the conditions of ordinary people in Iraq .
He has other priorities .
If we are to encourage him to think about his own people and about peace in the region and in the world , we must take a united stand - in this Parliament too .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
It is a great honour for me to be given this opportunity to speak in the European Parliament on where matters stand with the revision of the European Employment Strategy .
Employment policy affects something of fundamental importance to human beings , namely the work we do .
The Bible says that we must earn our bread by the sweat of our brow .
Work has many other functions in addition to this , however .
It is in the workplace that we spend most of our waking lives .
It is here that we forge a large number of connections with other people , and it is often these people we miss most if we lose our jobs .
The new areas that are to help make Europe into a leading power include an extensive labour market and social responsibility on the part of enterprises .
All too often , the labour market is comparable to a centrifuge , in which far too many people end up on the periphery .
We must therefore develop ideas about how this situation can be prevented .
In Europe , we also face a series of common challenges which we must solve if we are to retain the European social model , combining economic effectiveness with good social security arrangements and a market economy with the welfare society .
Enlargement of the European Union to include a number of Eastern and Central European countries - with or without transitional arrangements - means the free movement of labour in the new and larger EU .
A number of countries , including Denmark , chose to embrace the free movement of labour from the first day of their membership .
We in Denmark see no problem with the free movement of labour .
On the contrary , we view the new Member States as a resource .
The primary task towards the end of the year consists in reaching agreement on the framework for revising the Employment Strategy .
In 2003 , we shall then get to grips with the discussions concerning the actual strategy and the individual guidelines .
As its point of departure , the Presidency has attached great importance to our obtaining a thorough debate before a new and revised Employment Strategy is devised .
In that connection , it is important for all the central actors to have their say .
To ensure there is enough time for the debate , we thought it important to give the subject a central place in the Danish Presidency 's programme in the employment and socio-political area and to begin revising the strategy no later than at the first formal Council meeting .
That provides the best opportunity to send a clear signal to the Commission as early as possible .
The authorities in the individual countries naturally have a central role in connection with the evaluation .
It is they who have been responsible for implementing and monitoring the strategy since it was introduced in 1997 .
They therefore have a great deal of valuable first-hand experience of the present strategy 's strengths and weaknesses .
The Commission is , of course , another important source of experience and results from the first five years .
Over the last few years , other actors too have , however , obtained relevant experience to which consideration should be given in connection with the current evaluation .
That applies especially , of course , to the European Parliament .
In this connection , I took note of the points of view published by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in the middle of September .
I am able to go a long way towards endorsing the views that have been presented of what should be the core features of a revised strategy and the desires that have been expressed to consider how cooperation between the various actors can be further developed .
Finally , I want to mention the national and European parties in the labour market who , actively involved as they are , also have important observations to contribute .
Revision of the European Employment Strategy was on the Council 's agenda in Luxembourg yesterday .
It is therefore an extremely topical subject to be included on the agenda for the plenary debate here today .
As is well known , the Commission 's communication takes stock of experiences from the first five years of the Employment Strategy .
It contains a general evaluation of the results achieved on the European labour markets , and it outlines the most important issues in connection with a revision of the strategy .
The communication is a crucial point of departure for the debate now taking place in various forums .
In addition to this communication , a common statement from , respectively , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Economic-Political Committee was presented to the Council meeting , providing their assessment of the most important principles for a revised strategy .
The Presidency has always wanted them to be able to present a common statement .
We think that a common statement , capable of being endorsed by the relevant Councils , was synonymous with the strongest possible political signal of what is wanted in political terms from the future strategy .
A common statement is , moreover , in accordance with the current desire for better coordination between , and streamlining of , the various European processes such as the employment guidelines and the guidelines governing general economic policy .
There must be no secret about there being many different points of view on how far the revision of the Employment Strategy should go .
The Danish Presidency 's ambition has , however , been firstly to work for a compromise capable of uniting those Member States that want to see the Employment Strategy considerably revised with those that want to see far fewer changes .
For us , the task has therefore been to secure a common platform for further work .
I am therefore pleased to be able now to report that the Council offered its unanimous endorsement of the common statement by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Economic-Political Committee .
A strong political signal was thus also conveyed concerning the framework and principles that the governments of the Member States believe should form the basis for preparing for the revision of the European Employment Strategy .
I should like here to state some of the most important principles .
To begin with , it must be emphasised that the overall perspective of the Employment Strategy must be retained , with special focus upon the priorities for employment policy .
This means that special attention must be given to the results that , based on the Lisbon objectives of more and better jobs , are to be achieved through the strategy .
The ministers also approved the need to simplify the employment guidelines and , as far as possible , reduce their scope by having them focus upon common strategic priorities including national strategies for lifelong learning , supported by suitable objectives relating , for example , to the number of people who might be engaged in one form of education or another .
Importance is also attached to the future strategy 's helping meet the challenges faced by the countries concerned in the form of different demographic features , increased globalisation , the knowledge society and EU enlargement .
There is agreement that the strategy should concentrate more specifically on the following broad objectives : job creation and increasing labour force participation , improved quality of work , improvement and modernisation of the functioning of the labour market and the ensuring of both flexibility and job security .
To enlarge upon this , I would especially emphasise the need to increase the labour force supply via policies that promote jobs for women , older people and vulnerable groups ; by encouraging active and preventive labour market policies that are effective and efficient ; by reforming tax and benefit systems and so creating clear incentives for taking up , and remaining in , employment ; by improving lifelong learning , skills and mobility ; by increasing equality between men and women and by combating discrimination ; and by promoting developments in entrepreneurship conducive to job creation .
Finally , the Council , in expressing its support yesterday , expressed a wish for the strategy further to reflect the fact that the focus is on the medium-term challenges set out by the Lisbon strategy where , for example , the participation rates for women and older people are concerned .
Implicit in this is the wish for greater stability in the guidelines over time .
In other words , they must not necessarily be changed each year .
The wish for stability also conceals the fact that work is under way to ensure a greater degree of coordination and less overlap between the various European cooperation processes .
We in the Presidency view these general principles , endorsed by the Council , as a contribution and pointer to the Commission in connection with its ongoing work as the end of the year approaches .
The Council 's agreement yesterday means that there are a number of factors that will have to be debated further over the next few months .
That is especially true when it comes to the more active involvement of the two sides of industry and of the European Parliament .
There is therefore a clear desire to enter into more practical deliberations as to how the European Parliament can play a larger role in the preparation and development of the Employment Strategy .
The role of the national parliaments is also to be recognised in this context .
One important matter still to be dealt with is the whole discussion of the scope and of the type of indicators .
These are crucial to monitoring the strategy and to ensuring that countries move in the desired direction and at the right time .
It is therefore also crucial that , as soon as a clear picture of the new strategy emerges , there be a thorough examination of the existing indicators .
The purpose of such an examination must be to ensure that the indicators reflect the core objectives of the revised guidelines .
The objective must be a more efficient set of indicators , which are robust , comparable , more focused on the individual guidelines and based upon up-to-date data .
We should like to achieve a situation in which we have fewer , but better , indicators .
I want to emphasise in conclusion that the Danish Presidency wishes to make the Employment Strategy easier to operate and more serviceable as a starting point for employment-promoting strategies in the individual Member States .
We must get away from the tendency to focus increasingly upon details and instruments and instead concentrate on the results to which the European Council has attached importance since the Lisbon Summit .
In connection with revising the Employment Strategy , we must never lose sight of the big picture .
Over the next few years , the idea of a revised European Employment Strategy is that it should help make Europe more coherent as a continent and as a society .
The idea is that the Employment Strategy should be targeted and that the decision-making process in connection with the adoption and implementation of the strategy 's individual features should become more transparent .
In endeavouring to create ever more employment , the European Union should attach key importance to targeting and transparency , to involving a larger number of actors and to rooting employment policy more firmly in the Member States .
We must never forget that it is the practical results that , in the last analysis , are the test of whether the European Union 's Employment Strategy is effective .
The methods must be put to the test in practice .
Mr President , firstly I congratulate the European Parliament for its stimulating and constructive resolution which was adopted on 25 September 2002 .
It provides a useful assessment of successes and achievements as well as some of the weaknesses of the European Employment Strategy . It is , of course , important that it identifies concrete priorities for the future .
The resolution was most valuable to the Council .
The discussions we had yesterday in Luxembourg concerned both the evaluation of the European Employment Strategy and the streamlining of processes in the context of the Lisbon agenda .
As the Minister said , there was a consensus between the Member States on the content and the procedures for the future .
I am pleased to say that there is now a large common platform of shared views between the three institutions upon which we can base the further development of the strategy and , in particular , define the next generation of employment guidelines .
I would like to concentrate on three main areas : policy messages , the process and governance of the process .
First , as far as the policy messages are concerned , we all agree that the integrated coverage of broad areas is one of the positive achievements of this strategy .
There is an agreement that there is a need to keep this wide range of issues within the strategy and not to narrow its scope .
Some progress has also been made on the identification of key priorities . There is a long list of these , including job creation and increasing labour force participation ; improving quality in work ; modernising and improving the functioning of the labour market ; ensuring flexibility and security ; increasing labour force supply via policies promoting an inclusive labour market ; promoting active and preventive labour market policies ; reforming tax and benefit systems ; improving lifelong learning skills and mobility and promoting developments in entrepreneurship conducive to job creation .
Obviously the next step will consist of transforming this long list into a structured proposal for Employment Guidelines .
It remains to be seen whether or not the current four-pillar structure , on which we have articulated the development strategy , is still needed in order to reflect these priorities , or if other groupings could improve their visibility .
If possible , the guidelines should be reduced in number .
This brings me to the second issue which is the process .
Within the framework provided by the Treaty , the Employment Strategy should focus on the medium and long-term challenges to be met by the Lisbon 2010 deadlines .
With a view to ensuring a clearer focus on outcomes and on the medium and long-term goals of the strategy , there is a need for greater stability in the Employment Guidelines which should not be changed every year .
Member States ' National Action Plans must focus more on implementation .
Overlaps and duplications with other processes should be more limited , in particular , through coordination between the employment strategy and the broad economic policy guidelines .
It is crucial that the respective roles and contributions be better defined .
The third point concerns the governance of the process .
This is an issue on which the European Parliament expressed great interest in its resolution of 25 September 2002 .
The ideas for future orientations which I have just outlined should provide a better framework for more openness and participation .
Less and clearer objectives should make the strategy more visible .
A stronger focus on implementation and results should provide a better knowledge-base and more transparency .
Therefore , within this new framework , and with a stronger , more concrete focus , social partners would play a more effective role , and regional and local authorities would understand their role more easily and could participate more effectively .
Further consideration should be given as to how the European Parliament could be actively involved in the design and development of the employment strategy and on how national parliaments can be better integrated into this process .
There are major problems in some Member States , where the national parliaments have not participated in , nor have , in some cases , any idea about the employment strategy , the monetary procedures or the common goals .
This is quite a long list of shared convictions and perspectives but the new process for the strategy has only just begun .
As you know , the formal proposal for the employment guidelines 2003 will be presented in April 2003 together with the proposal for the broad economic policy guidelines .
In the meantime , there is room and time for everybody to become part of the process and to make their voices heard .
The Commission will continue to develop the idea of open participation .
In order to further stimulate and facilitate the involvement of potential stakeholders , the Commission intends to adopt another communication . This will be presented in January and will give an outline of the revised strategy with concrete objectives and targets .
There is enough time for a rich exchange of views with the Parliament over the next few months in order to define and to agree on procedures for the new European Employment Strategy .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mobility is an important factor in creating better jobs and in closing the skills gap in the European labour market .
A gap clearly exists , however , in occupational and geographical mobility in the Union .
With regard to the first of these , European citizens do not change jobs very frequently , although most Member States have experienced an upward trend since 1995 .
With regard to the movement of workers between Member States and nationally , the picture is no more encouraging : our rate of mobility is almost half of that of US citizens , with only a small elite of 225 000 European citizens moving to another Union country ; in other words , 0.1 % of the population of the Fifteen .
This is why , in February 2002 , the Commission produced an action plan for skills and mobility that identifies 25 measures intended to respond to the shortcomings and needs indicated by the high-level task force .
I feel bound to criticise the Commission for having presented its proposals directly to the Barcelona European Council before giving Parliament the opportunity to comment on them .
Whilst the coherence of the action plan 's recommendations should be highlighted , European citizens still face many obstacles .
In this report , which I had the honour of drafting , in accordance with the Hughes procedure , in cooperation with the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport and incorporating the opinions of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities and the Committee of the Regions , which proved to be important and valuable contributions - I would highlight various measures intended to promote occupational and geographical mobility and the elimination of obstacles to their full realisation , some of which I shall now discuss .
Firstly , local authorities should be involved in setting up a network of industry-based and educational advisory bodies to bring the world of work and education systems closer together ; other , more effective actions need to be taken in order to reduce regional imbalances given that the basic reason for regional inequalities in terms of employment growth is the differences in the skill and educational levels and the mobility and adaptability of the labour force ;
Secondly , Member States should provide support for one of the pillars of the European Employment Strategy - the entrepreneurial spirit - using the necessary funds , and coordinate their training-related activities more closely ;
Thirdly , we must highlight the important role of the social partners in promoting access to training so that workers can achieve more and better qualifications and skills ; the participation of the social partners is also crucial to monitoring the action plan at European , national and regional level ;
Fourthly , Community legislation on the mutual recognition of qualifications must be more strictly applied ;
Fifthly , youth exchange programmes , the awareness of cultural diversity , linguistic ability and citizenship must all be encouraged throughout training ;
Sixthly , in order to combat the under-representation of women in high-technology sectors , support must be provided for the adoption of training actions and for the introduction of information and communications technologies and new systems of learning that guarantee women priority access , not forgetting the training and retraining of older workers , the disabled and other disadvantaged groups ;
Seventhly , the crucial role that teleworking could play as a response to a geographical mobility that workers do not want ;
Eighthly , the transferability of pensions is one of the most sensitive issues in this area , because pensions constitute a major obstacle to mobility , and workers who have acquired rights to a pension in their Member State could risk being unable to transfer these rights .
Directive 98 / 49 / EC and Regulation 1408 / 71 must , therefore , be updated , simplified and extended and the coexistence of situations of double taxation with those in which this does not apply must finally be eliminated ; a further major contribution to fostering geographical mobility is the creation of the European health insurance card , which is expected to be up and running in 2004 ;
Ninthly , we must highlight the use of the Eures system , although this must be extended and brought up to date .
I shall now address the Commission , so that it takes account of the importance of this instrument and fulfils the good intentions expressed in its communication on this particular aspect ; the objective of transparency and of centralising information on employment opportunities within the Union can be achieved through the creation of a one-stop site providing information on mobility as well as campaigns aimed at individual industries .
I would also highlight the fact that the candidate countries must combat the brain drain in this area ; we must help them to create their own structures for innovation and to promote the exchange of experience .
Member States , local authorities , employers , social partners and Community institutions must actively seek to ensure the success of this action plan and the measures that have now been presented must be taken into account in the revision of the European Employment Strategy
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Bastos on her report and her presentation of it and to thank the rapporteur of the Committee of the Regions , Mrs Arnold , for her input .
The action plan for skills and mobility consists of 25 points designed to give the citizens of the European Union greater mobility .
Basically , the objective of the action plan is to remove obstacles to living , working and studying between one Member State and another .
The objective is not , by any stretch of the imagination , to make mobility compulsory ; it is to put conditions in place which make it easier for anyone who so wishes to move within the European Union .
The Commission is delighted at how well Parliament has received the action plan and with its support for these measures which , as you know , were approved by the High-Level Task Force on Skills and Mobility as the most suitable way of improving the conditions upon which mobility and lifelong learning for our citizens depend .
Parliament 's report contains a number of undertakings which are even more ambitious than those made by the Commission in the action plan , although I have to say that , given the priorities laid down in part by the Barcelona Council , the Commission has endeavoured to make the action plan as realistic and feasible as possible , taking account of the legislative procedures required in order to keep to the proposed deadlines .
The action plan contains a series of specific targets which will be used to evaluate its success over coming years and we shall , of course , need a number of indicators in order to assess its progress .
These indicators will be defined together with the Member States .
We need the Member States to be actively involved at all levels , especially as a great many measures under the action plan are largely measures for which the Member States have jurisdiction .
I should like to point out that we need coordination and we need collaboration between the Member States on education and vocational training , especially when it comes to the mobility of young people , exchanges of best practices and transparent professional qualifications .
As a result of the initiative by the Commission and the Member States , the Council will issue a resolution on 12 November on reinforcing cooperation in the field of vocational training .
The point of reinforced cooperation is to improve the quality and attractiveness of vocational training overall and to address the lack of transparency and mutual trust hampering the recognition of professional qualifications and skills from one country to another .
The implementation of the plan is under way , legislative proposals have been submitted , new procedures have been designed and the Council has been urged to take decisions on the proposals already tabled .
The Commission has made provision for close collaboration with the social partners , especially on two points : first , on the question of lifelong learning and , secondly , on the facility to transfer supplementary pension rights .
More specifically , especially on the matters addressed by Mrs Bastos , there are already plans to set up a website containing information on job mobility by the end of the year , so that European citizens can obtain information on the European job market and a number of other areas to do with mobility .
It will also provide a direct link to the learning opportunities website which will be up and running in 2003 .
The Commission is to pass a decision revising the Eures system , so that it efficiently supports the mobility of European manpower , the objective being for Eures to provide services and information both to job seekers and to companies looking to recruit at European level .
Thirdly , the Commission will be tabling its proposal on the European health insurance card at the beginning of 2003 , which Parliament already knows about .
I should also like to mention two horizontal issues .
First , there is room to improve the position of women across the board and the gender dimension must be taken into account in all individual measures and , secondly , we face an important challenge in the run up to enlargement : Parliament has voiced its concern about the danger of a manpower drain from east to west ; this sort of mass exodus would create a huge problem for the candidate countries .
The connection between immigration and employment is to be discussed at a joint OECD / European Commission conference in January 2003 .
In the meantime , the Commission is discussing a draft directive from last year on conditions of entry and residence for third country nationals looking for paid employment or freelance work , so as to ensure that the Member States take a common approach on this issue .
The action plan for skills and mobility is a very complicated and ambitious plan containing a whole host of measures which , if they are to be implemented , require very close collaboration between the European institutions and the social factors and social partners .
May I make a point of thanking Parliament for the support and interest which it has shown in this plan right from the outset .
Mr President , may I start by saying how much I welcome the Commissioner 's remarks , and also those of the Danish Presidency .
The concept of putting employment in a central place in the Presidency programme is absolutely right and sets exactly the right tone and example not just for us but indeed for successive presidencies .
I would like to make some general remarks and then touch on my report .
Certainly it is fair to say that generally , Member States and this Parliament too often skate around the important issue of employment .
There is much talk but little action and such action as there is often unhelpful .
Certainly my own country sets a rather poor example in this respect .
Last year 4 600 employment regulations were introduced .
That is one every 26 minutes .
That is hardly the way ahead .
But it is not enough for us to have separate programmes and projects , welcome as those may be .
It is not enough just to set targets whether for young people , women , the long-term unemployed etc . , and then sit back and watch .
It is not enough to focus so firmly on job protection , trying to keep current jobs alive even when the market has moved on .
We need to focus on job creation , which means liberating enterprise .
We need to recognise that the greatest engine of employment growth in all our countries is the sector called ' small and medium-sized enterprises ' .
We must help them succeed and thrive and not hold them back .
We need to realise that full employment helps create social inclusion and not the other way around .
The Lisbon Council said , and I repeated this in my report , that we need to encourage a regulatory climate which is conducive to investment , innovation and entrepreneurship in general .
Two years on , we have simply added to the burdens on business , and high unemployment in continental Europe is our own fault .
I am heartened , however , by the lead that the Danish Presidency is trying to give and I would like to thank Minister Frederiksen in particular for a most helpful letter that he sent me on 18 September .
I am sure he will not be embarrassed if I share with colleagues just one paragraph which is very pertinent to our topic of discussion today :
' My clear stand is that the European Union should only step in with legislation where there is an obvious need for such regulation and , in such cases , only to the necessary extent .
There should be room for manoeuvre at the national level and if regulation is introduced it should , in my view , to the highest possible extent , be in the form of framework directives rather than detailed rules .
There should also , wherever possible , be a freedom of choice as to the method of implementation as is , for instance , the case in connection with the open coordination method in the employment and social field .
Finally I would like to emphasise that I also attach great importance to the principle of subsidiarity . '
Those are extremely wise words and we all look forward to them being translated into action .
Similarly , the comments from Commissioner Prodi back in July saying that the intention was to simplify regulation by at least 25 % , and to do that with all speed , is also to be welcomed .
Again , we wish to see some flesh put on those particular commitments as soon as possible , preferably again under your leadership and presidency .
As far as the growth and employment initiative is concerned , I was delighted that this was approved unanimously in committee and that we had made some progress in becoming lighter on our feet .
The first report on this multi-annual programme was in January 2001 .
The second year 's report was made only 11 months later , and this year the report is actually in October .
Next year I would like to make it earlier still , and I would look for the earliest possible feedback from the Commission to make this possible .
Specifically , however , I would like to point out how much I welcome the Commission 's cooperation in providing information and updates at regular intervals .
I welcome the progress that has been made and in particular the way that the programme has been managed and has developed .
I would like to see some clear responses and some action regarding the proposals made by the Parliament both last year and indeed this time around .
Very simply , I would like to see the next Commission report show that it has not only read Parliament 's report but has actually responded to it . This means including a fuller analysis of certain aspects of the initiative and also the winding up of the Joint European Venture , the JEV Programme , in its current form .
I am reminded that at the end of the debate in December on exactly this subject , Commissioner Liikanen accosted me just after he finished speaking and asked whether the Parliament agreed with winding up the JEV Programme , because this was what the Commission very much wanted to do .
I told him that Parliament did indeed want to see the programme wound up .
He said he was very relieved to hear that and would now get on with it .
So far , I have not seen much action in winding the programme up .
The Commission needs to be much quicker and lighter on its feet on such issues , but then , so do we all .
Mr President , SMEs play an important role , both from an economic and a social point of view .
They are therefore a key political priority .
The relevance of small and micro-enterprises was recognised by the Feira European Council .
This is why they should benefit from the EU financial instruments to a much greater degree than they have so far .
To achieve this , the Commission urgently needs to recognise and readdress three areas .
I am not entirely satisfied with the explanations we have had from the Commissioner .
The Commission needs to tackle the lack of information SMEs and micro-enterprises have about these programmes .
Access to information about how to get financing is an essential starting point for encouraging entrepreneurship and SMEs ' activities .
Therefore , the Commission and Member States need to launch campaigns to give SMEs clear and simple information on how to benefit from EU projects and programmes .
Second , there is too much red tape and too many complicated financing procedures .
These need to be eliminated .
In Europe , SMEs have to face many more obstacles when accessing financing than is the case for SMEs in the United States .
We have heard about the Joint European Venture Programme and why it has failed .
We must look at the figures .
One of the reasons is that one in five projects was refused by the Commission or withdrawn due to the level of administrative requirements .
This needs to be investigated .
Also , the Commission failed to put in place the groundwork before they launched the JEV Programme because it was not marketed in some states , there were no intermediaries , and if you look at the UK , there was only one .
This meant that the programme was doomed to fail from the start .
I know that in my region there are many micro-enterprises and SMEs who would have welcomed the opportunity to be involved in this programme .
I hope that its successor will address some of these problems because this programme is important , especially for the candidate countries .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission 's action plan on skills and mobility and Mrs Bastos ' report .
Whilst it is the lack of jobs rather than the lack of mobility which is the main problem for the unemployed in Europe , the issues identified by the Commission taskforce are very important .
I would like to make a few specific points that were highlighted by the Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities Committee :
First , gender mainstreaming is a requirement for all Commission documents , but an annex to this action plan explaining how it was done in this case would not only help ensure that the measures are adhered to , but would also demonstrate how mainstreaming was achieved in a practical way .
This would be a good example for other policy areas .
Second , regional initiatives are proposed to support training for women in occupations where they are not equally represented .
The revised Equal Treatment Directive allows Member States to provide such additional vocational training in areas such as the scientific sector and this should be built on in the action plan .
Third , the action plan proposes the formation of industrial , educational and other advisory bodies .
Whilst I know that membership of these bodies is not always within the Commission 's jurisdiction , a clause requiring the Commission to ensure equal representation when possible sends everyone involved a very clear message that this is desirable and expected .
Geographical mobility means more , of course , than simply getting a job in a different place .
There are other issues to be taken into account , particularly for workers with children : access to housing , social services , good quality education and childcare .
The report makes several points which I welcome and which are important to women , such as qualifying periods for supplementary pension rights - as mentioned by the Commissioner - and the use of best practice to encourage more young women to take an interest in mathematics , science and technology .
I hope Parliament will support the report .
Mr President , I should like to thank both the Council and the Commission warmly for their introduction , but I should also particularly like to thank both our PPE-DE rapporteurs , Mrs Regina Bastos and Mr Philip Bushill-Matthews , for their reports .
After all , it is important not just to debate the general aspect , but also to address two very specific components of the employment issue .
First of all , the SMEs which are , of course , of key importance to the economic structure , and Mrs Bastos ' report which naturally mainly concerns the labour market structure and the EU 's education and training structure .
If these are not kept in step with each other , then something is wrong .
At present , the economy is , of course , not in terribly good shape .
This will undoubtedly have an impact on the labour market .
We already know this and we should be prepared for this .
This is why I wonder whether the Council is not a little too upbeat .
Is it not relying too much on figures from the recent past , when growth and the development of productivity were far better than now ?
A second question that can be addressed to the Council is , of course , whether they are not being overly optimistic in combining all these processes .
We are certainly not opposed to this , but are we not in danger of creating another Johannesburg Summit of some kind , or to put it in biblical terms , a Tower of Babel , with all these processes happening simultaneously ?
Will this produce any extra benefits ?
This is my second question .
A question I should like to ask the Commission , one that is related to what I said on a general note , is the issue of whether the Commission takes account of its own directives .
I am very aware of the fact that as soon as a social directive is issued , very extensive discussions on employment will follow immediately .
This is currently the case with , for example , the directive on working conditions for temporary staff .
There are also other directives , though , in the field of the economy itself or in the field of annual reporting , and there are many complaints , also from SMEs , that these directives are very detrimental to employment .
I will give you an example that occurred this week , namely Commissioner Bolkestein 's Take-Over Directive .
This directive will almost certainly cost tens of thousands of jobs in the Netherlands and in Germany and , in time , will undermine the present social system .
Is this taken into consideration in the Commission 's decision-making process ?
Does consideration of how many jobs will be lost come into it at all ?
Or is the focus in respect of these inherently sound intentions on the social directives ?
If this were the case , this would , in my view , be wrong .
I would therefore like to find out from the Commission whether this was the case here , and if not , whether this is likely to happen in future .
As I have already said , we are still facing a difficult situation in the area of employment .
I think that a number of things can still happen at EU level .
I would , for example , mention the issue of the arms industry , which is very badly regulated in Europe , and where we could achieve far better employment levels but also far better efficiency than at present .
I know that a lot of people would prefer not to talk about this too much but would rather leave this to the course of time .
This too is therefore a problem that I believe we need to consider .
Finally , I think we should still be very careful not to look exclusively and excessively to America , and to believe that they do everything better than we do .
We have seen a few recent cases - it is enough for me to mention Enron , but also the current strike on the west coast - in which the United States does not do so well .
I would urge the Council and the Commission mainly to try to adopt the good things that are happening in the United States and not too many of the bad things , and also not to think that we are doing so badly on all scores .
We often do much better than we think .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the Commission , my fellow MEPs and the rapporteurs for this policy document .
It is important for us to try to attain the Lisbon goals and for this purpose , we must certainly develop the area of employment and training .
I therefore welcome this proposal .
We must learn from the past , for without the past , there is no future .
In order to achieve the goals agreed in Lisbon , however , we will also need to consider better labour mobility , and I particularly have the border regions in mind .
We need more harmonisation and more cooperation in the tripartite system of government , industry and knowledge institutes , mainly in order to stimulate working across borders .
This is why I have tabled an amendment to promote this .
Fortunately , the Committee on Budgets has already adopted an amendment to this effect and I hope that the same can be done in this Chamber .
At the moment , the transnational labour and knowledge potential that is available is still very much under-utilised , and this must improve .
Furthermore , we should in future consider the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and diplomas , something that we are , in fact , already addressing to a large extent .
Eventually , however , the cross-border harmonisation of social security systems , social policy and even tax policy will also need to improve .
I assume that the Council will deal with this and will be tabling proposals in due course , particularly with a view to promoting this mobility and the exchange of knowledge across the borders , for as we know , there are very few Europeans who move from one region to another , particularly to look for employment .
Unlike Mr Pronk , I should like to point to the Americans , who have no difficulty whatsoever in looking for another job within a one thousand kilometre radius .
As for his comment on take-over bids , I should like to note that in my view , European enterprises are better able to run as a result , and if they run better within the internal market , this will eventually lead to better investments and thus to more employment .
As you see , Mr President , it is possible for us to have different views .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Frederiksen and Mrs Diamantopoulou .
I shall keep my comments brief , for small groups have little speaking time .
I thank our fellow MEPs Mrs Bastos and Mr Bushill-Matthews for their contributions .
I should like to outline a number of key areas .
We are discussing the revision of the employment strategy .
If we look at the current guidelines , and the priorities as they are at present formulated , then it is clear that the employment strategy has , in fact , partly been overtaken by the Lisbon process , and the Lisbon process , has , in turn , been overtaken by an economic downturn .
This means that a great number of things are actually in the balance .
Labour participation targets are probably not realistic ; there is no employment ; it is only possible to offer incentives if employment is on offer and if the offer of employment is promoted .
The question is , however , whether we are always able to do this .
I am very interested to find out about these new guidelines and also very interested to see what we can get rid of .
How can we sum this up ?
I can understand that things are different for youth unemployment , but a number of other types of work , such as jobs for the elderly , cannot always be promoted .
I welcome new guidelines and do not believe there is always a need for pillars .
These guidelines should , however , be clear and simple , just like the new relationship with ESF and the funds .
With regard to streamlining , I actually endorse Mr Pronk 's view on this , namely that streamlining and integration are closely connected .
If we talk about integration , we should also take account of the economic and socio-economic policy aspects in the re-assessment of what we refer to as the social and employment policy .
Finally , I would ask the Commissioner or the Council why the Social Security Directive has not , to date , been reviewed .
I have seen the annotated agenda and cannot make out any progress .
I wonder when this will happen when we talk about flexibility on the one hand and social security on the other .
Commissioner , I feel that there is not much point in constantly referring back to the Lisbon objectives if our goal is to define at European level and , most importantly , at national level , action plans and legislative measures to create an environment which will encourage firms ' competitiveness , particularly in this period , and thus create the right conditions for high-quality employment .
In my opinion , there are a number of things we should do - and we can choose whether or not to do them - at national level .
Here are a few considerations .
I feel , for example , that the constant focus on the action of the social partners is not just excessive but is in danger of leading us along a path which will increase the rigidity of the labour market , the path of protecting workers and firms that are already part of the production cycle and providing them with guarantees , safeguards and opportunities , in other words protecting those inside the labour market and the economy and thus creating greater barriers for those outside the market , those who need it most , those who are seeking work .
As regards intracommunity mobility - and I feel this is an important goal - I believe that we must concentrate on creating the right conditions for effective access to this mobility .
I would point out , however , that there are mobility problems within the Community and within the individual countries , and I am thinking here of Italy , for example , where there is extremely little , if any , labour mobility within the country because of labour market legislation , because of national collective agreements - and I hope that nobody is going to propose European collective agreements for the different sectors of the labour market - agreements which do not recognise specific situations or even the different benefits that the individual areas might present for an efficient labour market ; we therefore need to create worker mobility but also investment mobility .
Another aspect of the same subject is the mobility of professional labour and professional categories of workers .
Many countries such as Italy have a corporative system for regulating the professions , which makes access impossible since the partners would be bound to the corporations and creates a legislative barrier to mobility , for example to access in Italy for those who wish to exercise some of the most important liberal professions .
I believe that we must reflect on this issue , and we must also reflect on the fact that it might be better for Europe to concentrate on the need for a constant increase in the role of the social partners rather than trying to introduce the most effective market rules possible .
Madam President , allow me first to address a query to Mr Frederiksen , who chaired his first Social Affairs Council yesterday .
I have been informed , to my great surprise , that it was impossible to reach agreement on the tripartite social dialogue summit during that meeting , and in my view , one of the very things that are important in the employment strategy and that we must try to promote is to involve the social partners in this employment strategy based on their responsibility in wage-base determination and working conditions policy .
I should like to express my great astonishment and sadness at this and ask him why no agreement could be reached .
I should like to make two comments on the report by Mr Bushill-Matthews , who has for the second time drafted a report of this kind on this annual report and whose shadow rapporteur I have now been for the second time .
I am also a little surprised at the fact that the report features on the agenda of this plenary meeting , since we tried very hard to reach agreement within the committee on a number of important points .
I have two observations to make in this connection .
Firstly , with regard to the JEVs , that is , the joint ventures with the accession countries , I fully endorse what Mrs Gill has said on the subject , namely that it is important to analyse carefully why that project is running so badly , whether this is indeed due to the publicity , the bureaucracy and long-winded administrative procedures , and whether it is not regrettable to mess up a project of this kind if there is a possibility that the procedures might be improved .
I should like to ask the Commission to pay particular attention to matters of this kind during this assessment , because I believe that it could in itself present a very important opportunity to promote entrepreneurship and cooperation .
My final point concerns Mr Bushill-Matthews ' report .
I should like to briefly draw attention to the request that has also been included in his report to obtain a report from the Commission about corporate social responsibility and the SME .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Bastos ' excellent report highlights the dual necessity to integrate Eures into the Member States ' employment services and to involve local authorities and the social partners in the activities of Eures so as to bring about ever-increasing decentralisation of labour mobility initiatives .
It will thus be possible to enhance and extend cross-border cooperation in training , the recognition of qualifications and the protection of pension rights , to which the social partners have made a decisive contribution with the promotion by Eures of at least 39 interregional trade union councils in the territories bordering on the States of Europe .
This experience must be exploited and must certainly not go to waste , which is what would happen if the interregional trade union councils were detached from Eures and their existence and the funding of their activities somehow made dependent on the goodwill of each individual Union State , as would appear to be the intention of the Commission .
The need for greater involvement of the Member States in the funding and running of Eures and the associated structures is certainly something we support , but the form and extent of this involvement can only be defined at Community level and involve all the Member States jointly and severally : in other words , it must not lead to the Commission casting off its responsibility for the running or even the continued existence of the interregional trade union councils .
We have therefore tabled an amendment before the House with the consent of the rapporteur , Mrs Bastos , which proposes that the Commission and the Council be asked for reassurance on this point .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Bastos on this exhaustive report on a subject - mobility - which is so important , so crucial for a Europe which is hoping to achieve greater competitiveness through the creation of new , higher-quality jobs .
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the Commission 's Action Plan , which contains practical measures for creating a more favourable environment for the European labour market by 2005 , making it more open and accessible for all .
I am pleased to find included a number of recommendations which I and Mr Evans made two years ago in our report on mobility within the Community , in particular the mobility of students , people undergoing training and people doing voluntary work as well as teachers and researchers .
Then , last but certainly not least , there is a special section which deals with the mobility of people with disabilities .
We need to go further , however .
If , indeed , we want a Europe with more and higher-quality jobs , with greater social cohesion - in other words , if we want to achieve the ambitious but necessary Lisbon objectives - it is essential that we continue to concentrate on eliminating once and for all those barriers which still exist , restricting the professional and geographical mobility of the European citizens and , indeed , limiting their potential .
We cannot afford to let this absurd situation continue any longer . It is easier for money , goods and services to move within the European Union than the European citizens themselves .
Consider the strategic role of the local authorities , the opportunities provided by teleworking and the need to modernise and fully exploit the potential of the Eures system . This is something I stressed in my report on the Sixth Framework-Programme for Research too .
We therefore need to update and simplify coordination of social security once and for all , speed up revision of Regulation No 1408 / 71 and address and resolve together the complex issue of supplementary pensions .
A key issue , then , which Mr Zappalà is currently addressing in committee , is that of academic and vocational qualifications and the mutual recognition thereof . We must , at last , achieve that European area of qualifications which will complete the reform of the internal market , increasing mobility between the different Member States of the Union considerably .
I should like to express my thanks for the many sound contributions during this debate .
I agree with Commissioner Diamantopoulou that , following yesterday 's Council meeting , we now have a common platform for revising the Common Employment Strategy .
I also agree that we must use this platform as the basis for a broad debate on future employment in the EU .
Let there be no doubt that the debate is open to all players and that the role of the European Parliament in this debate is absolutely crucial .
I should also like to thank Mr Bushill-Matthews for his observations to the effect that we must create jobs in practice .
It is in this area that the European Employment Strategy must be put to the test and demonstrate its worth .
I should also like to express my thanks for the many practical proposals contributed by Mr Bushill-Matthews for promoting employment in Europe and increasing flexibility in the European labour markets .
I am also keen to stress , as several other speakers have done , that the two sides of industry must take an active part in the process .
They must feel that they own the process and so feel an obligation to participate .
I know that the basic conditions for doing so vary from one Member State to another , but it is on a day-to-day basis that the results are to be achieved , and I am pleased that the Commission and Parliament are emphasising this .
I think I have unfortunately to say to Mrs van den Burg that she has misunderstood the outcome of yesterday 's Council meeting .
I agree completely that the social dialogue and the tripartite summit are important , which is why we scheduled these matters for discussion over lunch at yesterday 's Council meeting , where it was agreed that we should establish a tripartite social dialogue summit .
We shall therefore try to have this endorsed at the next Council meeting .
I should like to say to Mr Herman Schmid that , in my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , I cannot at this time present practical models for closer cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council , but we look forward to hearing this matter discussed and to having the practical options and proposals on the table over the next few months .
I want to say to Mr Bouwman that we in the Council should very much like to see the various socio-political directives revised .
One of the things I would point out is that the current modernisation of EEC Regulation 1408 / 71 on social security schemes for employed persons moving within the Community is on the agenda of the Council 's December meeting .
I should also like to thank Mr Andersson for his contribution .
We are in complete agreement on a great many matters .
We must be focused in our approach and see to it that matters are implemented in such a way that there is democratic scrutiny of all our efforts .
I should again like to emphasise that , for the people of Europe , it is the results that count .
When all is said and done , an increase in prosperity is conditional upon those who are unemployed obtaining jobs .
People must get off passive welfare and into work .
New jobs must be created , and the business climate must promote the creation of new , and more , jobs .
That is , and remains , the main task .
We must debate the future Employment Strategy now and over the next few months and , as Mr Herman Schmid stated , we must arrange for the national strategies to fit in with the European strategies , for it is in this area that we can reap the considerable benefits of our combined efforts to promote employment .
I would thank the representatives of the Council and the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The next item is a joint debate on :
? Recommendation ( A5-0299 / 2002 ) by Mr Obiols i Germà , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Community and its Member States of the one part , and the People 's Democratic Republic of Algeria of the other part ( 10819 / 2002 - C5-0362 / 2002 - 2002 / 0077 ( AVC ) ) , and
? oral questions ( B5-0255 / 2002 and B5-0256 / 2002 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , to the Council and Commission , on the conclusion of an association agreement with Algeria .
Madam President , Commissioners , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Cohn-Bendit , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure for me to table the question here and also to make a number of comments on behalf of our rapporteur - if he is not here - on the conclusion of an association agreement with Algeria .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs did not make things easy for itself in this respect .
We therefore also postponed our decision until we were able to hold a discussion with the Algerian Foreign Minister , to whom we put questions on a wide range of issues , notably concerning compliance with key aspects of this agreement and especially the clauses on human rights and democracy .
This is also an important question for the Council and the Commission .
How much confidence is there that these provisions will be complied with ?
Under Article 2 of the agreement , and with the involvement of this Parliament , it should after all be guaranteed that importance is attached in future to ensuring that such clauses do not simply remain abstract elements of these agreements but form part of an operational policy designed to make sure that appropriate developments genuinely take place in such countries .
I believe that it is in our common interest that we should have peaceful and democratic development , based on the rule of law , throughout the Mediterranean region , and therefore also in Algeria .
This is why it is right for these relations to be developed in order to enforce such positions .
In this context , the Council and the Commission must use all the instruments to ensure that the death penalty is abolished , that genuine cooperation is established in the fight against terrorism , and that progress is made on issues relating to decentralised decision-making structures , taking account of the different conditions within the country , and in particular , to ensure that progress is made on economic and social development which deprives terrorism of its breeding-ground .
I believe that these are key tasks , which should be tackled on the basis of this agreement so that it can become a genuinely useful instrument .
In this context , it is naturally also of interest to us to find out , in view of the European Union 's policies , to what extent free movement of persons can genuinely be developed in this area , and , furthermore , how issues such as asylum policy can be dealt with .
In particular , of course , we are keen to hear why inter-parliamentary relations do not merit a single mention in this new agreement .
I believe that if we wish to promote democratic development in any country , it is extremely important to support parliamentary developments in an appropriate way in order , on the basis of inter-parliamentary dialogue , to set in train a mutual learning process and strengthen a country 's democratic development .
I would be pleased if the Council and Commission could answer this question .
In particular , I am interested in hearing how the current Treaty can be used to promote this development , irrespective of what the Treaty says .
For these reasons , I would like to ask everyone to vote for this agreement .
In line with the resolutions which we have tabled in this House , however , we intend to monitor the implementation of this agreement on an ongoing basis and look very carefully at what you , the Council and the Commission , are doing , so that we ensure that our notions of democracy and human rights , as well as the joint campaign against terrorism , can flow into a progressively positive common policy .
On this , I ask for your support !
Madam President , might I be permitted to emphasise that the signing of the association agreement really has signified a turning point and opened a new chapter in our relations with Algeria .
It is the Council 's view that the signing of this agreement clearly shows that , in order to stimulate trade and investment , the Algerian authorities have a desire to maintain and step up their efforts on behalf of the necessary reform process .
That ought also to find expression in political and social reforms .
A clear signal is also being sent to investors to the effect that Algeria undertakes to create a constructive environment for international enterprises .
It is primarily a question of intergovernmental relations , but the agreement also provides a framework for the commercial world and civil society .
The agreement is also of significance for the EU 's entire Mediterranean policy , and it is a further step towards setting up a Euro-Mediterranean free-trade area .
The purpose of the agreement is also to promote that sub-regional cooperation between the Mediterranean partners themselves that is so important to a positive outcome of the Barcelona process .
The association agreement contains an article on the movement of persons , and the EU has in this way pledged to look into the possibility of simplifying and speeding up the procedures for issuing visas to certain persons .
This provision must find expression in the implementation rules for the agreement .
Once the agreement has come into force , the bodies set up under it will have to investigate how it will be possible to implement this pledge concerning visas , taking account of course of the EU 's policy at the relevant time .
With regard to respect for human rights , the Council is monitoring very carefully the issues relating to respect for human rights in Algeria , and specifically within the political dialogue with Algeria that has taken place at ministerial level since 1997 .
In this way , the Council , which is represented in the troika , is given the opportunity regularly to address these issues and vigorously to emphasise that there must be no violation or abuse of human rights , including in connection with combating terrorism .
The association agreement will now provide greater opportunities for following up this issue and for supporting the Algerian authorities in this connection .
I would point out that , as is well known , the agreement makes respect for human rights an essential feature forming the basis of the parties ' external and internal policies .
It also provides an institutional framework for regular political dialogue at different levels , and specifically at Association Council level , concerning all subjects of common interest .
As long as respect for human rights is a problem in Algeria , the issue will be on the agendas of the joint meetings .
As soon as the agreement has come into force , that will apply both to the political dialogue , established in 1997 , and to the bodies concerned with the agreement , namely the Association Council and the Association Committee .
The Council does not intend to take any steps concerning the situation in Kabylia , for it regards the matter as being in the first place an internal Algerian issue .
However , the Council looks favourably upon the important decision taken recently to give the Tamazight language the status of a national language .
In June 2001 , the Gothenburg European Council made it an urgent matter generally to call upon all those in responsible positions in Algeria to make efforts to bring the present confrontations and violence to an end .
It encouraged the authorities to launch a political initiative to solve the crisis with the aid of dialogue between all Algerians .
The situation remains difficult and complex , however , as may be seen from the low turnout at the parliamentary election on 30 May 2002 .
The October local elections will also be able to provide an important indication of the situation in the region .
Improvement at the socio-economic level would aid the search for a solution , and we have every desire to help with the efforts aimed at economic reforms .
We are supporting these by means of the Meda Regulation , providing EUR 240 million for the period 2000-2004 , and by means of the loans from the European Investment Bank , amounting to EUR 620 million since 1996 .
Once it has been put in place , the new investment facility should also contribute to improving the economic situation in Algeria .
According to the association agreement , the Association Council can facilitate cooperation and contacts between the European Parliament and Algeria 's parliamentary institutions , as well as between the Economic and Social Committee and the corresponding body in Algeria .
I should like to emphasise that the Council takes a positive view of the conclusions of the latest meeting of the parliamentary Euro-Mediterranean Forum in Bari in June 2002 , emphasising the parliamentary dimension of our partnership with the southern Mediterranean countries .
We are in the process of looking into which cooperation mechanisms can be used for setting up such a Euro-Mediterranean assembly .

Madam President , the agreement signed by the European Union and Algeria marks the start of a new era in relations between us , and as Mr Brok quite rightly says , Algeria needs Europe and Europe needs Algeria within the context of Euro-Mediterranean collaboration .
I should like to comment on three important points , in reply to the issues raised by Mr Brok .
The first relates to the economic and political reforms which this agreement may help , the second relates to people 's freedom of movement and the third relates to human rights .
On the first point , from a political point of view , Algeria decided in 1989 to adopt a constitution allowing a multi-party system .
At present , democracy is not very well grounded , with political life segregated from civil society .
Algeria has a duty to improve the situation and , more to the point , to ensure that there is a genuine division between the executive , legislative and judicial powers and transparent ballot counts .
The political dialogue for which provision is made in the association agreement will provide a valuable framework for exchanging opinions and experience on this issue .
From an economic point of view , the association agreement allows for the gradual introduction of a single free trade area between Algeria and the European Union and challenges the Algerian Government to make the necessary reforms .
As stressed in the resolution , it will have to start by satisfying certain basic needs of the people , such as running water , housing and medical care , otherwise it will clearly be unable to push ahead with other reforms because it will not have the consent of the people .
Similarly , it needs to move and facilitate the move from the present planned economy to a free-market economy .
This reform was overdue in Algeria anyway , because the suffocating planned economy had reached its limits .
But now it has an opportunity , helped by this agreement , to adopt economic reforms which , basically , will rectify economic distortions and social inequalities .
The transition to a free-market economy will require consultations with business associations , with the trades union , and will need to focus on improving the legal framework for business and investment activities , reforming the banking system and stamping out corruption .
The government recently approved a 7 billion dollar programme along these lines , which covers a great many of these issues .
Again , the aid provided by the European Union under the MEDA programme will supplement this programme , given its three basic objectives of : one , strengthening the market economy ; two , developing human resources , and three , consolidating the rule of law and satisfying certain requirements .
The second point concerns the free movement of persons .
Under the agreement , the European Union is charged with finding ways of simplifying the visa procedure , as Mr Frederiksen mentioned , especially for the people involved in implementing it .
This is a reasonable request on the Algerian side .
The association agreement cannot concern itself merely with the setting up of a free trade zone ; it must also make it easier for people to travel in both directions .
I should point out that this endeavour relates to legal movements and in no way contradicts the Seville conclusions on stopping illegal immigration .
The agreement signed is completely in line with the Seville guidelines making provision for specific collaboration on illegal immigration and the repatriation of illegal immigrants .
The third issue is the human rights clause , which is fundamental to the association procedure .
The Commission acknowledges that Algeria has experienced tragic terrorist activity over the past ten years and we are giving the Algerian Government all the support we can in its fight against terrorism ; but we also believe that the fight against terrorism is no excuse whatsoever for trampling over fundamental freedoms .
The link to the Barcelona process implies a joint commitment to comply with certain basic democratic rules and values .
Our main concern in this area is for those whose whereabouts are unknown ; there are serious obstacles which need to be overcome both by their families and by non-governmental organisations , who frequently encounter delaying tactics on the part of the authorities .
I think that the application of the human rights clause can be dealt with both adjectivally and substantially .
Adjectivally through political dialogue , which needs to be predicated on human rights , and substantially , I would say , by the European Union by using a clearer and more substantive language with fewer evasions .
One item on the agenda for political dialogue is the question of Kabylie .
We are hoping to inaugurate a dialogue with representative agencies and we welcome the conciliatory approach taken recently on the question of the official recognition of Tamazight as a national language .
The European Parliament is willing , as it has already stated , to foster dialogue with the Algerian parliament and this will be vital to exchanges of information , common positions and the interests of both sides .
Contrary to what is stated in the motion for a resolution , the importance of this is clearly stated in Article 99 of the agreement and the Commission will do its utmost to facilitate this sort of dialogue .
On a more general note , the Commission wholeheartedly supports Parliament 's approval of this association agreement , which must not under any circumstances be seen as a blank cheque for the Algerian Government ; it is a way of encouraging it to continue with the political , economic and social reforms it has started , basically in order to better the lot of the Algerian people .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , when giving our opinion , according to the recommendations of Mr Obiols , with regard to the proposal for an association agreement with the People 's Democratic Republic of Algeria , our Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , through the intermediary of its Chairman , Mr Brok , and with the agreement of its bureau , considered it necessary to open the debate that has brought us here today and which will be followed , tomorrow , by the adoption of a resolution that I hope will be voted for by a very large majority of this House .
This step , which , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , has just enabled us to obtain the answers we were waiting for in response to our main questions , must in no way be interpreted as an attempt to interfere in Algeria 's domestic affairs , particularly as a mark of disrespect towards Algerian culture and identity .
On the contrary , it falls within the scope of Parliament 's commitment , recalled here by Mr Obiols , to establishing a privileged partnership with the Maghreb countries based on mutual respect and increased awareness of our common destiny .
That was the aim of the own-initiative report on the Arab Maghreb Union , for which Mr Cohn-Bendit and I were co-rapporteurs , which was adopted by a very large majority in this House before the summer .
With regard to this debate , I would now like to emphasise three points that have already been partially raised .
The first is that timetabling clashes mean we are delivering our opinion on the same day that local elections , which are crucial for the future , are taking place in Algeria as you mentioned , President-in-Office of the Council .
We must hope that these elections contribute to achieving peace , and do not , as some fear today , particularly in Kabylia , give rise to further outbreaks of violence which would serve as pretexts for further repression .
The second point is that , among the anticipated consequences of the conclusion of this agreement , we firmly hope that aid from the European Union will provide a solution to one of the main difficulties in this country , namely the problem of youth unemployment and the resulting frustrations .
In this regard , President-in-Office of the Council , you spoke of the need to increase investment and you invited Europeans to invest .
In fact , we believe that this is one of the very important areas in which the agreement should allow us to demonstrate our commitment .
Today , however , we draw the attention of the Algerian authorities to the fact that , for European investors , the formalities that must currently be fulfilled with a view to approval are probably a little too bureaucratic and can sometimes be discouraging .
I have already said this to our Algerian counterparts when I met them last week , but I would like to repeat it today .
The third point is that we must hope this agreement will help to develop and strengthen regional cooperation - and you mentioned that as well , President-in-Office of the Council - and that it will therefore contribute to kick-starting the process of constituting the Arab Maghreb Union , a process which today is unfortunately at a standstill in the absence of any prospect of a political solution to the problem of the Western Sahara .
Also on this point , I believe it would be useful to ask the Algerian authorities to pay the utmost attention to finding a solution that allows all the parties concerned to save face , by means , naturally , of the necessary compromises .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot remain indifferent in the face of the current situation in Algeria .
On the contrary , it should make us more committed to making a clear assessment of the current state of the country and to helping the Algerian people to overcome their difficulties .
That is why I am giving my full support to the Euro-Mediterranean association agreement that has been presented to us for our agreement today .
I believe it is along the right lines for four main reasons .
This is part of the very rationale behind the process opened in Barcelona , encouraging Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
This agreement will facilitate regional integration and in particular the Arab Maghreb Union , which we are hoping for with all our might .
This agreement sends a strong signal of the solidarity of European citizens with the Algerian people .
And in particular , this agreement should support Algeria in its efforts to achieve openness , reforms and modernisation .
That is the most important thing .
In this context , I am pleased to see the broad consensus within the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy in favour of the proposed measures .
Nevertheless , our agreement must not be interpreted as giving the Algerian authorities carte blanche .
We must remain vigilant on the subject of human rights , democracy and good governance .
These fundamental values are the very cornerstone of the European Union and must be respected as a prerequisite for the correct implementation of the agreement .
That is why Parliament 's motion for a resolution , which recalls these requirements , is along the right lines and should be given the utmost consideration .
Please allow me to add that , as a Frenchwoman , I am particularly aware of the difficulties that the Algerian people has suffered for so long .
The suffering of this country has gone on long enough .
We all need to take urgent action to find concrete solutions .
The association agreement will contribute to this if we are able to give objective consideration to Algeria 's real problems .
Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , we have discussed this matter for quite some time in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , with reports and hearings .
Most of us have also had bilateral contact with a number of representatives of Algeria .
We have done all of this not only because we take this issue seriously , but also because there are many issues concerning Algeria which need to be dealt with .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is particularly concerned about the human rights situation .
We know that serious human rights violations are being committed in Algeria .
Torture and persecution of opponents are unfortunately not unusual , and there are many reports of abuses by military and paramilitary groups .
Thousands of citizens have disappeared , and it is worrying that the Algerian authorities have not permitted UN observers to investigate this situation .
The situation in Kabylia is still desperate , and peaceful demonstrators have been killed .
Much remains to be done in Algeria in the domains of freedom of the press , freedom of association and the establishment of the rule of law .
The country also has a terrorism problem .
These issues are described very well and in great detail in Mr Brok 's resolution .
It also points out the need for a regular follow-up of the way in which human rights are being observed , for scrutiny and for interparliamentary dialogue .
The Liberal Group has made constructive efforts to contribute to this resolution .
It is therefore with some surprise and disappointment that we note that the Christian Democrats have put forward a number of amendments which considerably dilute the resolution .
If these amendments are adopted , we believe that the resolution will not have the required force or constitute the complement to the recommendation by Mr Obiols i Germà that is so important .
The Liberal Group would vote against the resolution .
It would be a shame if these points disappeared , because it is very important to put pressure on the Algerian Government .
The association agreement is important for Algeria .
In spite of the agreement 's shortcomings , we believe that Europe has to help Algeria to build up its economic , political and democratic institutions .
As has been pointed out , the agreement constitutes an extremely important part of the Barcelona process .
Madam President , by way of conclusion I wish to address a few words to the Commission .
What is the significance of Article 2 of the association agreement : the human rights clause ?
We have discussed it many , many times , but it has never been acted upon .
What is so terribly difficult about finding mechanisms for temporarily or , if necessary , permanently breaking off cooperation , with reference to Article 2 , when serious human rights violations are carried out ?
If we do not lead from the front on this issue , we will actually make ourselves look ridiculous , and we risk not being taken seriously in the field of foreign policy .
If so , all our talk of a human rights dimension in foreign policy will be nothing but resoundingly empty words .
Madam President , of course this agreement is not the result of an extensive process of participation and negotiation between all the main players from both sides .
Consequently , it is what it is .
Our support , however , for the challenge of forging lasting political relations between both sides of the Mediterranean is unstinting , and we also hope that the Algerian crisis can emerge from behind closed doors where it has tragically played out for too long .
We would therefore like to take up the challenge of shared development .
Mr Morillon , I am going to put your mind at ease , please be reassured : we are not interfering when we talk of the democratic deficit and of the importance of supporting the development of freedom in this country .
The report of the Arab States office of the United Nations Development Programme says this itself .
It is therefore not a matter of interference at all .
Democracy is the foundation of development in all its forms .
However , in order to meet this challenge , in order to take up this challenge of shared development , we must begin by not adding confusion to the chaos in Algeria .
Certainly , this agreement must not give the authorities free rein .
In order to avoid this , it is necessary to very clearly acknowledge that , today , it is practically indecent to deny that the violence that has blighted Algeria for more than ten years is down to groups of all kinds , and when I say all kinds , clearly I am also talking about military security groups .
This has to be said !
Paramilitary groups . This has to be written !
Mr Habib Souaidia , who is present here today along with other friends whom I would like to greet , was accused of slander by General Nezzar .
Mr Souaidia said that the generals , who are the real politicians and decision-makers , have killed thousands of people for no reason at all .
The case brought by Mr Nezzar was thrown out .
Will we have just the merest fraction of the courage of this Algerian lieutenant ?
I believe that we should start by acknowledging in our resolution the suffering and tragedy , the hundreds of thousands who have died and the thousands who have disappeared .
Secondly , our resolution must clearly call for the lifting of the state of emergency which is a real denial of freedom , and the public authorities with whom we negotiate , by declaring this state of emergency , have even let their prerogatives lapse , under the guise of military power .
How can we accept this ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this association agreement with Algeria comes at the right time and I also believe that it has become urgent since Algeria is finally struggling to emerge from a lengthy dark period in which it has found itself as a result of an ongoing attempt to destabilise it , comparable to the situation affecting all oil-rich countries across the world .
A foreign , imperialist attack that , as elsewhere , used Islamic extremism for geopolitical ends , which we have been too short-sighted to see .
Mrs Boumediene-Thiery brought up the main issue a moment ago when she reminded us of the United States ' desire to get its hands on Algeria 's mineral resources .
The Algerian Government passed the test victorious in spite of its isolation and timidity , I would even say faintheartedness , for which European aid is chiefly to blame .
In order for this association to be successful , it must not be limited to good intentions , or just to vague , exclusively economic , free trade agreements .
It must also be a political association .
In other words , we must get used to addressing all global political issues together with our Mediterranean partners .
Furthermore , this is a prerequisite for the Mediterranean to remain at the centre of the world stage ; unless this condition is met , we might become more African , Mediterranean or European , but have only a minor role to play in the twenty-first century world .
In order to achieve this , we must clearly go beyond a simple association agreement with Algeria , as with other Maghreb countries , which are our closest allies .
We need to alter the structure of Europe and leave behind any fantasies of supranationality and federalism so that we can include our Mediterranean neighbours in an expanded European Union , which will clearly make imperial powers see that they are up against a group of countries devoted to the preservation of liberty , that is to say ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , the association agreement concluded with Algeria really is a step in the right direction in Euro-Mediterranean relations and towards achieving our common objective , which is to create not just a free trade zone but an area of sustainable development , security and prosperity for all .
This being so , may I say how delighted I am that the agreement clearly refers to respect for fundamental human rights .
I am also delighted at the references to promoting the role of women in economic and social development through education , vocational training , better family planning programmes and the media .
What saddens me , however , is that these references alone will not promote respect for women 's rights in practice and that no reference to this issue was made either by the President-in-Office or by you , Commissioner , who are a champion of women 's rights and have nailed your flag to the mast of respect for the principle of equality in the Community 's foreign relations .
I should like to remind you that , in its resolution on the report on respect for women 's rights in Euro-Mediterranean relations , the European Parliament called for an express provision on protection for women 's rights and , at the same time , called for provision to be made for a protection monitoring policy similar to that applied to candidate countries .
I should therefore like to take this opportunity to voice my disappointment , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , at the sidelining of this issue and to salute the Commissioner 's words , her optimistic words , about the association agreement not being a blank cheque for Algeria .
We would like the European Commission to set up mechanisms to monitor and evaluate progress and for the Algerian Government to be required , as should happen with all association agreements , to demonstrate the necessary political will to bring about the legislative , administrative and other reforms needed in order to anchor equal opportunities between men and women in the law and include gender mainstreaming in all its policies .
In the same vein , we want to support Mr Brok 's proposal on combating and condemning violence against women and , as condemnation never suffices , we want to impose a strategy inspired by the experience and successes of strategies in the European Union and the candidate countries to combat violence .
In the same vein , I should like to condemn the absence of the role of women and women 's organisations from the proposed regional collaboration .
This , at the very least , is one area where provision should be made to strengthen civil society and work with women 's organisations .
Madam President , I think that , this evening , we all welcome the fact that we have reached a key point in relations between the European Union and Algeria . It is a key point because the situation in Algeria has been extraordinarily troubled for at least a decade .
It has experienced , inter alia , a period of relative isolation in terms of international relations , particularly relations with Europe , not least in that there is a connection between Algeria and the African dimension and it is important that this aspect of relations is strengthened too .
I would like to place this report precisely in the context of the partnership .
The agreement is actually an instrument , it is not a concession granted by Europe , by the European Union , to Algeria , for we too benefit from the agreement - we must never forget that - and it is an instrument which unites , an instrument based on a vision of partnership .
What does this mean ?
It means that we need to exploit all the possibilities , both as regards Algerian society - which we could say may be stifling both its economic potential and its human resources potential - and as regards ourselves .
I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to a number of points .
You set great store by the Agadir process set up between the countries which have concluded association agreements with us .
You ought to focus equally on the Maghreb dimension of the partnership , for , as we all know , the borders are closed between Morocco and Algeria , and if Europe does not help to increase cooperation between neighbours I do not know what its mission is .
Lastly , I feel that it is important to place the emphasis on human rights - as other Members have done - and on the elections .
I would like to say to the Algerian authorities that something important is happening in Kabylia : a party which did not take part in the political elections has presented itself at the administrative elections .
This is important because it repairs a deep institutional divide which had become established .
We have witnessed a period when , for example , relations between the police and the people of Kabylia were non-existent .
It would be a shame if , during the elections , the police authorities were to create problems once again rather than protecting the people and assuring the smooth running of the electoral process , which is extremely important .
It is therefore absurd to make a comparison between Algeria and the candidate countries , for we are not granting Algeria accession to the European Union , ladies and gentlemen , let us be quite clear about that .
The greater the consideration that the Union gives to these countries , the greater the benefits it might derive from relations too .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President , I am happy to be closing this discussion .
I would just like to say to my good friend Philippe Morillon , ' Philippe , you are wrong .
All your amendments are misguided .
And I believe that you should think about them tonight and withdraw these amendments as soon as you wake up tomorrow .
Most of them have already been withdrawn ?
Well then , withdraw the rest !
We will all be happy ! '
Why ?
Because it is obvious that we must exercise our right to intervene .
The Algerians exercise this right to interfere in our affairs when they say that our immigration policy is not right , that they do not have enough visas , etc .
They have the right to participate in European discussions .
If there is an association agreement , then we have not only the right but also the duty to intervene when massacres are committed .
We must condemn massacres , whether they are committed by Islamic terrorists , paramilitary terrorists or other terrorists linked to some armed service .
We do not have the right to allow the Algerian embassy to dictate resolutions or amendments to us .
That is not our role .
Here our role is to establish an association agreement , on the one hand , and on the other , to intervene politically in discussions in Algeria , so that Algeria can emerge as a democracy .
And this is not just the fault of colonialism , though colonialism does have its faults .
Algeria has a single party tradition .
Algeria has a tradition of military power where the military stands above society and it is the military that commits both good and evil acts .
This has to change and it is exactly what we are trying to say in the resolution tabled by your colleague Mr Brok , and which many Members voted for .
And I ask that tomorrow we change nothing in this resolution of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy which is not a resolution of the left , but a resolution by Mr Brok , a member of the PPE-DE .
Let us adopt this resolution .
Let us vote for it as it stands and we will all be happy .
In connection with this debate , I have received a motion for a resolution submitted in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the Commission declaration on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Madam President , it is slightly difficult to speak on this resolution because as yet it has not been translated and brought up to the office .
I have to work on the basis of the French version and I just hope I get it right .
It is tragic that once again we find ourselves standing in this Chamber talking about yet another war in sub-Saharan Africa .
It is absolutely right that we voice our displeasure at such an action having taken place .
It is true to say that the election was disappointing and that we had hoped for better results .
It reflected on the problems of Ivoirian birthright - as to whether you should be allowed to stand as a president if you were born in the country or if your parents were Ivoirian .
We should always remember , however , that everything concerning our relations with these developing countries is based on the Cotonou Accord . That , of course , gives us a basis for democracy , human rights and good governance .
Quite honestly , good governance to me is almost more important than pure democracy because if you can get a stable country that is transparent in its doings then that is a big step .
Côte d 'Ivoire is a huge country with enormous potential and is one of the lynchpins in West Africa .
This was very much an internal power struggle .
There are those who blame outside influences or rebel groups from other nations , but this was a pure power struggle within the nation itself . It was an issue of people wanting to take power simply as a domestic issue .
The problem is much the same as that experienced by Nigeria in that there is a very strong Muslim presence in the north of the country , and a Christian one in the south .
There is always a vying between these two groups .
As it happens , the Muslims in the north tend to be the poorer of the two groups .
The Commission should focus aid onto this area to benefit the Muslims who have not got the wealth of the south .
I was in Ghana two weekends ago when the ECOWAS meeting of the 14 West African states took place .
They discussed the situation in the Côte d 'Ivoire .
There was real doom and gloom amongst the representatives and leaders of those countries .
When things go wrong in a country of that size , it not only destabilises Côte d 'Ivoire , it very much destabilises that whole region .
Therefore I was delighted that at least the ECOWAS leaders had the foresight and sense to intervene in the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire and send a delegation there in the hope that it could mediate between the two parties .
I sincerely hope that they are successful because there are problems arising in Nigeria where exactly the same situation exists .
That country has a strong fundamentalist Muslim north and a Christian group in the south .
With the way the Commission is now moving towards regional policies , it is absolutely vital that we get these countries to understand that if they are going to be able to face global prospects as far as trade is concerned , they must pull together as a region .
Therefore it is vitally important that they support each other .
The one disappointment was that NEPAD , the new African partnership on development , has not reacted more strongly in this situation .
Written into that new agreement was a peer review .
I had hoped that when a problem like this arose , the Heads of States in African countries in that organisation , which has been set up by Africans to look after Africa , would have immediately stepped in .
But unfortunately , as with the Zimbabwean situation , they have not done so .
If this organisation has not fallen at the first fence then it has certainly stumbled .
I sincerely hope preparatory talks can take place as soon as possible because only around a table can we bring this conflict to an end without the death and destruction that usually happens .
All I can do is ask the Commission to press both parties to stop warring and come together for discussions .
Madam President , since the coup d 'état on 19 September , the whole of the northern territory of Côte d 'Ivoire has been plunged into confused military conflict .
Military operations are being carried out even as I speak and fighting is raging in Bouaké , leading us to fear the worst for the civil population caught up in the conflict .
Ladies and gentlemen , we fear for the people of Côte d 'Ivoire who have been taken hostage by factions and who are paying for this crisis with their freedom and , in some cases , their lives .
We fear for Côte d 'Ivoire , which is in danger of becoming further removed from the model for which it is so often admired .
Today , Côte d 'Ivoire and its society are being torn apart , and we fear for Africa and the African people for the whole region may collapse , and this is a region which has already seen too many wars and human tragedies and where armed gangs are rampant and trafficking of all kinds is rife - these are both distressing everyday realities .
This is an outcome which does not , in fact , seem too far removed from the current instability in Côte d 'Ivoire .
If Côte d 'Ivoire becomes destabilised , this will lay the foundations for a crisis similar to that in the Great Lakes region or in the Congo , which have for many years been devastating the heart of the continent .
We are concerned by this crisis , and we are saddened by it .
We are also surprised by it too , however .
It is happening at the very time when the efforts made by Laurent Gbagbo 's regime to deal with two of the country 's greatest challenges were paying off .
The first challenge is national reconciliation and , to promote this , a broad forum was organised in 2001 and a government of national union was formed , bringing together the major political forces following the elections in July 2002 .
The next challenge is economic and social revival , promoted through fundamental social reforms such as free schooling or health insurance for all citizens .
In order to make further progress on these fronts , however , Côte d 'Ivoire needs peace .
Europe must exert pressure to bring about a negotiated solution and a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
It must make every effort to mediate and must welcome the actions carried out under the aegis of the ECOWAS .
These attempts have so far failed , but it is indeed difficult to ask a legitimate government to negotiate as equals with armed rebels .
The challenge now is to preserve the unity of the whole territory of Côte d 'Ivoire whilst respecting constitutional law .
We must be particularly careful to ensure that , if an intervention force is sent to Côte d 'Ivoire , this does not lead to a de facto division of the country .
The Socialist Group also supports the idea of sending a parliamentary mission - I am addressing my fellow Members here - to give our support to the democratically elected institutions and to go and meet with the various political forces in Côte d 'Ivoire .
In order , however , to help democracy take root in Côte d 'Ivoire , President Gbagbo must very swiftly take the initiative of launching negotiations with all the political and social forces in his country .
Negotiations must , in particular , focus on the constitutional bottlenecks which are acting as a brake , slowing down national reconciliation .
The 2000 Constitution does not fulfil this requirement , it does not allow all the different political positions to express themselves and it once again and still prevents Mr Ouatara from standing as presidential candidate .
It does not provide for the possibility of dissolving the National Assembly in the event of major crises , and this may leave the way open for an extremely violent political reaction .
Lastly , President Gbagbo must resume dialogue in order to pursue an unqualified and unambiguous effort to achieve national reconciliation , which is essential for a country that has been torn apart for many years by the manipulation of the concept of Ivorian birthright , almost 30 % of whose population is made up of foreigners .
In this respect , the call for the expulsion of 500 000 inhabitants originating from Burkina Faso , broadcast last Sunday on Côte d 'Ivoire national television , is an unacceptable abuse and must be vehemently condemned , in the same way that the attacks on foreigners who live in the country must be vehemently condemned .
Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , today , Côte d 'Ivoire and the legitimate government of Laurent Gbagbo need the firm support of the European Union that you have outlined and which I shall promote very firmly and in every possible way .
Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome the Commission 's statement here today , which is actually more balanced than our draft resolution .
I also note with interest that the Commissioner made specific reference to the RDR , which is the Liberals ' sister party in Côte d 'Ivoire .
We have attempted to maintain contact with the party , but recently , of course , that has not been possible .
I am very disappointed at the part the EU has played in this matter .
In April , I asked the Council what measures were being taken to aid the functioning of the National Reconciliation Forum and what measures were envisaged for monitoring the elections in June 2002 .
At that time , it was said that the EU certainly was concerned about the fact that the 2000 elections were characterised by violence , infringements of human rights and exclusion of some major political parties , and talks were held pursuant to Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
The talks were , however , brought to a close in June 2001 , and it was not thought possible to make any particularly significant contribution to the supervision of the elections , or to provide support , or to play an active role .
Many people in the region are suffering because we remained passive and did not take a more active role .
This is a shame , because this is an area in which the EU could have been active , and we were aware of these issues .
We are concerned about the troubles spreading out in the region .
As usual , there is a great risk that women and children will bear the brunt of the suffering .
We know that the position of children in Côte d 'Ivoire is not as it should be .
The Liberals will not support item 5 of the resolution , and my colleague Mr Van Hecke will go into more detail on this matter .
Madam President , supporting President Laurent Gbagbo is , ladies and gentlemen , natural .
It is natural to support a politician for whom prison , exile and suffering have marked the thirty-year long struggle for his ideas .
In two years , he has restored to Côte d 'Ivoire a minimum rule of law , revitalised the education system , gained the trust of the international institutions and above all , provided conditions for national reconciliation by forming a government made up of all the opposition parties , and I would point out to Mrs Thors that the RDR ( Rassemblement des Républicains ) party entered the government in August 2002 .
Parliament invited President Gbagbo to Strasbourg in November 2001 - Nicole Fontaine invited him - and , in doing so , wanted to acknowledge the work carried out by this humanist professor and leader .
We must help him because he symbolises republican legality , because he symbolises political change in an Africa that is greatly in need of it , because he is the symbol that Africa is anchored in a modern democracy .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , a ceasefire is needed , but on the condition that the rebels surrender their weapons .
No constitutionally elected president can negotiate with armed rebels that occupy 40 % of his country .
The European Union must help in the general reconstruction of the country , which will involve the development of the rule of law , a programme of social housing for the most deprived , and the reorganisation of the Côte d 'Ivoire army .
Ladies and gentlemen , if Côte d 'Ivoire falters , the whole of West Africa will be permanently destabilised , it will be plunged into chaos , and there will be terrible risks of ethnic and religious clashes .
We must therefore , as part of an active diplomatic effort , send a parliamentary mission , and this is what we shall begin working on , Madam President , as of tomorrow .
As Commissioner Barnier wished , quite rightly and quite appropriately , this parliamentary mission must be able to arrive within three days in Abidjan and it must strive , on the basis of the resolution that we shall vote upon tomorrow , to play a role and provide Parliament with a role to play .
It is no good arriving when the crisis is over .
We have an essential responsibility towards this country , its president and the people of Côte d 'Ivoire .
They need our solidarity , Madam President , in the terrible ordeal they are going through , and the European Parliament must therefore have a presence and its presence must be firm .
Madam President , recent events , marked by a number of assassinations in Côte d 'Ivoire , are extremely worrying .
The military uprising against the current official government is unjustifiable , despite the worsening economic and political conditions .
The unprecedented economic crisis , related to the fall in the price of raw materials , and particularly of coffee and cotton , has caused further hardship and poverty in the country .
It is also clear , however , that the lack of respect for the concept of Ivorian birthright , which came to a head during the presidential elections in 2000 , has served only to intensify the climate of hate and violence in the country , and the accusations that neighbouring countries are supporting the rebels could be used to justify the persecution of the immigrant civilian populations .
In this respect , we must welcome the statement made by President Gbagbo which calls for foreigners to be protected .
It should also be taken on board by his troops .
The risk of an outbreak of xenophobia among civilians is indeed great .
We must avoid being caught up in a civil war between ethnic groups , a crisis situation similar to that in the Congo , which would be extremely dangerous and regrettable for Côte d 'Ivoire and all its inhabitants .
Therefore , although we may lament the failure of mediation efforts by the ECOWAS which proposed the resumption of negotiations between the government and the rebels , the intervention forces should not impose an actual division of ethnic groups on the ground .
The European Union must support the legitimate government in order to restore the rule of law and to protect the civilian populations , of all ethnic origins .
In the longer term , a committee of enquiry should be set up in order to discover the causes of these events and to condemn those responsible .
The European Union must ensure respect for the principles of human rights , of democracy and of political pluralism , but also , and this is crucial , encourage the economic and social development of Côte d 'Ivoire .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen representing the Member States , Commissioners , allow me to express my astonishment at the arguments put forward by some of my fellow Members , because , ultimately , the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is so straightforward that we should be in immediate agreement on a number of obvious facts .
The first obvious fact is that Côte d 'Ivoire is one of the States that deserves our most vigorous support , as it is showing numerous encouraging signs : its level of growth stands at 3 % , it is making relatively rapid progress towards democracy , illustrated by the presidential elections that have been universally welcomed as a step forward , it has a process for forming political groupings in place which , following the forum for national reconciliation , should lead to fully democratic legislative elections , and the current government must be instructed to arrange these as soon as possible .
Yes , Côte d 'Ivoire and President Gbagbo deserve the support of all the European States that are concerned about links with Africa .
I do not understand how we can hesitate , unless we are trying to make things worse before they can get better or we are allowing ourselves to be carried away by a feeling of indifference to which I fear many Europeans are certainly tempted to give in but which is unacceptable to France .
The second obvious fact is that Côte d 'Ivoire is in not facing a civil war .
It is simply battling with a foreign invasion which , although it exploits the age-old oppositions between ethnic groups , as usual , is primarily a matter for geopolitical analysis .
The so-called insurgents are obviously armed , and powerfully so , by one or more foreign powers .
An analysis of the situation must not , therefore , be based on ethnographic conclusions , and even less on humanitarian lamentation , but on geopolitical factors .
Turning to the third obvious fact , which is crucial but , for this reason perhaps , is too often eclipsed , since it is true that the ignorance - or lack of perception - of this House in geopolitical matters is evident in so many areas .
Today , Africa is , out of all the continents , the one which is the most immune to the influence of the global empire .
This is due to historical reasons relating to the links that several European nations have forged with Africa and , consequently , due to the fear , which has often stopped Washington , that any destabilisation of regimes would bolster the Soviet Union .
However , since the collapse of the Russian power , the empire has been trying to extend its influence over this continent , which is both the richest , potentially at least , and , sadly , the most vulnerable of all .
We tried to do this several times in Equatorial Africa - formerly under Belgian control - and extended these efforts to the neighbouring countries of the Gulf of Guinea , which has such substantial oil reserves .
We are now benefiting from the ambitions of a personality of uncertain nationality , who , in any case , spent most of his life in the United States , to destabilise a country whose situation has been growing stronger with each passing year and which , as a result , became a major partner of Europe .
It is this connection , it is this link that some want to destroy .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must be firm regarding the true interests of Europe .
France has the courage to do this .
The support that it is giving to the official , democratic government of Côte d 'Ivoire must be shown by all Europeans together , because what France is doing in Africa , it is not doing for itself but for the whole of Europe .
Madam President , the latest conflict in Côte d 'Ivoire comes , I believe , as no surprise to those who try constantly to follow the developments in that country .
Behind it stretches a long history of political , economic and , above all , ethnic stand-offs that continually interweave and reinforce each other .
The motion for a resolution that is before us overlooks , whether knowingly or unknowingly , the responsibilities of the current leaders .
Côte d 'Ivoire is the world 's largest producer of cocoa and one of the most important producers of coffee .
The country accommodates nearly 5 million immigrants , mainly from the neighbouring countries Burkina Faso , Mali and Senegal .
In times of economic boom , they are deployed as cheap labour ; during a political and economic crisis , they are the scapegoats par excellence .
The xenophobic campaign in the state media was nourished by President Gbagbo 's accusations that Burkina Faso was at the root of the mutiny , without there being a shred of evidence .
Many people in the north of Côte d 'Ivoire originally come from Burkina .
They have the feeling that they are now being treated as second-class citizens , particularly since their leader , Mr Ouattara , was barred from taking part in the presidential elections on account of his alleged Burkinan roots .
Together with Mr Ouattara , the peoples in the north felt excluded from the political system .
This is the core of the problem .
Côte d 'Ivoire has been broken as a nation by the political misuse of religious differences and of the concept of Ivoirité .
The international community has made a huge effort to evacuate French subjects and 200 children of American clergymen .
I hope that it will display the same level of commitment to prevent even more victims from falling among the civilian population and to prevent the instability in Côte d 'Ivoire from degenerating into a regional conflict , the effects of which are incalculable .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank you for having given the Commission the opportunity to open this debate , to take part in it and to provide its own contribution .
Having listened to their comments very carefully , I would also like to thank the various speakers , virtually all of whom have , in general , simply demonstrated that , with regard to this serious issue , we have a common view of the situation and of the ways to resolve it .
The House and all of the Union institutions are concerned , not only by the serious and damaging internal consequences that the current crisis situation in Côte d 'Ivoire may have , but also by the destabilisation - as several speakers have said - that the crisis could cause throughout the whole region if a peaceful political solution is not found in the very near future .
Yesterday 's televised speech by President Gbagbo calling for an end to the conflict leads us to hope that this peaceful solution will be found very soon in order to prevent unrest in the country and the whole region , which many , including ourselves , fear will happen .
Let us hope therefore , Madam President , that this debate and our combined efforts - and let us spare no effort - will help to restore lasting peace and silence the weapons in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Thank you , Commissioner .
To conclude this debate , I have received seven motions for resolution tabled on the basis of Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The attempted coup of 19 September has plunged the people of Côte d 'Ivoire into utter confusion , and has led to acts of violence such as the demise of the Home Affairs Minister and the death of General Gueï .
The support expressed by the European Parliament for the democratic institutions of Côte d 'Ivoire and its president in the wake of the attempted coup , does not mean that Laurent Gbagbo has been given carte blanche to resolve the situation as he sees fit .
On the contrary , he must listen and put in place ceasefire agreements called for by the regional ECOWAS mission .
There can be no military solution to this crisis ; the only option that can be contemplated is a political solution involving all opposing parties .
The Côte d 'Ivoire President must now embark on the policy that he made a commitment to follow after his election , the backbone of which was the policy of national reconciliation and the fight against ethnic and religious divisions .
In the light of events in Côte d 'Ivoire , there is a genuine risk of balkanisation and it is feared that the whole region will slide into chaos .
One quarter of the population of Côte d 'Ivoire is made up of immigrants from West Africa , of which some countries , such as Liberia , are engaged in civil war .
( Written statement abbreviated pursuant to Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The next item is the report ( A5-0341 / 2002 ) by Mr Berend , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing the European Union Solidarity Fund [ COM ( 2002 ) 514 - C5-0441 / 2002 - 2002 / 0228 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to express , at the beginning of the debate , my deep gratitude to the House , and particularly to the rapporteur , Mr Berend , and to Mr Walter , as well as to the chairmen , Mr Caveri and Mr Wynn , for the high level of cooperation between our two institutions and for the speed with which you have examined this proposal for a regulation .


We must now work as quickly as possible , not least in the area of the budgetary mechanism , so that the first funds can be provided before the winter .
I would like to be able to provide the first funds in November .
Given the progress made in discussions within the Council this very afternoon , I feel that we can say that an agreement on this proposal for a regulation is now within reach , and I am pleased to say that this has been made possible thanks to a very broad consensus between Parliament and the Commission , of which Mr Berend was one of the architects .
During this final stage of discussions , we still have three points to tackle .
The first is the definition of precisely which disasters will qualify for the provision of compensation .
Parliament is concerned that the mechanism should not be gripped in the vice of an excessively rigid definition .
The Council , for its part , wanted to classify natural disasters as priority .
The Commission , as I said the other day before the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , has studied the recent history of disasters in Europe in great detail .
In recent years 80 % of the disasters which have occurred are natural disasters , such as gales , earthquakes or floods .
I do not believe , therefore , that it is inconsistent to agree to the priority requested by the Council since the option for the Commission to intervene in other similar cases - ecological , environmental or technological disasters - would still be available in a very small number of specific cases .
The second point concerns the threshold , or thresholds , for drawing on the Fund .
Like the Commission , this House attaches particular importance to the fact that there are two criteria , either one or the other , and not just one sole criterion , so that we can fairly assess the impact of a disaster on the economy of a State , whether this State is a large State , a large country such as Germany , or a smaller State .
I am afraid that , as we are quite aware , the smaller States in our Union are at risk of experiencing genuine , serious natural disasters .
Even though the Council wishes to significantly re-assess the criterion expressed as an absolute value - we had proposed damage estimated at EUR 1 billion , the Council is going no higher than EUR 3 billion - the principle of having two alternative criteria is not being questioned .
Finally , the third point , is maintaining a qualitative criterion to provide for intervention under exceptional circumstances to help a single region affected by a disaster .
This is an absolute priority for the Commission , and it is the margin of appreciation that we have sought throughout the discussions .
The higher the quantitative thresholds , and I have just said that they were increased in the Council proposal , the greater the need to have a margin of appreciation , because , of course , the worst thing that could happen would be , ladies and gentlemen , for this Fund to be so restricted , made so inflexible by very limited qualitative and excessively high quantitative criteria that , ultimately , it is never used .
I have pointed out , and I reiterate this to the House , that , in 14 years , we have only identified , thank God , seven major disasters with a total amount of damages of more than EUR 1 billion .
It is also for this reason that I proposed in the Commission 's first version to retain the quantitative threshold of EUR 1 billion .
Once again , the worst thing that could happen would be for the Fund to be so inflexible , bound up in all sorts of criteria , that , once set up , it would never actually be used , even when peoples have been affected by disasters .
The Council is taking a very careful approach to the qualitative criteria .
I would like to say here that neither the Commission , nor , I believe , Parliament , wants the functioning of the regulation to be hijacked by the systematic use of this qualitative criterion .
The Commission wants to be and will be extremely strict in the use of this particular solution .
What we want is very simply to ensure that victims of a disaster that is exceptionally serious for a single region can qualify for assistance from the Fund .
Indeed , there are regions in Europe that are more at risk than others , such as islands , isolated or remote regions , or regions that we must protect , as , in fact , the Treaty stipulates that we must do in a specific article - and Mrs Sudre , who is present , knows it well - Article 299 on the outermost regions .
I therefore think that we must have the facility , and it is precisely this facility that the Commission has provided , to help these regions primarily in conjunction with these quantitative criteria .
To sum up , Madam President , with your help and , on this basis , with the help of the rapporteurs , I now hope that an agreement will be reached very swiftly on this proposal for a regulation and on the amendment of the interinstitutional agreement .
Because , behind the problems , the regulations , the thresholds , the rules , there are people - this we must not forget , I have met them and have been moved by their plight - people who have been wounded , injured , and are still waiting , and as we are quite aware , in addition to the injuries there are also people who have died .
These people are currently waiting for Europe , together with the national and regional authorities , to help them reestablish , as a matter of urgency , the very basic conditions that they need to continue their daily lives .
Madam President , Commissioner , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , the floods that hit Central Europe this August reached alarming proportions .
They claimed numerous lives and inflicted massive physical damage .
Entire regions and cities were devastated , and entire rural areas and cultural heritage monuments sustained severe damage .
The extent of the destruction triggered a great wave of sympathy across Europe , and the desire to be able to provide assistance , also at EU level , to the countries concerned in mastering the countless problems they face quickly became apparent .
Commissioner , the local populations gratefully recall that only days after the disaster occurred , you and Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission , visited the regions affected to see the extent of the damage for yourselves .
However , they were not only grateful , they were also hopeful .
Your visit raised their hopes that in such a case , the EU would intervene .
Until now , there have been no suitable instruments for this purpose at Community level , for as we know , an EU relief fund once existed , but was discontinued in 1998 .
As the rapporteur , I view the establishment of this new solidarity instrument as an important complement to the Structural Funds .
It equips the EU with a flexible instrument with which to cut through red tape , which enables us to provide rapid on-the-spot assistance when disasters occur .
The purpose of the Fund - which will be focused on immediate financial assistance - is to help the people , regions and countries return to normal living conditions as quickly as possible .
Its scope will therefore be limited to the most urgent needs .
The long-term reconstruction of infrastructures and businesses must be left to other instruments , and this EU aid will add to , not replace , the efforts of the countries concerned .
The EUR 1 billion designated for this fund are ' floating ' : in other words , they are not earmarked for a specific budget line , but will be mobilised only when a disaster occurs .
The Commissioner has rightly asked the question : What kind of disaster can this Fund be used for ?
By defining a major disaster as any disaster resulting in damage estimated at over EUR 1 billion or more than 0.5 % of GDP , this should ensure that claims on the fund are restricted to very exceptional damage .
That is why the committee agreed , by a majority , on a definition that refers to ' major disasters ' .
We have deliberately refrained from making any reference to natural , environmental , or technological disasters .
After all , what would we say to the people concerned if the European Union were hit by a disaster such as 11 September in New York , on a scale which claimed a similar numbers of casualties ?
Faced with this scenario , we cannot say to people : Sorry , the EU is unable to help because this is not a natural disaster !
We should stick with the term ' major disasters ' as well as the three-month deadline for the submission of applications for assistance from the Fund , as this is in line with the principles of urgency and immediate rapid assistance which underpin the Fund .
As regards the availability of the financial resources granted , in my capacity as rapporteur of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , which is the committee responsible , I call for a timeframe of two years so that the Fund can provide aid to restore immediately key infrastructures such as energy , water supply and treatment , communication , transport , health and education .
The funds should also be used to provide auxiliary services , as well as to safeguard security infrastructures , take immediate measures to protect cultural heritage and clean up damaged natural areas , buildings and cities , and carry out emergency short-term repairs to dams .
The stipulation that this grant must leave available 25 % of the annual amount of EUR 1 billion allocated to the Fund up to 1 October each year in order to respond to disasters possibly occurring late on in the calendar year is supported by the committee responsible .
Although the parliamentary procedure for the preparation and debate of this report is not without its problems due to the very tight timetable , I believe that the accelerated procedure adopted in this instance due to its particular urgency , with the aim of disbursing EUR 1 billion in November , if at all possible , is acceptable in this exceptional case .
I think we should proceed as swiftly as possible .
The people affected are waiting for assistance from the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , those of us who sit on the Committee on Budgets have had a truly great task laid on our shoulders , and I am both glad and grateful that there is one thing that has so far on this occasion become abundantly clear . It is a matter of common knowledge that this is , on the one hand , about getting very diverse things done very quickly because people really are waiting for assistance after having undergone something that we can scarcely imagine .
On the other hand , we would have to toil our way through three complicated subject areas if we were actually to be able to do something that will be equal to the pressures of the future .
For a start , we have to create a legal basis ; one is in place today .
We have today already been engaged in negotiations about it , and have had discussions about it in a very good atmosphere .
I believe we will be able to come to an agreement .
The Committee on Budgets attached primary importance to the need to embody all this in an Interinstitutional Agreement .
We have to take care that we do not only give people the impression that we are now able to give aid with all speed , but must at the same time make it robust enough for it to last , to fit into the overall framework , to stand the test of time , and ensure that others affected at a later date may know that there are some things on which they can rely .
What we must not do is again dangle a carrot before them and then later have to say that there is no basis capable of supporting what we want to do .
We have therefore put the emphasis on three things .
The legal basis must be decided on as soon as possible , and so we have cooperated very constructively with the Committee on the Regions , to which I am very grateful for having taken the majority of our amendments on board .
Today , the Interinstitutional Agreement is as good as concluded , but just one small problem remains .
The Commission must , as soon as possible , propose a supplementary and amending budget in which the money - the EUR 1 billion of which we are speaking - is actually made available as quickly as possible , and an appeal can be made to the Member States to produce the figures with all speed so that we can make progress on this .
In our budgetary capacity , we have agreed that we want , in future , to hold out this EUR 1 billion at least as an offer .
We will work together with everyone else as quickly as possible , but it must also be clear that we will do this as thoroughly as possible .
My present optimism is founded on my past experience , in this House , of cooperation across all national boundaries , without regard to political allegiances , between the committees and also between the institutions - Parliament , the Council , and the Commission .
I believe that the people of Europe can know that here there is real cooperation with human beings in mind .
We , who , in our budgetary capacity are otherwise meant to focus our attention more or less exclusively on money , now know how valuable the human dimension is .
There is now a need to provide assistance as quickly as possible , here and now , in Germany , in Austria , in the Czech Republic and , in future , also in regions which in the past sometimes felt that we , unfortunately , could not really meet their needs adequately .
Madam President , my inaugural speech here in this House in 1994 was on the subject of the serious floods which had caused tremendous damage in Athens at that time , and I have spoken about natural disasters on numerous occasions since .
On numerous occasions , both I and several of my fellow Members have called for the European Union to take action on the ground when major disaster strikes the Member States of the European Union .
Last year , I submitted an amendment during the budgetary procedure for disaster-relief action on the ground by the Union , but it failed to achieve the required majority in the European Parliament .
The fact that we are now well on the way to adopting a Solidarity Disaster Fund is of course , excellent news ; I just wish we had not waited until after the terrible catastrophe , the human tragedy in Central Europe this summer ; but , nonetheless , the European Commission and Mr Barnier personally deserve our congratulations because , we are , at long last , on the way to adopting a Solidarity Fund for natural disasters and , of course , congratulations also go to our rapporteur , Mr Berend , on his report , his hard work and his proposed amendments , which are a step in the right direction and almost all of which were adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy .

I should just like to say , in support of what Mr Barnier and Mr Berend have said , that it is right , first that there should be a broad definition of disasters and , secondly , that the European Commission and Parliament have laid down the right limit for including disasters in this regulation .
I really hope the Council will not demonstrate the meanness it appears to be demonstrating on this particular issue and will be as generous as it should .
The limit set by the Commission and endorsed by Parliament is the right one , it is not too low and it is not too high and I think that the message which all three institutions need to send out is a message of solidarity , a message that the European Union will act on human suffering .
I trust the Council will take this message on board ; as for Parliament , I think that , with Mr Berend 's report , we are moving in the right direction .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European solidarity is within our grasp !
Now and in the future , aid can be given at once when disasters strike .
It is with gratitude that I , as a MEP from Saxony-Anhalt , see with what speed and unanimity the Commission and Parliament act .
I have also found , among the flood victims in my region , that the European ideal can hardly be more clearly communicated than by aid .
It is perhaps auspicious that we find ourselves debating this solidarity on this historic day when the enlargement of the Community has taken on a definite shape , for the Solidarity Fund is already open to the candidate countries and our solidarity is already being extended to them .
My group 's concern is to retain as far as possible the precision of Commissioner Barnier 's fine proposal for a regulation .
The Solidarity Fund is an instrument of aid , one that makes immediate aid possible and whose tasks must be clearly distinguished from those of the Structural Fund .
I would like to highlight two amendments to the Commission draft .
Firstly , I wish to follow Mr Berend in highlighting the more comprehensive definition of a disaster , which we wanted , and which will allow us to respond flexibly to future catastrophic events that would otherwise be hard to include under the Commission proposal , for example droughts or the fallout from acts of terrorism .
Secondly , the extension to three months of the period in which application to the Fund must be made .
This gives an appropriate response time to those candidate countries that are as yet less well equipped to deal with administration and does justice to a situation in which important parts of the administration have also been destroyed .
Although this is not relevant to the Solidarity Fund , our discussion today should make reference to the call for a future European civilian emergency force .
The flood disaster has shown that , whatever the efforts made , there were significant deficiencies in the leadership of operations , in materials , logistics and communication , at any rate as regards the cross-border dimension .
This needs to be remedied .
The Commission should start by encouraging or supporting joint exercises by fire brigades , by the agencies for technical aid , by the rescue services and so on in border areas .
In the medium term , this could give rise to a logistically unitary aid network or even a civilian solidarity corps , which could indeed be deployable in the event of disasters outside the Community , for example after an earthquake such as that which recently struck Turkey .
It is a vision such as that on which we should be working , and we should not wait until after the next disaster .
My thanks - for I must not forget him - to the rapporteur for his excellent cooperation !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks and , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Mr Berend , who has speedily drawn up this excellent report in exceptional circumstances .
We must certainly all agree that we need a flexible tool that allows for quick action to repair damage caused by major disasters .
Establishing the Solidarity Fund is such an important issue , however , that more time should have been set aside to discuss it .
During the Committee debate and afterwards many factors came up which we have had insufficient time to consider properly .
Our group is in favour of establishing the fund .
The threshold for the use of the aid must be kept high .
The fund must concentrate on immediate costs during the initial stage of major natural disasters .
Actual reconstruction does not form part of the fund 's remit .
Risk factors must be addressed through insurance and preventive measures whenever possible .
It is also important that the fund should not become a new variation on the Structural Funds , to be used up on a yearly basis .
It must only be used when there has been an exceptional , major disaster , when help is really needed .
One or two questions came up after the committee debate .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the position will be on major disasters taking place in third countries and resulting in suffering for people in the Member States and the applicant countries .
Secondly , what will the maximum amount of aid be as a percentage of the costs of damage ?
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to begin my statement on the Commission proposal with a word of congratulations to Commissioner Barnier and his colleagues on the way that the presentation of the proposal for a regulation on the setting up of the Solidarity Fund has actually been very quick .
By doing this , the Commission has in fact done its bit to meet the expectations of the citizens in the European Union 's disaster areas for prompt aid .
At the same time , I of course want to give my support to the discussion here in Parliament being a matter of urgency , and I expect the Council to go ahead with its project of direct dialogue to deal with Parliament 's amendments to the Commission 's draft .
This would make it possible to actually make a start on allocating resources from the Fund with effect from 1 November , following adoption by the General Council on 21 October .
I think this is virtually a world record for these three European institutions to get something from conception to realisation in such a short time .
This is unmistakeably and tangibly symbolic of European solidarity .
My group gives its support to the extension of the applicability of the Fund 's resources to major disasters in accordance with the amendment brought in by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and is in consequence opposed to the Council 's preference for concentrating on natural disasters .
In the same way , as my fellow Members have already said , we are also , as a group , in favour of applying them to damage in excess of EUR 1 billion or 0.5 % of GDP , 50 % to be paid out at once , a three-month deadline for submission of applications , and the possibility of derogations for regions that are particularly severely affected .
I would , though like to express my regret that , as the Fund is to be what one might term a fund with virtual money , it is not to be possible to transfer resources unused in one year to the following year and thus to accumulate them .
To do so would have given us a more flexible instrument for giving as much help as possible to citizens , businesses and institutions affected even by major disasters .
Mr President , we are , in principle , in favour of setting up the Solidarity Fund .
However , the amended proposal as it is now before us will in time lead to an untenable financial situation within the framework of the present budgetary agreements .
The term ' major disaster ' has hardly been defined and if damage does not exceed the threshold value , there are generous exemption situations .
The way this fund is being organised shows in my view a lack of any sense of responsibility .
Although this may engender a warm feeling towards the EU among the citizens affected , ultimately , they end up paying for the emergency aid themselves .
The fund has to be streamlined in order to stave off this sort of hopeless situation .
This means restricting it to natural disasters and adapting the threshold values and exemption situations to its complementary nature .
This is with a view to penalising negligence , promoting preventive measures , making optimum use of existing international damage schemes and guaranteeing the fund 's effectiveness .
I was the only one to hold this view in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I therefore foresee major problems when , after a few years , the financial balance sheet is drawn up .
I doubt whether there will be any solidarity left between the states .
For those who share my doubts , I warmly recommend our amendments .
Otherwise , I pin my hopes on the Council 's wisdom .
Allow me to add that I am pleasantly surprised by the acoustics in this Chamber .
This is probably due to the additional equipment that has been installed .
I can assure you that it is working extremely well .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is a community founded upon peace , and hence also on solidarity .
Not only do we talk in those terms , but we live in solidarity and set definite dates .
I would remind you that , at its first September sitting , Parliament almost unanimously passed a 19-point resolution on the flood disasters in Austria , Germany , the Czech Republic and Slovakia , that our second sitting found us voting the Budget lines , and that today , in our third part-session , this mini-plenary is creating the legal basis for all this .
We are standing alongside the victims , acting swiftly , unbureaucratically and consistently , and it is for this reason that we have also chosen to use the accelerated procedure for matters of urgent importance .
We are keeping our promise , and I would also remind you that we have doubled the proposal by the Council and the Commission for EUR 500 million to be allocated to the Fund .
We also call on the Council not to alter our definition of a major disaster - over EUR 1 billion in damage in any one country or over 0.5 % of its GDP - as any change would nullify the consistency of our stance .
We call upon the Council to take up the proposal from Parliament and the Commission and make it a resolution .
We can and must tell the victims that , subject to the agreement of the Council on 21 October 2002 , we will see to it that money can flow to the affected regions from 1 November onwards .
Agnes Schierhuber and I are from an affected region in Lower Austria and represent many who know how much damage was done and how much hope has been kindled by the policy of acting speedily and naming specific dates .
We rejoice and are also rather proud to be able to show by this example how we not only talk and make promises , but are also capable of fixing dates and acting promptly .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the speed with which the Commission has put forward the proposals to set up a solidarity fund and the promptness with which our institution is able to respond to them .
By this , we are showing that the European Union is reactive and responds to the concerns of its citizens .
I also welcome the fact that the recommendations that the European Parliament is preparing to make emphasise an important point , namely an emergency fund , the aim of which is to provide essential relief items to those affected .
The mechanisms for releasing the appropriations which are put in place as well as the timeframes specified must , as a necessity , take into account this specific point .
European money must arrive quickly on the ground in order to assist victims at the time when they need it most .
Because the aim of this Fund is to demonstrate in practical terms the solidarity of Europe 's citizens towards disaster victims , many Members of Parliament and I myself would like the intervention thresholds to be more generous and to take into account regional characteristics .
It is now the Council 's responsibility to tackle this point .
I believe , however , that if Parliament insists that flexible qualitative criteria be taken into account when releasing funds , it must be heard .
It is possible that a disaster destroying poor regions of the Union , the outermost regions for example , or which completely devastates a territory , as has happened recently in the South of France , will not be able to benefit from European solidarity , because of nothing more than accounting reasons .
I must say that , personally speaking , I believe it is essential that natural disasters are handled separately and as a priority , because , in this case , it is impossible to identify who is responsible and therefore to claim insurance .
It is in these cases that European funds are most needed .
As a final , very brief , point , I would like to reiterate that repairs must go hand in hand with the implementation of a genuine policy of prevention and that of a European civil protection force , in order to give rapid assistance to those European citizens who are in the most difficulty .
We have taken note of that matter and will try to correct it for tomorrow morning .
Mr President , Commissioner , many Members have already stressed the value of the solidarity - and this fund is called the ' Solidarity Fund ' - which is implied in and is the corner stone , the heart of the measure on which we are about to vote . We are building a Europe of solidarity .
I would , however , like to highlight another value which I believe is absolutely central to this initiative - and we have all supported it and contributed to its timely achievement - and that is the political benefit to be gained from it .
I feel , Commissioner , that there have been very few situations or events in which many , very many of our fellow citizens have for the first time felt that Europe is genuinely close to them , that it is truly an elder brother ready to run to their aid when they are in difficulties .
We must never forget that , in some cases , the only experience many of our fellow citizens have had of the European institutions is of a set of rules and regulations , bans and directives .
I believe there is a political benefit to be gained from showing them the friendly side of Europe , as we are doing in this case , particularly at times such as this - and we are approaching a major referendum now , we all know the details - a political benefit which we must not allow to go to waste .
How are we to avoid wasting it ?
Commissioner , you put it very well and I fully agree with you .
We cannot make this instrument , which was designed to respond to emergencies , rigid , unadaptable or inflexible , in other words an instrument which becomes ineffective or which is even in danger of not being used precisely because the rules to which we are linking it are too complex .
We must maintain a certain flexibility in this matter and I can see that you are quite aware of this but - and this is the last point to which I would like to draw your attention , even though , I regret , you are not listening to me - I also feel that we must view this merely as an initial step .
Ladies and gentlemen , nobody here wants to see events such as these repeated , but we have a responsibility to be realistic .
Soon , there will be 25 Member States , and it is quite clear that the climate is changing .
I am afraid that , statistically , it is realistic to expect more such tragedies to occur .
Therefore , in the face of tragic events which , I am afraid , will be repeated , I do not feel that EUR 1 billion will suffice .
We must endeavour to explore further possibilities for the future , Commissioner , for the 2004 budget , if possible .
I will only make one suggestion at a time , and I would like to hear your opinion too . Why do we not set aside part of our leftover funds - for there is always so much money left at the end of each budget which we do not know how to spend - why do we not use a set amount for this fund ?
I invite you to reflect on the matter .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this evening and tomorrow 's vote will see us reaching another milestone in the European Union 's manifestation of European solidarity .
The floods have wrought their havoc , and we have taken immediate action .
Let me take this opportunity to remind you of the resolution Parliament passed by a large majority - over 470 votes in favour - at the first September part-session in Strasbourg .
We showed how aid can be provided quickly and secured on a durable basis , and that there can be an instant guarantee of European aid .
I would like to express my gratitude to the Commissioner , who has so quickly taken on board this initiative by Parliament and submitted proposals , and say that it would be proper for Parliament to process these proposals without delay , even though our rules actually provide for a different procedure , and even though my parliamentarian convictions do not always lead me to favour our all too ready abandonment of our rights .
In this case , though , it makes sense , and in this case it is right that we should act in this way .
We have now created lines in the Supplementary Budget that we have just passed .
We are now discussing the legal basis , about which we want to have agreement with the Council by the time we meet in Strasbourg at the end of this month .
What this means is that the formal conditions for the disbursement of funds have been fulfilled .
Two are required - the legal basis and the Budget line .
What I ask is that the Commission should manage to come up with a supplementary budget quickly .
That , Mr Barnier , is a job for your fellow Commissioner Mrs Schreyer rather than for you !
Money must also then be allocated to these lines , because - as I have told this House three times already - if a disaster strikes in the middle of August and emergency aid takes until just before Christmas to arrive , then that is not emergency aid at all !
We should not be deceiving ourselves .
That being so , Mr Barnier , my request is to be passed on to Mrs Schreyer - who , I am glad to see , is coming in on cue - that a supplementary budget be set as quickly as possible , so that the lines can be funded and so that European solidarity can be a matter of deeds and not just words .
This needs to be given expression , and it is time that we did so .
I think that we in this Parliament have made our advance payment , and I hope that help can be given quickly , and in accordance with definite criteria , in any future disasters such as we have experienced in August , and that the events leading to the abolition , without legal grounds , of the former Disaster Fund do not recur .
Not all the problems in Europe should be allowed to become European solidarity issues .
This is where a clear dividing line must be drawn between solidarity and subsidiarity .
If we manage that , we will be on the right track !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start with very warm thanks to the rapporteur and all Members and staff of this House who have made it possible for this report on the establishment of the Solidarity Fund to be adopted so quickly . As certain Members of this House have already pointed out , the distribution of resources for the affected regions is dependent on it , and that not only in the Member States , but also in the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
It is this prompt action that helps the EU to be taken seriously as a Union for its citizens , and to show that the same EU is capable of responding with efficiency and speed to the emergency situations in which they find themselves .
Mr Karas has already referred to the fact that I too come from one of the regions affected , and I can assure you that people are really grateful for this solidarity .
As well as the great damage sustained by roads , bridges , railway infrastructure and public and private buildings , over 20 000 hectares of farmland were devastated .
Let me repeat that the damage in Austria amounts to something in the order of EUR 6 to 7 billion .
The new Solidarity Fund is intended to be - indeed , it must be - a powerful instrument in an emergency and , for that reason , one whose use is targeted .
I would like to give my wholehearted support to the rapporteur 's proposals , and thus to those of the Committee on the Regions , as regards fixing the threshold at EUR 1 billion or 0.5 % of GDP .
The threshold of EUR 3 billion demanded by the Council strikes me as too high .
It is also right to require that the financial resources be drawn on within two years .
The two-month deadline cannot but be supported , as , if aid is to be given quickly , applications for it must be made with equal speed .
Demands continue to be made on the Member States , which cannot evade their responsibilities for preventive measures or long-term reconstruction work , for which we will yet need much in the way of resources .
My especially warm thanks are due to the Commission for coming up with proposals so fast , and especially for the Commissioners having been on the spot with the President of the Commission , and for these funds of EUR 1 billion being available .
I really do hope that we will vote in favour of this report tomorrow and thus enable the funds to get to the victims as soon as possible .
Parliament and the Commission will then have done their duty , and it is my very real hope that the Council will pass the necessary resolutions in October , so that the money will at last reach the victims .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to express my satisfaction regarding the rapid creation of this emergency aid fund that can be called upon in cases of major disasters , since victims have the right to expect the European Union to provide them with solidarity and assistance .
I also regret , however , that this statement is only being made after several years of repeated requests to the European executive to set up an instrument of this sort , the lack of which was , for example , particularly marked following the storms which hit France in December 1999 .
Mr Savary mentioned this earlier .
The powerlessness and inertia of the Community in such circumstances have been very badly perceived by the general public , even though efforts were undertaken to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
Today , following the catastrophic weather in central Europe and in the south of France , the imminent prospect of the implementation of an emergency fund with an annual grant of EUR 1 billion may , at last , give slightly more credibility to the concepts of European solidarity and a common destiny .
In this respect , I believe it is essential to congratulate , in particular , Commissioner Barnier , who succeeded in drafting a proposal for a regulation of very high quality in a record time .
The Fund will provide emergency aid to any area affected by a major disaster , whatever its status with regard to the Structural Funds .
An additional qualitative criterion stipulates that , in very exception circumstances , namely when the disaster affects a substantial part of the population of the region or the State concerned , the assistance from this Fund can therefore be used .
I knew that we could count on you , Commissioner , for this provision to include the particular case of the outermost regions , whose geographical and climatic situation often causes dramatically poor weather that has devastating consequences on their relative prosperity .
Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty must be able to be applied , including in the scenario in question that I obviously do not wish to see happen again in a hurry .
You are to be congratulated on what I understand is your maiden speech in Parliament .
Mr President , I wish first of all to thank each of the speakers for their contributions and their questions , and for the specific concerns that have been expressed .
I particularly appreciated your almost unanimous praise for the Commission , for its ability to react and to take the initiative .
I do not accept these compliments for myself alone .
Mrs Schreyer , who stands beside me , has worked extremely hard to create a flexibility instrument that will enable us to finance this fund and , of course , all of our staff will also have appreciated your words .
As Mrs Sudre said , for three years now , I have thought that the European Union 's response to major disasters has not been equal to the task .
I am reminded of conversations I had with Mr Hatzidakis a few days after I arrived at the Commission , the day after the earthquake in the Athens area .
As a French citizen , I was moved , as I was when Germany was buffeted by storms ; and there were also those disasters in the Azores ...
Frankly , for a long time I have thought , with regard to this issue of risk and risk control , that the European Union 's response to major disasters has not been equal to the task .
We have reacted in this way this time because the disaster that has befallen Germany , Austria , the Czech Republic and Slovakia is on a scale that has never been seen before .
Under the auspices of President Prodi , we have all learned a lesson from this .
I would like once again to thank your rapporteurs , especially Mr Berend , for their cooperation and their proposals .
I heard Mr Lisi say : will EUR one billion be enough ?
I certainly hope so .
I even hope that this billion will not be used up every year .
This is already infinitely more than the small budget line that existed previously and which could only be spread very thinly .
Mr Lisi , ladies and gentlemen , we shall put our best foot forward .
As the years go by - and I hope we will not be seeing too many disasters - we will establish points of reference and in a few years we shall evaluate the management of this fund .
I have already said that if , by the end of the year , this fund were completely used up - and I must make it clear that I mean at the very end of the year - we could use credits from the following year .
Let us use this EUR one billion first , however , if we need to .
We will then assess what needs to be done .
I would also like to say to Mr Ferber that in order to use this money effectively and rapidly , to benefit the communities that are expecting it - local representatives and businesses in Germany , Austria and in the two candidate countries that have been affected - we must be able to release these funds .
I therefore insist on the fact that we must receive a request for intervention from the Member States and an assessment of the damage , even if the dossiers are not extensive technical ones .
I said the same thing today to the Minister-Presidents of the German and Austrian Länder . We have informed the ambassadors of the countries concerned that we need assessments of the scale of the damage .
To this end , we have been holding meetings with officials from the countries concerned .
Mr Ripoll i Martínez mentioned the very specific case of droughts .
I have to say , Mr Ripoll i Martínez , that droughts are not intended to be the main target of this solidarity .
I would also add that if periods of drought do occur , as appears likely , we do have other means in the European Union budget , under the CAP for instance , of helping and of demonstrating solidarity , in particular where farmers are concerned .
Lastly , I wish to reply to Mr Pohjamo , who asked me which countries apart from Member States of the Union could benefit from this fund .
The proposal for a regulation lays down very clearly that this fund is designed for the countries of the European Union or those countries with which negotiations for accession have been opened .
I should like , if you do not mind , since I have taken an interest in this matter for a long time , to say that in addition to this fund which I hope will be operational , thanks to you and to the Council , in a few weeks at the latest , there are lessons to be learned .
Prevention is always cheaper than repair and consequently , I have had two ideas which we can discuss a little further .
Firstly , although the Commission is not asking to be given competence in this field , I think it would be useful to have a benchmark study of the various insurance schemes in the Member States and candidate countries .
I was struck quite forcefully the other day , during my visit to Saxony-Anhalt , when I met a businessman whose company had been totally destroyed and who told me that he had no insurance cover at all .
I therefore believe that we must take a look , in each of our countries , at best practice and the best schemes and perhaps exchange these best practices in the framework of intergovernmental cooperation .
My second idea concerns prevention , an issue mentioned by Mrs Guy-Quint and Mrs Schierhuber .
In the proposals we are considering for the future regional and cohesion policy for the future agenda for after 2006 ( proposals that I shall be making on behalf of the Commission at the end of 2003 ) , I am determined to make prevention against natural risks and disasters a mandatory priority for the European Structural Funds in all of the Union 's regions and in all of our programmes .

Lastly , I wish to conclude , because I am going as far as possible into the lessons to be learned , by replying to Mr Stockmann and Mr Savary , that I also think we should go beyond mere coordination .
We have already made progress since earlier disasters , particularly under the auspices and the authority of my colleague Margot Wallström .
I think that we should move towards this fine and effective idea of a European civil protection force , that we should create a network of specialised units in our various countries , which can be linked up and mobilised in the event of disasters within Union territory or beyond , and that it should not be Belgians , French , Germans or Austrians who set out - each with much goodwill but separately - but Europeans who set out to help other Europeans - their neighbours .
Perhaps we should discuss this issue further .
Once again , we are not calling for Community competence .
I also know that competence for civil protection is often not national . It is sometimes regional .
But where there is a will there is a way and I think that it would be a fine and effective idea to go beyond mere coordination and one day to set up a European civil protection force .
I thank you , Mr President and I thank the rapporteurs . Thank you in advance for your vote on this issue tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The next item is the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , concerning the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the energy performance of buildings ( 8094 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0268 / 2002 - 2001 / 0098 ( COD ) ) ( A5-0297 / 2002 ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank our rapporteur for his quite remarkable work , particularly when we are talking about an issue of this scale , which involves taking real action , since , for once , we will be working on consumer information , on training and on new production priorities .
I think it is crucial to provide information about the state of the EU 's energy demand when it comes to energy consumption in the housing and tertiary sectors . This applies all the more at a time when the threat of global warming hangs over our future .
Of course , we must also add to this the problem of our dependence on outside sources of energy supply .
This is a directive which will , as a result of the four following instruments : the methodology for calculating the integrated energy performance of buildings , the application of minimum energy performance requirements to new buildings and to buildings undergoing renovations and the establishment of a system of energy performance certification , I believe , increase consumer information and encourage owners to invest in improving energy performance , which is in both their interest and that of their tenants .
The particular notice system that we wish to put in place will enable us not only to keep citizens informed about this energy performance , but also to give public authorities an exemplary role in the field .
It is therefore a text that constitutes a considerable qualitative leap in relation to the SAVE programme , because it has a restrictive nature that will give us total credibility with regard to the Kyoto challenges .
I thank both the Commission and the Council which have , fortunately , abandoned the approach of voluntary measures in favour of that of a genuine piece of European legislation , which will alone guarantee results as well as uniform implementation .
No one could think that this directive imposes constraints and an excessive burden on the construction sector .
We maintain on the contrary that this is an opportunity for industry , for research and the consumer and represents a genuine boost for research into insulating material and heating and air-conditioning systems .
Eventually , European industry will have considerable expertise in the field of the energy performance of buildings , which will enhance its modernisation and its competitiveness .
We shall , at the same time , be extremely careful to undertake an evaluation and to ensure a usage that is geared more towards housing for the most disadvantaged members of society .
Might we perhaps be able to hope that the first experimental models will be the buildings of the European Union itself ?
I thank you also for the clarity and the transparency of the work undertaken with the Commission , and above all for the close attention the Council has paid .
This is why , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I ask you to vote in favour of this text .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his sterling work , particularly in reaching a useful and speedy conclusion at second reading .
We have aimed at the target of improved energy efficiency in buildings for some years , in the climate change programme amongst others .
Some measures , such as the thermal insulation of new buildings , are indeed already provided for under the same programme .
However , these were not binding on the Member States .
In general , Community programmes have failed to result in the actual application of standards of energy efficiency in many Member States , so this directive , although modest , is indeed a step forward , a building block , if you like .
The rapporteur was correct to point out that in view of the Kyoto timetable , we must be careful not to invalidate the directive by a long transition period , particularly for certification in specific areas .
I congratulate him again on reaching a useful conclusion .
Finally , I would like to add my voice to those who plea that we do something realistic about energy savings in Parliament buildings and in EU buildings in general .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0283 / 2002 ) drawn up by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on a communication from the Commission concerning the fraud-proofing of legislation and contract management ( SEC ( 2001 ) 2029 - C5-0158 / 2002 - 2002 / 2066 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a fact - perhaps an agreeable fact at this hour of the day - that I am able today to present to you a draft report that has been unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control . I take great pleasure in the fact that we expressly welcome the Commission 's ideas relating to the fraud-proofing of legislation and contract management .
It is always cheaper to avoid or prevent fraud than it is to attempt , after the event and at great expense , to put things right .
I would like to bring up a couple of other items that we would like to see reinforced .
Firstly , fraud-proofing must not be allowed to unduly prolong the preparation of European legislation , nor must it be limited exclusively to new draft laws .
On the contrary , existing legislation must also be checked for flaws .
I believe it to be also a credibility issue that we should , in tandem with this draft law from the Commission , start to scrutinise policies that we know , Commissioner , to be an invitation to fraud - the examples that come to my mind include export refunds in the area of agriculture .
Secondly , we have to hold fast to the primary purpose of the anti-fraud office , OLAF , which is , of course , to combat fraud and corruption and not to do the things proposed here .
We are prepared , however , within the framework of the 2003 work programme , to examine whether OLAF has sufficient human and financial resources at its disposal to effectively perform the duties transferred to it .
Here too we have to discuss whether we can transfer an increasing number of tasks to this Office .
We have had to note a cut in its budget for the coming year .
Parliament is trying to get matters back in some sort of order , but this is not just about the Budget ; it is quite simply about the fact that we know that one of the reasons for the failure of OLAF 's predecessor , UCLAF , was that it did everything and therefore managed nothing .
The main focus here , then , must be on the essentials .
It is our view that standard contracts and agreements should be drawn up and collected centrally , and that this would make it easier to track and monitor parties to contracts and transactions under them .
We take the view that a clause should be incorporated into the contracts and agreements to exclude from the award of future contracts those partners guilty of any fraudulent act .
Here too we urge the Commission to give priority to more consistent application of the options that are already available .
It is a tragedy , for example , when EUROSTAT repeatedly points out that firms cannot be got rid of even when it is proven that they gave false information as early as the stage of putting out to tender .
Where does that get us ?
That is surely a credibility issue !
The combating of fraud is essentially a credibility issue , and credibility is something the Commission has yet to provide in various areas .
To repeat , we are very satisfied with what the Commission has submitted here .
What really will make a difference is how it is implemented .
What will matter , in the final analysis , is how seriously and with what transparency we want to remove the flaws from our own legislation .
I would like to tell the Commissioner without any equivocation that , on this issue , we in Parliament are standing alongside the Commission , but we need openness , and , when it comes down to it , we also need transparency , if we are to be able to work together on these problems .
Mr President , Mr Bösch , honourable Members , I would like to start by thanking Mr Bösch for the support expressed in his report and which he has just reiterated .
The Commission 's initiative both forms an important part of the work of reform as a whole and has a part to play in the Commission 's overall strategy for the protection of financial interests .
As you have emphasised , its aim is to improve the fraudproofing of Community policies and legislative proposals .
The prevention of fraud is nothing new .
It was and is a matter of major concern , and it must be comprehensive , meaning that it must , so to speak , be present right from the very outset , and hence - as you also emphasised - in the initiative and the proposal ; it cannot be introduced later , at the implementation stage .
Fraud prevention is not the province of a few specialists alone , a fact that has led us to declare that inter-departmental cooperation must start at an earlier stage , rather than leaving all the work to OLAF .
The expertise of the Directorates-General must be combined with the specialist knowledge that OLAF has gained from its practical experience .
This sort of cross-fertilisation can be useful as a means of developing fraudproofing in such a way that legislative drafts are examined with a view to making them fraudproof .
This is about establishing a method of working intended to combine this expertise with knowledge about prevention , and doing that without needlessly prolonging the legislative process .
I fully agree with the emphasis you have put on it .
Another important aspect has to do with making lawmaking simpler .
It of course has a preventive function for the legislative process not to be so complicated that it becomes incapable of being monitored ; simplification , on the other hand , also creates good openings for legal control .
The fraudproofing mechanism is meant to help shape legislation in a way that makes it clear and fraudproof .
I would like to enlarge on what you mentioned in that context ; on the one hand new draft laws , and on the other , the checking of laws already in force .
That , of course , again raises the question of the human resources available .
We are now starting on current lawmaking processes , which is of course the first step .
Once a procedure has become established , we will see to what extent we can apply this also to the amendment of laws , with which we are also constantly occupied .
OLAF is now getting on with drawing up criteria , appointing contact persons , and installing this mechanism .
Let me , however , point out that making legislation fraudproof is not just a matter for the Commission , but legislators are also of course obliged , for their part , to treat this principle as a decisive criterion when framing laws .
Let me conclude with the additional observation that even the best policy of prevention can only be a success if it goes hand in hand with a credible framework of deterrence , as indeed , Mr Bösch , you emphasise in your report .
Fraudproofing measures must not be allowed to limit in any way OLAF 's firm action in bringing fraud and irregularities to light ; they are merely supplementary to it .
I might add that the Commission is endeavouring to bring about improvements in the area of criminal law .
We have just had the hearing on the European Public Prosecutor , and will take this opportunity to thank Parliament for the great support it has given .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not only does combating fraud seem to be becoming an ongoing task in the EU , but the Commission is also showing a great deal of imagination when it comes to the ways and means , and it is again showing its capacity for fantasy with this communication on the fraudproofing of legislation and contract management - a high-sounding title in very truth .
It remains to be seen whether the draft , when it comes to fruition , will also contain what has been promised .
I think it right to be sceptical about that .
Since taking office , this Commission has distinguished itself by placatory promises , the words of which have not been followed up by actions .
The Commission 's announcement of its slogan ' Zero Tolerance for Fraud and Irregularities ' has not prevented the officially-acknowledged fraud figures for 2000 from being higher than ever , and even those for 2001 from being , at EUR 1.25 billion , well above the average for previous years .
Legislation and contracts are now to be drafted in such a way as to be fraudproof .
It is as if they were meant to be stamped with the words ' checked and found fraudproof ' !
Is that the big picture ?
Is it not self-evident that legal documents - insofar as such documents are at all able to do so - promote lawful rather than unlawful conduct when the EU 's billions are handed out ?
Does the Commission not employ hosts of well-trained and highly-paid officials , and this objective not far from the least of those they are there to achieve ?
Actually , I do think , if we are really honest , that this communication is superfluous , promoting as it does something that goes without saying .
I can only sum this up by saying that the Commission 's clocks are obviously set differently after all .
It is evidently necessary to lay down by means of an official communication that we must obey rather than disobey the law .
I find that very worrying on the part of an institution that is the custodian of the European treaties .
In view of that , should the Commission not at last deal with the cases of fraud that have come to light and draw the necessary conclusions ?
Is that not the method that promises success ?
To give one example , why does the Commission , with the resources at its disposal , not take a certain former lady Commissioner before the European Court of Justice ?
Providing a deterrent example for the future , that would be better targeted .
But no , the Commission prefers to change the Financial Regulation in order to reduce transparency .
It is still trying to limit Parliament 's supervisory role , and it has done away with the independent financial controller .
All these points are referred to in Mr Bösch 's Report , which I also fully endorse in other respects .
If fraud is to be successfully combated , then decisive intervention is indispensable .
Anything else can be nothing more than an accompanying measure .
Now I do not want to use this opportunity to enlarge on criticism of the Commission 's book-keeping system , although there seems to be a certain amount wrong with it , but it is rather sad how the Commission continues to deal with criticism .
It seems to have learned nothing from it .
Mr Bösch mentioned it , and I want to repeat it .
A Danish official is deprived of her brief and is marginalised for drawing attention to instances of maladministration , by which I mean what went on at Eurostat , to which our report makes reference .
Despite this criticism - and despite what I am tempted to bluntly call adequate grounds for suspicion - the Commission continues to cooperate with a firm that operates in a highly questionable way , which has won contracts by deception and has failed to do any good work .
This is something to which the Commission must respond .
If it does not , it cannot be spared the criticism that communications such as this one are nothing more than diversionary manoeuvres !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The next item is report ( A5-0307 / 2002 ) by Mr Holmes , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing specific access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks ( COM ( 2002 ) 108 - C5-0135 / 2002 - 2002 / 0053 ( CNS ) ) .
I am privileged to present this report on behalf of my colleague from the Fisheries Committee , Michael Holmes .
Members may be aware that Mr Holmes recently underwent major surgery and I am sure that the House will join me in wishing him a speedy recovery .
Firstly , I congratulate Mr Holmes on his excellent work in compiling this report .
We are dealing with this issue against a background of collapsing fish stocks throughout the European Union .
Indeed , at the recent World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg , the issue of over-fishing in international waters was recognised by countries around the world .
They committed themselves to limiting fishing to sustainable levels and to taking steps to restore fish stocks by 2015 , a position fully supported by Commissioner Fischler .
Indeed , he expressed the view that the EU should achieve these targets long before that date and he pledged decisive action against illegal and unregulated fisheries practices .
That is why I find it bizarre and even astonishing that the Commission agreed to a Council compromise last June which effectively paves the way for a total allowable catches ( TACs ) and quotas to be applied to deepwater stocks .
Although this was judged by Mr Arias Cañete , the Spanish President-in-Office of the Council at that time , to be one of the highlights of the Spanish Presidency , it requires closer examination .
The science in relation to deep-sea stocks is not yet fully developed .
However , we know that these fish live at great depths - over 1 200 metres - and we know that they are slow-maturing , not reaching breeding age until they are at least 25 years old .
We also know that they have a very low reproductive capacity , and that there are around 87 different species of fish swimming together at these great depths , of which only around eight are edible or marketable .
As a result , we know that fishermen in these waters regularly dump around 90 % of all the fish they catch , dead , back into the sea .
Out of every 100 tonnes of fish caught , 90 tonnes are being thrown back dead into the water .
Applying TACs and quotas to these deepwater stocks for the first time , as Mr Holmes points out forcefully in his report , will invite disaster .
TACs and quotas are the root cause of the two million tonnes of good , fresh fish which are currently dumped dead into the sea every year in the EU .
TACs and quotas only control what is landed , they do not control what is caught .
If this House votes tomorrow for the application of TACs and quotas to these deepwater stocks , then I can predict with some confidence that this valuable fishery will be destroyed perhaps within as little as five years .
As the Holmes report points out , the only way to regulate this fishery in a sustainable way is by effort limitation , by limiting the number of days during which a vessel may put to sea .
If a fishing boat is not at sea , then it is not fishing and if it is not fishing , then the fish are not being caught .
This is the only logical and realistic approach to achieving a sustainable deepwater fishery .
That is why this is also the approach favoured by the scientists and by the fishing communities on whose future the survival of these stocks depends .
Furthermore , it is essential that we apply strict controls to the type of gear being used in these deepwater fisheries .
Gill nets are strung out at huge depths on the sea bed , sometimes stretching for up to 100 kilometres , and are then left anchored for days at a time while the parent fishing vessel returns to port .
They can cause massive damage to these highly vulnerable species .
Sometimes , these nets can also break loose and continue ghost-fishing for decades .
These nets should be banned .
Similarly , rock hoppers which bounce across obstacles on the seabed to avoid nets becoming snagged can cause enormous damage to delicate corals and sea mounts which are an essential part of the marine ecosystem .
We cannot allow such unsustainable practices to continue unchecked .
Needless to say , these ideas are not favoured by those Member States whose attitude to fishing is based on a short-term , dash-for-profit philosophy .
They have no concern for the marine environment , for sustainability , nor for the massive socio-economic impact which will result if we allow these fisheries to collapse .
I therefore urge this House to accept the amended proposals recommended by Mr Holmes in his report and I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Stevenson has already said , we are dealing today with our proposal on access requirements applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks and the proposal for the imposition of TACs and quotas for deepwater species .
I would like to start by warmly congratulating Mr Holmes on his report .
Expert opinion is as one in confirming that deep-sea stocks are at present heavily overfished , and the pressure on fisheries continues to increase .
Stocks of deep-sea fish are , however , very sensitive in biological terms , as they have a very low breeding rate and grow very slowly - substantially more slowly than other types of fish .
It therefore takes many years before deep-sea stocks that have been too heavily fished are able to recover .
The opinions that we have received also state that TACs and quotas can be only a first step towards protecting deep-sea species .
Experts also urge that the fishing effort should be restricted and new methods developed , principally for the collection of data relating to these stocks .
That is why we have also submitted a proposal for licences , for effort limitation and the collection of data , and this proposal , taken as a whole , rests on four central pillars .
Firstly , we need better flow of information from the fishermen to the scientists .
Secondly , we have to introduce better supervision in order to get more reliable data .
Thirdly , we have to be more vigilant in monitoring the landing of deepwater species and provide for fishing vessels to be monitored with the aid of satellites .
Fourthly , we have to introduce a freeze on fishing licences for deep-sea species to keep them at the present level and prevent any further increase of the pressure on fishery .
As a whole , we have to gain better knowledge of deep sea fishing and improve the stocks .
Only then will we be able to enact fair and appropriate regulations .
So I hope that Parliament will endorse these measures .
I would like to wait until after the debate to say something about the amendments and let you know what position the Commission takes on them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is entirely fitting that at this time of the night we should be talking about species of fish that live in deep waters and which therefore also function to some extent in the night , in the darkness , as a result of the aquatic atmosphere in which they are immersed .
Leaving irony aside , however , I shall say that these species of fish living away from the continental shelves are precious and are part of the rich diversity of marine life .
We all agree , furthermore , that it is crucial to protect these species , these population units , from the heightened exploitation to which they have been subject in the last few years .
In fact , the scarcity of fish on the continental shelf and in the major fishing grounds has caused many vessels and many fishermen to turn to these species that have survived or that have been largely ignored until now , and which are , consequently , on the way to suffering total despoliation .
It is , therefore , absolutely crucial to protect these fish species and we also all agree that scientific research is essential since there is still a great deal we do not know about these species because they are , shall we say , rather mysterious , like everything from the deep , like everything from afar .
Much more research must be carried out on observing these population units , their ecosystems , their living and reproductive habits and their fertility rates , because there are major fears that since these species ' growth rates are slow , they are much more vulnerable to the exploitation to which they are subject .
Although there is agreement on the diagnosis and on the shortcomings of the research carried out to date , there seems to be some disagreement about the methodology with which to protect these species , as far as I could understand from Commissioner Fischler 's intervention .
Nevertheless , I do not see how we can avoid the need for total allowable catches ( TACs ) and quotas - the old methodology , which produced some results , although it has its limitations ; nor do I see how we can avoid limiting fishing efforts .
I know that this is a very sensitive matter , because nowadays , the activity of fishermen , fishing communities and investments clearly always take priority . In this case , however , the precautionary principle must be applied .
Where we cannot be certain , we must be cautious and prudent .
Consequently , we must do everything that can be done , even though we cannot be certain about the result and the efficiency of this action , to protect these fish species , these dozens and dozens of species , the habits of some of which may even be unknown or almost unknown .
I therefore congratulate the Commission and Mr Holmes on their work , because this work is crucial to the protection of nature .
Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Holmes for his work and join in wishing him a speedy recovery .
The ELDR firmly believes that there is an urgent need to regulate this fishery .
Available scientific evidence on deep-water species suggests that they are outside safe biological limits and that measures should be introduced to allow rebuilding of the stocks . Action is particularly essential in light of the fact that these fish live a long time , grow slowly and have low reproductive capacity .
The majority of the amendments made by the committee seek to exempt ling and tusk from the scope of the regulation , although they would still be covered by quotas .
Whilst the group accepts that these two species are caught on the continental shelf , it is imperative that they are properly regulated .
If these amendments are adopted by Parliament , the ELDR will vote against the proposal as a whole .
As for Amendment No 5 , the ELDR believes that kilowatt fishing days are a more accurate tool to measure effort in view of the so-called technological creep and so cannot support this amendment .
We are , however , favourable to Amendment No 6 which requests a review of the progress being made in achieving the aims of the regulation .
The ELDR has tabled three amendments of its own .
Amendment No 8 calls for an economic and operational impact assessment in relation to the expected loss of revenue and effort displacement resulting from the implementation of the regulation .
Amendment No 9 seeks to outlaw the use of fixed gill nets in this fishery as they risk inflicting substantial unintended mortality on heavily depleted stocks .
Finally , Amendment No 10 proposes the use of area closures to protect species which accumulate particularly densely in certain areas at certain times of the year .
The ELDR is also minded to support Amendments Nos 12 and 16 by Mr Hudghton and others on greater involvement by the fishing industry and on safety respectively .
It has , however , doubts as to whether fishing effort control should be the sole management tool and therefore also has doubts about Amendments Nos 11 and 14 .
The ELDR is concerned that Amendment No 13 may delay the implementation of the management measures and also believes that Amendment No 15 could potentially have a negative impact on the environment .
On a personal level , however , I feel that regulation of catch opportunities in a mixed fishery by means of both TACs and quotas and an effort regime , based on licences , will lead to the discarding of species for which a quota is not held or where the quota has been exceeded .
For this reason , I shall support Amendments Nos 11 and 14 .
I will also support Amendment No 15 as it represents a fairer basis for the distribution of quotas .
Finally , I would like to express , on behalf of the ELDR , a profound dissatisfaction that the Council has effectively taken a decision on this dossier without awaiting the opinion of Parliament .
We would hope that the Fisheries Council will see fit to take its views on board when it reaches its formal decision .
Mr President , I too would like to welcome Mr Holmes ' report and hope he makes a speedy recovery .
When the Commission 's proposals first appeared , we , in the Green Party , welcomed them .
It was high time that these newly-developed fisheries for deepwater species were brought under some sort of control .
We are all aware of why these species are particularly vulnerable to over-exploitation , as Mr Stevenson pointed out in his introduction .
As the stocks in EU waters which were the traditional target of EU vessels were becoming depleted , the result was the development of these new fisheries .
At the same time , we feel that the conclusions of the negotiations over the detail of the management regime put in place are much too weak .
They are also too dependent upon TACs and quotas which have proved such a disaster elsewhere , as Mr Stevenson pointed out .
We hope that now that a management regime is put in place , the Commission will act quickly to strengthen it - for instance by other means , such as much stronger technical measures and more restrictive effort controls .
This is what will be effective in the long term .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the move that led to the proposal for a regulation that we are debating this evening is exemplary and deserves thorough consideration when it comes to updating the common fisheries policy .
Around fifteen years ago , the French fishermen of Boulogne-sur-Mer began fishing for and selling certain species of fish living beyond the continental shelf in the deep trench , which is more than 800 metres deep .
It was at the request of these professional fishermen that a scientific research institute , Ifremer , started to take a close interest in the biology of these species and particularly in their biological cycle .
A fruitful collaboration between professionals and scientists enabled them to determine quite early on that these species have slow life cycles and that there was an urgent need for catches to be limited so as not to endanger their biological balance .
Also at the request of the professionals , supported in their action by the scientists , the government of the main Member State concerned , France , asked the Commission to take action to regulate these new fishing grounds by establishing TACs and quotas .
The Commission was reluctant for a long time and dragged its heels .
Without the political agreement reached at the Fisheries Council of last June , it is unlikely that we would now have these two proposals for regulations on fishing deep-water stocks .
Finally , however , we do have them and I welcome both them and the report by Michael Holmes , who has addressed this issue with great competence and whom I too wish a speedy recovery .
The way in which these regulations have come to exist is exemplary for more than one reason .
It illustrates first of all the fact that fishermen are of course the main people concerned and the main actors when it comes to establishing rules for sustainable fishing .
It also shows that the instruments best suited to providing the effective protection of fish species are those which are flexible and reversible , such as TACs and quotas , and not rigid structural measures with irreversible effects such as the destruction of vessels or the retraining of fishermen .
It also shows that fishermen and scientists can work together closely and intelligently and come up with proposals for realistic and constructive management measures which allow fishing to take place whilst at the same time managing resources .
Lastly , it demonstrates that an upwards action rising from the field level to the competent authority is more effective than the downwards and even condescending action usually favoured , unfortunately , by the Commission , not least when it launched the draft reform of the CFP .
These lessons must therefore be carefully retained and implemented , if possible , within the entire process of reforms underway .
Having said that , I think that we can only welcome the fact that we have achieved this regulation and I shall be supporting the report by Michael Holmes as well as most of his amendments , which have the support of the fishermen concerned , particularly those calling for the re-examination of the provision every three years in order to update the results obtained .
Mr President , without verifiable , up-to-date independent scientific advice it is impossible to establish a TAC regime .
How , then , could the Commission support such a regime ?
How could the Council endorse such a scheme in June 2002 without proper consultation with the industry and the North East Atlantic Fisheries Council being left out of the picture ?
The Commission has a lot to answer for in this , but the main appeal that I make at this stage is not for recrimination but for the proposal to be reconsidered .
If conservation of stocks is to be achieved , we must regulate deep-sea fisheries under a regime based on effort limitation .
We must take into account firstly that TACs will increase mortality through discards of the species most in the need of protection , and secondly , that safety could be put at risk as vessels with inadequate quota but a deficit in fishing days would be pressurised to fish under perilous conditions .
I urge this House and also the Commission to support the amendments in the name of the ELDR Group and those in my name which are signed by various members of the four largest groups in this House .
Finally , the social and economic implications of any final proposal must be fully assessed and measured for compensation provided where appropriate and without discrimination between fishermen in different Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my warm thanks for this debate , but want to remind you that this proposal was submitted by the Commission as long ago as the beginning of March , and I also want to make it clear that the Commission did not give the Council any agreement to the political compromise that the latter had worked out ; on the contrary , the Commission has noted that it will take up a final position on the acceptability or otherwise of this compromise only after Parliament has made its views known .
I must say in all frankness that there is also no truth in the assertion that no scientific evaluation exists .
A scientific opinion has been given by ICES , and also by our scientific advisory forum .
There is indeed no lack of scientific foundation for what we are doing !
Let me turn now to the various amendments , which I would like to evaluate in the light of the debate .
The first amendment is one that the Commission can accept .
I agree that ling , tusk and red spot seabream should be taken out of the scope of the regulation , although these fish should remain on the list of species for which detailed information on catches is required .

I can also accept Amendments Nos 2 and 4 , but not Amendment No 3 , as I am against removing the supplementary provisions on satellite surveillance from our proposal , our practical experience with the satellite system having shown that failures are often not real failures at all , but are simulated in order to circumvent the surveillance .
Moreover , traditional monitoring with patrol vessels and aircraft is far from adequate to deal with deep sea fishing , especially in very distant areas ; indeed , it is not even a workable proposition .
We therefore need effective monitoring by satellite , and we must tighten up the definition of an equipment failure and the consequences resulting from one .
I am happy to take on board the addition to Amendment No 5 to the effect that fishing days should be days out of port ; that is a useful clarification , but the reference to catch areas is less clear than our proposal that the exact ICES statistical rectangle should be indicated .
I am therefore unwilling to accept it .
Considerations of confidentiality lead me to consider it inappropriate to publicise the identification of individual vessels for scientific studies .
I can understand that the measurement of engine power in kilowatts is problematic and difficult to enforce .
Instead , then , of deleting the reference to capacity , which is necessary to scientific analysis , we want to improve the reference by , for example , specifying the classes of vessels , which can be summarised by reference to gross registered tonnage .
Amendment No 6 is , in my view , a good idea , and I am willing to provide for revision of the measures in 2005 .
I can also go along with Amendment No 7 , but not with Amendment No 8 .
The Commission , in any case , has consultations as a matter of routine with the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries on the social and economic consequences of conservation measures , but I am quite happy to accept Article 9a and submit to the Council and to Parliament , by 30 June 2005 , a report on the general arrangements for the management of deepwater species , which would also cover the scientific dimension of a reduction in fishing effort .
I cannot accept Amendment No 9 as at present drafted , as no scientific evaluations have been submitted to us demanding a ban on fixed gillnets , but I will take up your suggestion in this regard and ask ICES for a scientific evaluation of whether and for which areas such a ban on fixed gillnets might be a sensible conservation measure .
I can agree to Amendment No 10 .
I have to reject Amendment No 11 ; although it is the case that the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea recommends a reduction in the fishing effort for deepwater species , the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries regards additional TACs as a useful supplementary measure .
I am happy to accept Amendment No 12 , but the Commission has to reject Amendment No 13 on the grounds that it would go against the precautionary principle .
We must act as soon as we get scientific advice for the first time .
The same is true of Amendment No 14 , which I cannot accept either .
In order to implement in practice an effort limitation , we need deep-sea fishing licences .
I regret that I also have to turn down Amendment No 15 .
We are all aware that the deep sea fishing fleet has rapidly increased in power and capacity .
If we were to change the reference period , we would be permitting a de facto further increase in the size of the deep sea fleet , which however does not at all fit in with the effort limitations that are urgently necessary .
In conclusion , I have no option but to reject the final amendment , No 16 , as well , as this amendment would make possible derogations from the regulation that would be impossible to monitor , the things termed ' force majeure ' or ' risk to the safety of vessels ' being concepts lacking any definition in law .
Of course safety has to be guaranteed - there can be no question whatever about that .
The provisions we have now also allow a ship at risk to dock in a port other than that designated , provided that it does not land its catch there .
I believe this approach to be already balanced and to take the safety of ships sufficiently into account , as well as the enforceable provisions on conservation .
Greenhouse gas emission allowance trading
Mr President , I am pleased to be able to address the European Parliament on the emissions trading proposal .
I am proud of this proposal because I see it as a cornerstone of the European Union 's cost-effective implementation of the Kyoto Protocol .
First , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Moreira Da Silva , for his unstinting efforts in bringing this proposal to its first reading .
I know there were approximately 500 amendments in Committee , but we now have a much more manageable 100 amendments
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to use my opening words to express my thanks for the excellent cooperation I have enjoyed with the draftsmen and the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups .
It is due to this cooperation alone that we were able to reach a good compromise in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I believe that this directive will create the conditions for climate change and the Kyoto Protocol to stop being a purely theoretical concern in Europe and become an essential strand of the environmental and economic policy of all the Member States .
Essentially , this directive will form the basis of the carbon economy ; the winners will be those who are able to achieve the same levels of production with the fewest emissions .
I therefore congratulate the Commission , in the person of Commissioner Margot Wallström , on the initiative of proposing this directive , particularly because it will significantly reduce the cost of complying with Kyoto in the European Union .
As a matter of fact , I believe that proving that this system works , proving that this system will reduce the cost of complying with Kyoto in the European Union , will be the best way for us to convince our US friends to abide by the Kyoto Protocol .
Nevertheless , despite considering the proposal for a directive to be positive on the whole , there are areas in which Parliament wishes both to go further and to improve the basic proposal and a broad compromise was reached on these matters .
Consequently , rather than putting forward my own point of view , I am speaking on behalf of all of those who adopted this compromise .
Firstly , I think it is important that this directive has quantified targets for compliance and we feel it is crucial that there should be a maximum ceiling on emission allowances per Member State , on a linear curve converging with the Kyoto Protocol .
Secondly , we feel it is important that the Member States should be able to add to the sectors and activities included in the system .
I am thinking about the voluntary ' opting in ' of sectors such as transport or small and medium-sized enterprises in the Member States that feel it would be appropriate .
Thirdly , the use of credits must be completely prohibited in the directive 's first implementation period .
Fourthly , we consider it important that the directive should cover all six greenhouse gases , not only carbon dioxide , provided that these six gases are included on the basis of transparent criteria , identical to those used for carbon dioxide .
Fifthly , we believe it is important that the chemicals and aluminium industries should also be included in this directive .
Lastly , with regard to the areas in which we feel that the Commission 's proposal ought to be extended and made more ambitious - and I am referring to the initial emissions allowance allocation system - I think that a hybrid system based on free allocation but with some auctioning ( 5 % in the first period , 15 % in the second period ) is better than a 100 % free allocation as advocated in the proposal for a directive , not only in the economic strand , but also in the environmental strand and as regards reducing distortion of competition .
I have left what I believe to be the most important issue to the end : legal involvement .
It is my view that this system can only work if it is legally binding , in other words , mandatory .
I believe the Committee on the Environment achieved a good compromise on legal involvement , a binding system with the temporary exclusion - with limits on both the duration and the conditions - of some companies in the first period .
I believe the adoption of Amendments Nos 75 and 81 to be quite unjustified and even dangerous , because this would basically mean turning a binding system into a voluntary one and consequently increasing distortions of competition , reducing the liquidity in the market , increasing the price per tonne of carbon dioxide and reducing the economic efficiency of the system .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Moreira da Silva , the other draftsmen of opinions and the shadow rapporteurs for the pleasant working relationship that produced the proposal that is now before us .
I should note in this respect that it became abundantly clear during the process that the proposal on emissions trading is controversial .
Consequently , differences of opinion among the supporters and opponents of the scheme resulted in an overwhelming number of amendments .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I call for a uniform and transparent emissions trading scheme , a scheme which clearly describes the rights and duties for the government and industry .
It should , however , also do justice to industry 's entirely unique dynamic , a dynamic in which continuity and scope for competition are not unnecessarily hampered by new rules .
It is therefore gratifying to see that in the final report that is now before us , a number of amendments tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have been adopted in order to achieve this .
I am particularly referring to extending the period of time in Article 11 , adapting the penalty clause in Article 16 and the way in which Member States tax the emissions trading scheme in Article 16 , Paragraph 4 .
Clarity about factors that distort the market promotes the effectiveness of a market for emission rights .
It is therefore regrettable that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy failed to reach agreement on the way rights will be allocated from 2008 .
It still is of great importance to remain alert with regard to measures that Member States may take in order to intervene in a market for emissions trading by introducing its own schemes and taxes .
Resistance to an emissions trading scheme will continue to exist among various parties and will lead to the rules being bypassed .
A lack of clarity in the directive should therefore not mean that emissions trading is doomed to fail .
The saying ' the proof of the pudding is in the eating ' therefore very much applies to emissions trading .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
My colleague , Mr Blokland , just said that the proof of the pudding is in the eating .
I would like to say that those who have not thought about emissions trading might consider how a lobster is eaten . Imagine that you have a large lobster on a plate in front of you .
First it is quite easy to get very large and juicy mouthfuls from it , but things then become quite difficult when you get to the small claws and joints , and then you leave them on the plate because it is no longer really worth the bother of going on with the meal .
The idea now of course is that emissions trading will help us find the juicy targets for reductions in emissions , ones where a reduction in emissions is cost-effective and where it really is worth the bother , and perhaps the more difficult targets can be left to last or be dealt with in other ways .
Effective means are needed to realise the Kyoto Protocol commitments .
I would like to say that the wisest course of action is to start now , because in all likelihood the obligations under the Kyoto Protocol will enter into force from 2008 .
We know that in business those that get in early often also reap the highest profits .
The report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy fulfils all the key requirements for a good emissions trading system .
Firstly , Parliament will vote today on the proposal to significantly extend the emissions market with the inclusion of new sectors , including new gases .
That way we can be sure there will be enough sellers and buyers in the market .
As regards the flexibility that the Member States have been looking for , I believe the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has found the best possible flexible approach , so that Member States , subject to certain conditions , may temporarily exclude some installations from the emissions trading scheme .
This , I think , was an excellent solution , and one which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market also proposed .
Most important of all is the notion that in allocating these emission allowances we should adhere to the criteria whereby companies that have already attended to the matter of reducing their emissions are encouraged and rewarded .
In fact the auction debate is connected with this very issue , because auctions would introduce that element that would encourage and reward the trendsetters .
I hope Parliament will accept at least a small proportion of auctioned allowances .
We on the committee and in Parliament as a whole have enjoyed some quite excellent levels of cooperation .
I wish to thank both the rapporteur and the Commission in particular very much for this .
Thank you , Mrs Hautala .
Perhaps you would also let us know where you like eating lobster , as you use it as such an elegant example .
Mr President , I am not going to speak about lobsters , but I share the interests of the two previous speakers .
Mr President , you know everything by definition , so you already know the opinion of the Industry Committee .
In case there are any colleagues here who do not know , it is my role to report it .
There was a broad spread of opinions in the Industry Committee , as I shall briefly describe .
I will summarise a number of key points which our discussions centred around .
First of all , perhaps most importantly , should the scheme be compulsory or should there be opt-outs or exemptions ?
There were a number of voices from certain national quarters asking for exemptions .
Other committee members believed that if we allowed exemptions , everyone would ask for one and there would be no directive , so there was a dilemma there .
There was also a concern that the benefits that the cutbacks already achieved in certain Member States will not necessarily be rewarded adequately .
This should be taken care of .
There was general agreement that from 2008 the directive should be compulsory .
Regarding allocation of allowances , the Committee is against auctioning .
It seems to be a waste of resources when the industry should be using it to cut back .
The Committee is interested in including other sectors , even perhaps in transport and private housing , although this will be difficult to achieve .
We are in favour of including the other five greenhouse gases , although measurement is an important question .
On comitology and whether the Commission should be allowed to decide the future details , we are firmly , unanimously against .
We want full co-decision for the next directive when it is proposed .
We want the other parts of the world to pay attention because what we do is useless unless the Americans , Russians and Asians are involved as well .
Finally , a personal point , the public should be allowed to buy quotas because we want to involve the citizens in European activities and in saving the world .
Mr President , I too should like to start with a few words of thanks .
First of all to the Commissioner and her staff who have presented a sound proposal and were always prepared to discuss it with MEPs .
Secondly to Mr Moreira da Silva , who has tried to improve the proposal with an admirable doggedness .
And finally the colleagues of my own group who have had to sit through long discussions on this topic .
Tradable emission rights turned out to be a thorny subject .
During all the difficult discussions , it was sometimes necessary to remind ourselves of what we are working towards , namely Kyoto .
We must pursue the ambition of fighting climate change , and we must do this in an economically and socially responsible manner .
Three aspects were paramount in our group .
First of all , we wanted to maintain , and where possible reinforce , the proposal 's environmental integrity .
We therefore endorse Mr Moreira da Silva 's proposal to introduce a cap , a maximum ceiling , so that we can be certain that emission levels are indeed dropping .
We are , in principle , in favour of cooperating in this area with Eastern European countries and developing countries , provided that this is done in a way that precludes the use of sinks and nuclear energy .
Secondly , the PSE Group wants the scheme we are drafting to be fair and to be experienced as such .
This is why a credible sanctions policy should be put in place , this is why we want to absolutely avoid early innovators being disadvantaged and this is why the allocation method should also be the same wherever possible .
Discrepancies that are too great between Member States lead to distortion in competition .
It is still impossible to settle on one allocation method , be it grandfathering or auctioning , even within our group .
Thirdly , the scheme must be effective .
This means that the market must be as big as possible : the more players , the more effective the scheme .
I have to say that the discussion on this score was sometimes a little alienating .
I am of the opinion that it is not at all in the interest of companies to make use of an opt-out clause , for these companies must reduce their CO2 emissions , come what may .
Businesses that fall within the scheme can - if they fail to reduce emissions - buy emission rights on the market .
Businesses that do not fall within the scheme will need to switch off installations or even shut down divisions .
In my view , this is not a particularly socially-minded solution .
We as Socialists take employment seriously .
This is why companies and trade unions do not stand to gain anything from an opt-out .
It may therefore be a good idea to withdraw Amendment No 81 .
It is of great importance for us to be able to announce progress in the European climate policy in New Delhi .
Parliament is taking an important step today ; it is the Council 's turn next week .
It is equally of major importance for us to flesh out the concept of sustainable development in the wake of Johannesburg .
With this decision on tradable emission rights , we do justice to the environment , but also to guiding principles in the social and economic field .
We may not be agreed on the nuts and bolts , but this is the general line that we need to bear in mind .
Today , we have the opportunity of opting in favour of sustainable development .
Let us do so , therefore , with conviction .
Mr President , a few weeks ago we returned from the Johannesburg Summit with the demands ringing in our ears that fine words should be turned into real action in the knowledge that Europe 's pledges were being greeted with cynicism by journalists and the public .
Yet if those same critics look to the issue of climate change they will find that such cynicism is unwarranted .
From the beginning , the EU has led from the front .
It confounded the cynics by securing agreement for implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and by pushing the US and its head-in-the-sand administration into the sidelines .
We now see words being turned into action , with an emissions trading scheme which may well prove the basis for meeting up to 50 % of the reductions we have pledged to achieve .
I first read about emissions trading and about harnessing market forces to encourage industry to meet environmental objectives a decade or so ago in pressure group magazines .
Now those ideas , then so easily dismissed as crazy and impractical , are being given positive form .
I commend the Commission for its draft directive .
In many ways , however , it is a timid document and thanks to the work of our rapporteur we have all-party agreement to press for it to be made more ambitious .
Liberal Democrats in the Parliament will be joining in supporting a range of measures to broaden its scope , to extend it to include additional industrial sectors and require it to include other global warming gases in addition to CO2 .
Personally , I absolutely accept the need for a cap in allowances in each Member State although I acknowledge that some of my colleagues in my group are concerned that the requirements being placed upon their nations by the burden-sharing agreement are already onerous .
We have a lot to learn .
That is why I am pleased that Parliament will today vote to give a temporary opt-out to those emission-trading schemes already established .
I am not convinced that the British scheme provides the basis for long-term development .
It is a different scheme in concept and application from the Commission 's proposal , and we should be able to learn and benefit from it in the long term .
After the successful conclusion of the Kyoto conference in Bonn , the Commissioner told the press that we could now tell our grandchildren that we did something to tackle the problem of climate change .
All of us , Commissioners , Ministers , and parliamentarians want to be able to endorse those words .
It will not be easy .
There are some understandable national concerns but also some narrow , commercial interests wishing to dilute these measures .
We must keep our eyes on the long term and the enormity of the challenge .
If we do not take action now , we turn our back on the very future of the planet .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his very extensive work , but above all for being really skilful in his cooperation with other groups and for trying to find wide-ranging solutions .
We appreciate this very much .
I think that the report before us contains a great many improvements on the Commission 's proposal .
After all , this is a very complicated subject .
When it comes to the trade in emission rights , the main emphasis should be on taking measures that are as effective as possible .
At the same time , there is a risk that this might be seen as a substitute for political action to reduce emissions , and this must not happen .
Sometimes , too much confidence is placed in the trade in emission rights compared with the necessary measures that also have to be taken in other areas .
The trade in emission rights at global level within the Kyoto Protocol is a system involving many risks .
It is in danger of producing a situation where rights to emissions are purchased that do not subsequently exist .
We must discuss how this can be avoided in future .
As for the actual proposal , we want the system to be binding and for the exemptions that are made to be as limited as possible .
We want as many sectors as possible to be covered , and we naturally support the proposal for an extension to more sectors .
We think it is reasonable that all six greenhouse gases be included , and we think that auctioning off a part of the quotas should begin as soon as is practically possible .
This is wholly in line with the principle that polluters should be expected to pay for pollution .
We also support the idea of a national ceiling on trade , and we want effective sanctions .
We will therefore vote on the various parts of the proposal in accordance with this .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Moreira da Silva , for the extremely fruitful cooperation .
We in this Parliament have embraced Kyoto .
Only four MEPs voted against .
Kyoto does , however , mean minus 8 % and not plus 8 % , which will be difficult enough as it is .
Without European measures , our fifteen governments will not succeed individually .
Some eight countries have introduced national eco-taxes , but the industrial bulk consumers fall outside of these national eco-taxes .
And this is precisely where the European emissions trading scheme comes in , as nearly 50 % of European CO2 emissions will fall within its scope .
There has been a great deal of discussion in the United States about CO2 trading , but this has not been followed up by any positive decision-making .
Hopefully , we in Europe will be taking the historical decision to take the lead in actually setting up a definite scheme .
This is desperately needed , for we have been talking about European energy levies unproductively for the past decade .
These have not materialised because individual governments , first the United Kingdom and now Spain , voted against .
Another reason why these failed to materialise is because Commissioner Bolkestein refused to set up a leading group .
In fact , this emissions trading scheme is the European energy levy scheme , but in a different guise .
It is a better system , though ; better than the energy CO2 levies , both from an environmental and economic point of view .
My group , the Group of the Greens , has managed to get two important amendments adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The first one is the helping hand to the United States .
In Bonn in July last year , we talked to American businesses for two and a half hours .
They are very interested in taking part in an international CO2 trading scheme .
They believe that once President Bush is out of office , the United States will also follow suit .
The second point we managed to get adopted is that the European Commission has been tasked with developing proposals in order to extend this scheme to include households and traffic .
The traffic sector , in particular , is of major importance , for we have noticed that our national governments have failed to reduce CO2 emissions in the traffic sector , and this will be necessary .
We are still at odds on one point , namely that of the allocation of emission rights .
My group is in favour of an auction system .
We have tabled a moderate compromise , only 15 % auctioning and 85 % free , but even this 15 % auctioning will give a positive signal to industry that has made an early start on CO2 reduction .
If the majority of my fellow MEPs endorse this amendment , then my group will be wholly satisfied .
Mr President , over the past few months , we in Parliament , and outside , have witnessed a heated debate on the greenhouse effect .
Do the use of fossil fuels and the increased concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere form a serious threat or is it just hot air ?
After all , recent research has shown that , although the role of CO2 emissions by people is restricted and that emissions trading can make a limited contribution to reducing CO2 emissions , the problem cannot actually be solved .
Is emissions trading therefore pie in the sky ?
I do not think so .
The belief that a reduction in CO2 emissions is only of limited value in reducing the greenhouse effect is in my view wrong .
If it indeed transpires that the part people play in causing the greenhouse effect can be minimised , emissions trading will have achieved one thing , namely that we are now more aware of , and more economical in the use of , our natural resources .
With this , a second , unassailable goal has been achieved , namely that if we want to have long-term use of such natural resources as coal , oil and gas , we will need to learn to treat these in a responsible manner .
Making more economical use of natural resources means treating them differently from how we treat them now .
In other words , compared to our present way of doing things , we must use them differently .
It is therefore of great importance to ensure that this is also reflected in the way emission rights are allocated .
This is why , together with the PPE-DE Group , our group has tabled amendments in order to have a kind of benchmark included in the directive .
The comparison of energy consumption levels to determine the allocation of emission rights is an extra incentive for companies to take measures in order to reduce their energy consumption .
In this way , industry is offered the opportunity , based on mutual and historical comparison , to reduce CO2 emissions by consuming energy in an innovative way .
This is a greater incentive than introducing an energy levy , and it also places some of the social responsibility with entrepreneurs and industry .
Consequently , all the proposals tabled recently to weaken the directive and restrict its scope do not contribute towards improved energy policy in a constructive manner .
Quite the reverse .
Based on the idea that certain countries will not ratify the Kyoto Protocol , attempts are thus made to restrict the countries ' own contribution so as not to experience any economic disadvantage .
The fact that this idea is based on an incorrect assumption is self-evident .
After all , a reduction in energy consumption makes sense from an economic point of view too .
This has regrettably , led to many amendments being tabled which , if adopted , will seriously hamper the effectiveness of the emissions trading instrument .
Voting in the various committees has demonstrated , though , that many amendments cannot therefore count on sufficient support .
I am referring to the amendments that require other sectors to be added and that allow many exceptions to the rule .
In addition , Amendment No 97 on co-incineration should be rejected , because it reinforces the uneven playing field of waste incineration plants versus co-incineration plants .
Unlike waste incineration plants , real production processes take place at co-incineration plants , to which no exceptions should apply .
This complicates the directive unnecessarily .
I would therefore urge you not to support proposals of this kind .
Mr President , I will wind up by saying that solutions for a better living environment and a better future are often not obvious , certainly not in today 's economic climate .
Not only the economic climate is a decisive factor in this matter , however .
Our role as stewards of God 's creation requires us to manage the earth and its resources well .
I am absolutely convinced that this is of key significance for our commitment to the sustainable use of our Earth 's resources .
Emissions trading can be a means to this end .
Mr President , twelve years have passed since Rio , where it was recognised that greenhouse gases have to be reduced around the world , which shows how interminably slowly global processes of change in relation to the environment take place .
It is costs that are the main point under discussion .
It must , though , become widely accepted that every measure taken today is the cause of only a fraction of the cost of future consequential damage , which has to be paid for later .
That is what we have experienced in recent days in Central Europe , with the greatest flood disaster known to history .
The water has now gone , but the causes remain , and so we have to take action against them , primarily locally but also globally .
It is generally recognised that the most important step is the radical reduction in all greenhouse gases .
Mr Moreira Da Silva 's Report points in the right direction , and does so excellently .
We need a long-term perspective that also involves our belief that real improvement can be achieved .
We have been relieved to learn in recent weeks that , for example , the ban on hydrofluorocarbons has resulted , after only a few years , in the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic being reduced in size for the first time .
Emissions trading in itself does not yet reduce greenhouse gas emissions , but simply divides them up in a different way .
An effective campaign must start at our own front door .
To do this , we must first of all develop renewable sources of energy and press on towards the energy efficiency goals that we have set ourselves .
The long-term view can only be that the polluter-pays principle should be applied and that the revenues thus accrued should be earmarked for specific purposes and used to improve the situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are voting on the directive on emissions trading in Europe .
The European Union committed itself to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions under the Kyoto Protocol .
The Commission has now been working on a preliminary proposal on how to regulate emissions trading between European companies .
It will set cap-and-trade values for our energy-dominated industry that are to be reduced annually in accordance with the Kyoto targets .
It goes without saying that we in the European Union want to make our contribution to an improved environment and a reduction in emissions worldwide .
I am in favour of the notion of global emissions trading as one way of cutting greenhouse gas emissions .
The emissions market would , with all the natural efficiency of the free market , channel the reductions into those areas where the emissions are cheapest to cut .
The overall cost of climate policy to the EU would also remain low as a consequence .
The Commission proposal , however , contains several problem areas that need changing .
Owing to the costs of making reductions in emissions , industrial competitiveness in EU countries will suffer in comparison with those countries that are outside the Kyoto agreement .
There is a very clear danger that instead of actual cuts in emissions we will end up with emission leakage on a global scale , when European installations move their operations to countries that have not submitted to the burden sharing agreement that is Kyoto .
The number of single companies that would have to buy allowances depends on how the initial allocation is made .
The initial allocation must definitely be free of charge .
An allocation that is auctioned and therefore paid for would mean EU companies would have the burden of an additional cost which their competitors outside the EU and operating in the international markets would not have .
The initial allocation must not punish companies that deal with their own emissions effectively , and the measures that a company has already taken must be taken into account .
For example , in my country , Finland , there have already been voluntary cuts in carbon dioxide emissions for more than a decade .
85 % of industry and power plants have already concluded a voluntary energy saving agreement with the government .
The initial allocation process must also take account of a company 's real potential technically and financially for limiting their emissions .
For example , the steel industry in the area I come from cannot be allowed to get into a disadvantageous position merely because it is impossible to manufacture steel without producing a certain volume of carbon dioxide emissions .
Coal is not used in the steel industry to produce energy but as part of the production process .
Emissions have been effectively reduced by investing in modern technology .
For this reason I , together with my colleagues in our group , have tabled an amendment that would make it possible to exclude carbonaceous products from the cap-and-trade system up to a limit that can be achieved with the best available technology .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive is more problematic for Finland than for many other countries .
The sectors of industry it covers account for a large proportion of emissions in Finland , larger than in other countries .
On the other hand , Finland would get just a small share of the allowances in the allocation , as national targets are stringent .
In other words the total allowance will be small .
This is not the case with other countries where there are no commitments whatsoever and where climate objectives even permit an increase in emissions .
Although emissions trading is a cost-effective way to reduce emissions in theory , the proposal for a directive must not be allowed to impose any restrictions on commerce so that its benefits are not realised .
In theory emissions trading is most advantageous for those whose own measures to reduce emissions are more expensive than buying emissions allowances from others .
In practice the outcome , however , depends on how the allowances are allocated to the individual installations themselves , that is to say , how many installations will have to pay for emission allowances and what their market price will be .
Distorting the competition structure within the same industrial sector both in Europe and in a global context is a danger , which must be closely looked at in any future debate on the proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Wallström started by describing how inadequate the European Union 's climate protection measures have been up to now .
It is for that reason that we want to negotiate another new instrument on emissions law .
We all - myself included - say ' yes ' to that .
At the same time , though , I say that , if we break down the overall picture of emissions in the European Union , it can be observed that some are already heavily involved in reducing greenhouse gases and others are not .
I believe that we must not allow this additional new instrument to call into question the efforts that have already - and with some success - been made , and in view of which we should not be using a straitjacket to wreck structures that have been successful in reducing CO2 and other greenhouse gases .
This means that there are two things I see as important : the first is greater flexibility , and the second is fair conditions .
If I may start with greater flexibility , I know a business in my part of the world , which has reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 27 % since 1990 .
Why on earth should this business join the emissions trading system , when it has good business reasons for saying that it does not want to ?
On the other hand , there is a business that is interested , even though it is not covered by the directive .
Having themselves reduced CO2 , they are happy to join in .
In so far , I am in favour of making it possible to opt in and out .
Opting in , as provided for in the proposal from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , strikes me as completely satisfactory , whereas opting out does not ; the two are not parallel , in that one can opt out only up to 31 December 2007 .
I therefore want to put the case for leaving the conditions equal , so that if someone leaves , he is not wholly exempted , but must comply with the same emission reductions as he would if he were still in , but without this 2007 deadline .
I would therefore like to urge you to vote in favour of Amendment No 81 .
I now turn to the second area , which has to do with fair conditions .
We must of course ensure that businesses that get stuck in and have already made the effort since 1990 should have this taken into account when emission allowances are handed out .
Moreover , it is not acceptable that closures and relocations of firms should be brought into play to acquire emission allowances that are then sold at a profit , thus putting jobs at risk .
These emission allowances must lapse .
If we take the two together - flexibility and fair conditions - it will be with a clear conscience that we can say ' yes ' to using emissions trading to protect the climate , but under flexible and fair conditions .
Mr President , I believe that the Commission proposal forms an excellent basis .
Everyone must be involved and the initial allocation of rights is free .
There is , however , one snag ; the risk of distortion of competition within the EU .
In other words , the playing field may become too uneven , and you were right , Commissioner , to point out that this is unacceptable among national allocation schemes .
This is also why I am opposed to national exemptions , whereby a country can grant a company or a sector exemption .
It is my conviction that everyone should take part .
If necessary , exemptions may be granted at European level for one or other clear reason which can be objectively established .
In addition , I am of the opinion that the allocation must also take account of the energy efficiency of the technology used in a company .
A company that does not work efficiently should not be rewarded with an initial generous allocation of rights for free .
Since it is impossible to sell because a high number of sectors must operate in a global market , and would therefore be disadvantaged by this sale , European allocation criteria should be put into place that are objective , transparent and stringent and that apply to everyone .
We need a benchmark , the best available technology , and we need to prescribe compulsory criteria based on these for everyone and every Member State , since this scheme also affects the distribution of the burden across the Member States in one way or another .
There is the chance therefore , and unfortunately the Member States that are experiencing difficulties are nearly all small Member States , which makes the discussion for us highly problematic , in that there is distortion of competition , which does not mean that we reject this scheme , because this scheme , for us who are finding it difficult to cope , makes the effort more bearable and cheaper , as the price of the effort is reduced .

This is why we need an effective scheme .
We will at any rate need to adjust this scheme along the way , and we will at any rate be facing climate problems , greenhouse gases , measures which we need to take long after 2012 .
We should be clear about one thing : it is impossible to build an ecological paradise on an economic graveyard .
Mr President , to prevent global climatic change the United States of America proposed a worldwide system of greenhouse gas emissions trading and the creation of emission allowance markets for that purpose .
However , the United States did not join the scheme , which is to get under way at the start of 2008 .
The Commission has suggested that the cap-and-trade scheme , which the United States rejected , should commence in 2005 .
The same mandatory system has been proposed for everyone , with reductions in emissions being based on market mechanisms .
With this instrument a market is to be created . The fact that it is a market will not bring about a reduction in emissions .
The radio spectrum auctions in the European market were a catastrophe .
Besides , the Commission proposal is not a market mechanism .
It involves an administrative distribution of emission allowances among countries as well as the different companies located in them .
Crucial to the scheme 's success is the initial allocation , and that is not a market mechanism .
Companies in countries that have set themselves ambitious targets in emission cuts will be at a disadvantage compared with the others .
The companies that have reduced their emissions before the allowances become effective will be punished .
For them it will be more expensive to increase low-emission production than for companies which produce large volumes of emissions .
Those countries and companies that use a lot of nuclear or hydroelectric power are being favoured .
The EU trade in emission allowances should not be mandatory before 2008 : until then let it be an optional pilot project for Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make it clear , before I say anything else , that I am not , today , speaking on behalf of the CDU / CSU delegation to the European Parliament .
The majority of that delegation takes a different line , but I am speaking on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , which supports the key points of the Moreira Da Silva Report as voted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I wish to express my support for the report , and my gratitude to the rapporteur for his commitment .
The negotiations were not always easy to conduct - he had to agree to compromises that were difficult for his country in particular - and he therefore merits our especial appreciation .
The compromises were difficult for Portugal , but they were reasonable and helpful to the matter in hand .
Protecting the climate will be one of the greatest challenges in coming decades .
We should at last stop depicting business and the protection of the climate as being polar opposites .
The terrible floods in Germany and the countries bordering it have made it clear to us that great damage is done also in economic terms if we do not protect the climate .
These floods were , of course , far from an undisputed side-effect of climate change - to what extent they were is still a matter of academic debate - but the experts do not dispute that we have to do something to avoid such catastrophes in the future .
It is therefore right that the Commission should put forward proposals on this , but also true , as we in this House agree , that the Commission proposal before us has major defects , and discussion in the Committees has centred on what we do about them .
One group at first tried to reject the Commission proposal as a whole , and when that failed , to at least water it down .
Another group , among whom I count myself , declared that the proposal had to be improved .
' Improve it , yes ; water it down , no ! ' was the guiding principle with which we set to work , and I believe that the Environment Committee 's report has indeed eradicated the Commission proposal 's principal weaknesses .
What is most important is the acceptance of 1990 as a base year and the acknowledgement of previous achievements by businesses .
In Germany , Great Britain , Finland and other countries where something has already been done , it is quite simply incomprehensible that one should be penalised for having already made a start on protecting the climate .
That is what makes our introduction of the base year and the recognition of previous achievements so important , so that the firms that have done something can also be given proper credit for it , and then they will have a chance to make a profit from trading in greenhouse gas emission allowances .

There are other improvements , to which Mr Lange has referred ; in order that the closure of a plant and the loss of jobs may not then be credited as a climate protection measure , we have adopted an amendment to the effect that emissions certificates will be withdrawn if a production site is closed down .
The PPE-DE Group has tabled another twelve amendments , which we have decided on unanimously in order to make further improvements to the Moreira Da Silva Report , but without affecting the heart of the compromises .
The most important amendment in this area concerns how we should deal with the cement and chalk industry .
It is a fact that it is more difficult to avoid emissions of CO2 in the production of chalk and cement than it is in other fields , and so this must be taken into consideration without jeopardising the overall objective .
Along with the majority of the PPE-DE Group , I am personally opposed to any opt-out for whole countries and especially to the grant of any opt-out without prior conditions .
Even in the initial stages , we cannot talk in terms of an opt-out unless there are very definite prior conditions , which must themselves be subject to immediate verification .
Emissions trading is the market economy 's tool for protecting the climate , and , believing as I do in the market economy , I am in favour of the Moreira Da Silva Report and ask my fellow Members of this House to vote in support of it .
Mr President , I would also like to begin by signing up to Mr Moreira Da Silva 's fan club and thank him for an excellent job .
I would also like to thank him for an excellent round table discussion yesterday evening , which I thought was level-headed and balanced and also made a great contribution to the debate .
Also , I would like to express thanks for the Commission 's document , which provides a very good basis .
In view of the limited time available , perhaps we ought to have adopted the proposal unamended .
Parliament has , however , proposed a number of amendments .
I have some opinions about which aspects should be considered when we discuss systems for trading in emission rights .
We have three commitments to take into account .
We must ensure that climate change is reduced .
We must ensure that our industry , for which this system was created , also has the opportunity to compete on equal terms .
In addition , we have international commitments like the Kyoto Protocol to fulfil and maintain , and we cannot therefore change the basic rules .
In order for the system to function , I think that the following six points must be complied with .
The system must be simple ; it must be administratively simple .
We cannot create a complicated system that the participants , above all , businesses , do not understand .
The system must obviously be mandatory .
After all , we cannot create a playing field where some players say : ' No , I do not want to join in right now , so I am quitting and sitting on the sidelines instead ' .
We have to know who will be included in the system , and it is obvious that it must involve countries and individual installations .
I also think that it would have been desirable to allocate emission rights using an auction procedure .
There are many views on how the allocation should proceed .
The compromise now to be voted on is based on up to 95 % allocation free of charge and 5 % by auction during the first period , and I think that this is a good solution .
This way , we have at least an element of auction , which fits better with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
It goes without saying that the emission ceiling must be binding and connected to an enforcement system .
Just like the rapporteur , I think that the system should include more gases than just carbon dioxide .
There has also been discussion as to whether it should be possible to carry over emission rights from year to year , and I think this is right .
Enterprises that do not use up their emission rights during one year should be able to carry them over to the next year .
We also need to highlight certain aspects and emphasise that this must be in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol . We cannot invent something new .
Above all , I wish to urge the Council to ensure that it makes a decision on 17 October .
Mr President , the Union 's goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is justified , but the solution - as is often the case with EU decisions - is bureaucratic and costly .
More attention has been focused on the minutiae of the scheme than actually reducing emissions .
Furthermore , it treats different Member States unfairly , depending on such matters as industrial structure and the structure of energy production as well as how much has already been done to reduce emissions .
We all agree about what our aim should be .
The Kyoto commitments must be fulfilled .
There has been a lot of criticism of the emissions trading scheme .
It will be especially difficult for steel mills struggling in the global market that have plans for expansion and have already done a lot to reduce emissions .
A poor proposal was put forward by the Commission , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy made a lot of improvements to it , but they got watered down when the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy debated it .
I hope that when we vote we will be able to improve the proposal by approving changes to it that will allow a less rigid opt-out practice and exclude carbon dioxide from raw materials from the calculation of allowances .
I do not believe that auctions and burden sharing ceilings by country are appropriate in this connection .
The telecommunications sector showed us that auctions are not to be recommended .
The problems associated with emissions trading apply to many industrial sectors throughout Europe .
Thousands of jobs in industry are involved .
The danger is that production will move somewhere else , where it will cause more pollution .
Mr President , can I start by thanking the rapporteur for the care and dedication he has shown in respect of this topic ?
He was , and still is , receptive to the problems that this proposal entails .
I should like to thank him for , and congratulate him on , the enormous skill , but certainly also on the perseverance with which he is attempting to bring the emissions trading scheme to a successful end .
I share Mr Liese 's view that the rapporteur has not opted for the southern European angle , but has tried to join North and South together in a very judicious way .
The proposal is an outworking of Kyoto , where it was agreed that the emission of greenhouse gases was to be reduced .
I am able to say , with due pride , that the emissions trading scheme is already working well in the Member State from which I come .
A sound emissions trading scheme must meet a number of criteria : it should not discriminate between companies and sectors and it should reward pioneers for the measures they have already taken .
I will return to this subject in a moment .
The scheme must not obstruct the market and must therefore also provide opportunities to newcomers on the market .
Furthermore , the scheme must be competitive in Europe and may not adversely affect the European position on the global market .
In my view , the Commission proposal does not meet these criteria .
A cap or a trading scheme can be achieved by auctioning or grandfathering .
Auctioning would be a solution if the market were to function well , but if auctioning takes place only in Europe , competitiveness with the rest of the world is distorted .
The main disadvantage of grandfathering is that the rights are initially allocated for free on the basis of the emissions at the time .
Such a scheme of grandfathering , therefore , takes no account whatsoever of the reductions in energy consumption which have already been introduced within the Dutch market , and certainly in the German one , and also in a number of other countries .
This is why I believe it would be best to set up a scheme whereby rights are allocated on the basis of performance standard rates . These are rights that must be earned first by operating more energy-efficiently before they can be auctioned .
I wholeheartedly support the adapted proposal , which includes a number of the amendments that I have tabled on behalf of my group .
And I should like to say to my German fellow MEPs that I understand their view .
Mr President , the Kyoto Protocol was widely welcomed as an important step in combating the climate changes threatening life on our planet .
However , under pressure from the USA , the protocol contains a loophole which allows countries or companies to avoid honouring their commitments .
I refer to the system of greenhouse gas emissions trading .
It is unthinkable that an entire market should be created in order to trade in pollution as a commodity , a market on which , instead of reducing their emissions , companies can buy surplus emissions from other companies which are within their limits .
It is equally unthinkable that people should cite the right to pollute .
Taken in conjunction with the famous ' polluter pays ' principle , this means that anyone who can pay the price has a licence to pollute with impunity .
We are horrified that the European Union has based its policy for implementing the Kyoto Protocol on emissions trading and is addressing the whole problem in market terms .
This shows just how hypocritical its proclamations on the environment and climate are .
In theory it supports the Kyoto Protocol ; in practice it undermines it .
Reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and allowing monopolies to keep making obscene profits are mutually exclusive .
Of course , in the capitalist system , everything can be bought and sold , even pollution .
However , climate and the future of life on our planet cannot be bought and sold .
The protection of our planet is in the hands of the grass-roots movement .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Moreira Da Silva , who , by dint of a vast amount of detailed work , has made a useable proposal for discussion out of a very poor proposal from the Commission , one that actually ought to have been rejected outright .
So , many thanks to him , for what your office , Mrs Wallström , has produced , is not up to the standard of quality needed if protection of the environment is to make progress across Europe .
Not in eight and a half years have I come across such a poor proposal for a directive put to this House , so you can be grateful that Parliament eventually had the opportunity to improve certain aspects of this feeble effort .
So much for my introductory remarks .
My second point is that I unreservedly agree with Mr Lange that , if this proposal is to become reality , it must incorporate flexibility under fair conditions .
Fair conditions are required not only because individual Member States of the European Union have already achieved a great deal whilst others have not , but also in view of the relevance of emissions trading to competition .
Everyone imaginable in this House has had something to say about the USA and the bad guys over there , only then to say that this is actually a tax on energy .
Mrs Corbey said that electricity produced by nuclear power must not receive favourable treatment .
What the Commission has proposed does not actually meet its own conditions .
It is a bureaucratic monster , utterly ineffective in environmental terms , and this cannot be blamed on Kyoto and justified by reference to it , because Kyoto , Mrs Wallström , was signed by the Member States .
In Kyoto , the Member States committed themselves .
The Kyoto Protocol refers to six greenhouse gases , you to only one .
The Kyoto Protocol commits the Member States .
You want to impose obligations on businesses .
The Kyoto Protocol puts the Member States in a position to make use of any instrument .
You want to make the Member States ' responsibility null and void by using the Commission 's bureaucracy .
The Kyoto Protocol is effective from 2008 to 2012 .
Your mandatory emissions trading begins as early as 2005 .

The Kyoto Protocol has at least three instruments , of which you use only one , and , most of all , you violate the most important principle , one on which the international community has agreed , that the world at large should cut back on CO2 wherever this can be done most cheaply and quickly . It is quite clear , though , that what you are proposing here is European internal trade , which will not have any effect on anyone else , and will cost between EUR 20 and EUR 33 per ton of CO2 equivalent .
You have incorporated neither of the other two instruments in your directive at all .
The Kyoto Protocol strives for a mix in which the cost of EUR 6 per tonne of CO2 equivalent should apply , and if you do as you have proposed , the result will be factories being closed down and jobs being relocated .
We will achieve no positive outcome on a worldwide basis , and that is why we are in favour not only of fair conditions , but also of letting the instruments compete until the Kyoto Protocol takes effect .
All fifteen Member States of the European Union have now undertaken to individually reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 8 % .
The European Union has committed itself to something different , a different kind of burden sharing .
The way this sort of burden-sharing works is that a country such as Germany , with its minus 21 % , is playing a very large part , whereas Portugal , for example , is permitted an increase of a further 27 % over against the 1990 basis .
This is all very just and responsible , but now , when Germany and Great Britain are the only states to be able , even without the Commission 's bureaucratic emission-trading monster , to point to successes , you cannot penalise them on the basis that those who did it voluntarily must now pay an additional penalty for having made a success of it .
How , Mrs Wallström , is that sort of imposition on the Member States and on businesses meant to motivate them ?
As a German MEP , I can tell you that there have been reductions of CO2-equivalent in Germany amounting to 231 million tonnes since 1990 .
That is a massive amount .
Over the same period , Spain , another Member State , has poured another 100 million tonnes of CO2-equivalent into the atmosphere .
Penalising German businesses for Spanish omissions is the wrong way to go about things , and so I ask the House to support item 75 , which is intended to give more responsibility to the Member States .
Mr President , if I had more than two minutes at my disposal , I would , in the most amicable way possible , demolish Mr Langen 's arguments .
I do believe that the Commission has produced a thoroughly good draft , which I am sure we have improved , because Parliament always does everything better .
I want to make the following points .
Firstly , we already have a trade in emissions ; across the world , some 70 million tonnes of CO2 have been traded since 1996 , at - let us assume - a price of USD 3 per tonne , amounting to USD 210 million worth of business , and the trade is increasing at an exponential rate .
There has to be some order in this trade , and , in Europe , this directive helps us to do that .
That is why it makes sense .
I am very much in favour of past experience in the Member States being taken into account , which means that we need a transitional period , but one that must come to an end .
As far as I am concerned , 2008 is that end , when the same rule must apply across Europe .
I also want to point out that European competition law still applies to trading in emissions , and - Kyoto notwithstanding - the Commission can always intervene in the market if it believes that competition is being distorted .
This trade in emissions is in fact ushering in a new era in our economy , as waste gases - CO2 in this instance - are having a price put on them .
Where that price is estimated - the Commission is assuming EUR 20 per tonne - one can very readily imagine what significance this will have for the economy , for the energy sector , and for ecology .
We really are coming up to a paradigm shift , and , that being so , I am sure that this will not be the last debate on this subject .
I hope that Parliament 's resolution will after all be the basis of a rapprochement between us , enabling us to come up with a solution that makes sense .
Mr President , I would like to start with very warm thanks to Mr Moreira Da Silva , who was a superb rapporteur , and he has produced a fine report .
ET , Emission tradit is a strange unknown being from a strange unknown star .
We do not yet know whether to fear it or love it .
I have , though , attempted to give this being a rather more human face and have brought in a series of amendments , some of which have also been adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Amendment No 2 : if the authorities already have to update this by making various changes to the installations , then please let this happen with the operators ' agreement .
The Commission states in its draft that it will stipulate a harmonised method of allocation for the period beginning on 1 January 2008 .
I would rather that they did not .
I believe that Parliament has the right to be involved in this by way of the codecision procedure .
My concern in Amendment No 30 is that the allocation of allowances to new installations should , in principle , be harmonised across the EU .
My Amendment No 37 is particularly important .
This has to do with need for the Member States to ensure that the operators of installations can , within the relevant periods , bring forward allowances or put them aside for a subsequent year .
This strikes me as very , very important , and makes things a bit more workable .
It is my belief that none of us needs to fear this draft .
After all , we are dealing only with the period from 2005 to the end of 2010 , which the Commission has already designated as a sort of test run .
Fear not , my good brave Mr Langen ; we can keep on changing all this .
I am sure that it will be only after today 's vote that we will really get started on a major discussion process .
Mr President , we - by which I mean not only the economic actors , but also the Member States and the European Union - have to stand firm on implementing the Kyoto Protocol .
Mr Langen should not forget that we live in an internal market which is not meant to function in such a way that the lights go out all over Europe , but rather so that we try to create ecologically compatible and sustainable economic growth in the interests of employment and of saving the environment .
This , in my view , makes it very right and proper that the Commission should take note of the fact that certain Member States are already engaged in emissions trading , and that , as has repeatedly been said today , certain of them already have previous achievements to their name in reducing carbon dioxide .
This makes it particularly important that we should take 1990 as a base year .
Let me , moreover , make the economic point that it is extraordinarily important that emissions certificates be granted free of charge .
There is nothing to be gained from auctions ; we have been shown that by our bitter experiences in the past , from the trade in banana licences to the auctioning of UMTS licences , and that is why it matters that this instrument should be granted free of charge .
It is important from the investor 's point of view , as this will not lead to enterprises being harmed by costs at the outset and this will also ensure that emissions trading does not work like a tax .
Enterprises thus have at their disposal the resources they need for research and development and for the use of energy-saving , low-emission processes .
Allocation without charge also guarantees that all involved are on an equal footing and that the procedure is transparent .
I consider that to be of the utmost importance , and I must say that we welcome this proposal on economic grounds as well , because it ends up helping the price to take account of external costs .
I would , though , beg the Commission to do everything possible to achieve a breakthrough on the taxation framework directive as well , as it cannot but help to supplement taxes on business and thus help Europe to successfully realise ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , this is a report that is certainly of great importance .
It only remains to be seen whether it will have a negative or positive impact on real life . Then it will be a question of real companies and real people 's jobs , real families ' livelihoods and genuine climatic change .
It is an experiment , in which the EU cannot afford to fail .
In principle I eagerly support emissions trading , but it has to be said that this proposal is worryingly incomplete .
The Commission proposal , among other things , failed to answer the following questions . Firstly , there is the competitiveness of companies that implemented environmental action in the early stages , taking special account of the limits for individual countries as a result of burden sharing .
Then there are the competition-distorting factors of burden sharing among the Member States generally , the relationship between emissions trading and the fiscal interests of individual states , and that between emissions trading and the free energy market .
Then , too , there are the issues of the massive transfers of income arising from cooperative action between different operators and states , enlargement , the EU shielding itself from attacks from third country operators or Soros-type speculators , and matters to do with legal protection , and access to justice . The latter the committee fortunately accepted in my proposal .
In addition to the questions that still remain unclear , the proposal seems to confuse the goals and means of achieving them , the national level and that of business , and market instruments and traditional administration based on control .
In confusing these it serves its purpose poorly and needlessly puts a burden on the objective itself , which is to reduce emissions , regarding which European operators have until now been unanimous .
Uncommonly burdensome levels of bureaucracy accompanying the emissions trading scheme , bureaucracy that Parliament , regrettably , has not been willing to bear the responsibility for breaking down , promise additional difficulties .
I have been especially anxious about the possibility of carbon leakage .
Without my amendment the directive would not distinguish between carbon dioxide emissions that result from the use of coal for energy and its use as part of an industrial process .
As a result the position of the European steel industry , which meets excellent global ecological standards , would be in danger of being weakened in the global markets , causing not only economic but also massive ecological harm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my thanks for the valuable and constructive contributions to a very interesting debate .
This is not the first time and , believe me , definitely not the last time that we will discuss measures to counter climate change .
Allow me to begin by placing this debate in a wider context , that is to say , what we know about climate change .
We are well aware that climate change is taking place .
The rise in temperature we have measured during the twentieth century is the biggest for a thousand years .
We know that the snow cover in the northern hemisphere has decreased by 10 % since the end of the 1960s .
We know that the thickness of the polar icecap had decreased by 40 % in just a decade .
Researchers - and we have assembled the world 's leading climate researchers - say that , to deal with climate change , we will have to go much , much further than the Kyoto Protocol .
We will therefore need to take measures that go further than those we have discussed up to now .
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol and are now in fact working , within the EU , on three different fronts .
We are acting on the international scene by encouraging countries on the outside , such as the US , to sign up .
It is important to continue pushing for good conditions and for the achievement of those objectives of the Kyoto Protocol that are within reach .
We must , however , be credible here at home too , and that is why we have set up the European Climate Change Programme .
Together with all the various interested parties , we have identified those measures we need to take here at home in order to meet our commitments and combat climate change in a cost-effective manner .
The trade in emissions rights is one such instrument .
I will just add that we all realise that there is a cost in meeting the commitments under the Kyoto Protocol , but it will also be to our cost if we refrain from acting .
To do as others do and sit on the sidelines or refrain from doing anything cannot be considered as a contribution to the creation of equitable conditions .
It is necessary to remember this .
The trade in emission rights is thus one of the instruments we will need in future .
We have just been talking about large emission sources , but we also need to review the traffic system and take effective measures in this connection in future .
I would like to thank you very much , Commissioner , not only for participating in the debate but also for your commitment to the issue .
The debate is closed .
It is with great pleasure that I extend a most cordial welcome to a delegation from the Great Hural , the Parliament of the Republic of Mongolia , headed by His Excellency Mr Sanjbegziyn Tumur-Ochir , Speaker of the Great Hural .
The members of the delegation have taken their seats in the Distinguished Visitors ' Gallery .
This visit to Brussels by the Speaker of the Mongolian Parliament is a great honour and further evidence of the strengthening of the relations established between the European Union and the Republic of Mongolia .
I am sure that the talks between the members of the Mongolian delegation and the various Members of our Parliament today and yesterday will have been fruitful and serve to strengthen the bilateral links between our two institutions .
You are very welcome .
Mr President , I will be very brief , for we have discussed this report at length , and just highlight new points which have emerged from a very heated debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This is actually the twenty-third amendment of Council Directive 76 / 769 relating to restrictions on the marketing of substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - a directive , therefore , which seeks to protect consumers ' health and to harmonise the common market in products with the same characteristics .
As stated in Annex I , the proposal relates to 25 new substances classified as category 2 , 14 of which are considered to be carcinogens - cobalt salts , some cadmium salts , benzopyrene and some azoic dyes which have been recorded for years in literature as having carcinogenic properties have , at last , been included - three of which are considered to be mutagens and eight of which are considered to be toxic to reproduction .
As well as substances such as these , the ban is extended by the Commission to preparations , that is to mixtures or solutions of these substances .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , particularly Mrs Schörling and a number of other Members , would like to see the ban extended to the marketing of products and articles containing these substances , such as toys , textiles or flooring , too .
I would stress that I am opposed to the idea of extending the ban to products as well .
Consider the damage it would cause , not just in economic , commercial and industrial terms but the psychological damage too , should people learn that one of these substances - an azoic dye , for example - is present in an elegant tie , whereas , in actual fact , the carcinogenic substances are never released from that tie and the health of the person wearing it is therefore never placed at risk .
I will therefore confirm our position .
We are opposed to Amendment No 1 , tabled by Mrs Schörling , which was only endorsed by the Committee on the Environment by a very small majority and which states that ' the Commission should extend the ban on substances classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction ... to products ... ' .
We are also opposed to the first part of Amendment No 2 - the first seven lines - which states once again that ' ... the ban should be extended ... to products ... ' .
However , we accept the second part of Amendment No 2 , which seeks to put pressure on the Commission , recommending that the Commission submit a proposal to prohibit the use of products containing mutagenic or carcinogenic substances where there is scientific evidence that these dangerous substances are actually released from the products and absorbed and accumulated by the human body in concentrations with mutagenic , carcinogenic or toxic effect .
I believe that this recommendation will contribute greatly to the protection of consumer health and the environment , and I hope , Mr President , that the Commission and the Council will be able to incorporate it .
Mr President , this second reading is incredibly important , since it deals with the twenty-third amendment to the directive on restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction ) , the so-called CMR substances .
Neither the Council nor the Commission have wanted to meet the European Parliament halfway in our demand for the directive to include products as well .
After all , products are the main source of exposure for the public , for example in toys , textiles or flooring .
The risk assessment carried out in accordance with the Commission 's proposal is actually based on the precautionary principle and states clearly that the safety of the public is to be guaranteed .
This can only be brought about if there is also a ban on CMR substances in consumer goods .
For some obscure reason , the Commission and the Council have not wanted to accept this , despite there being scientific evidence .
The Council also points out that a large number of products are involved and that this is supposedly a reason for not doing anything .
It should in fact be the other way round .
If a large number of products contain CMR substances , we should obviously act even faster .
I would have preferred to see a proposal for a ban as early as 2002 , but we have not been able to get that far .
It is always a pleasure to work with the gentlemanly Dr Nisticò .
We have been able to produce a constructive amendment , a compromise between Dr Nisticò and fellow Members from the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I would urge fellow Members to vote in favour of Amendment No 2 .
We cannot wait any longer .
It is irresponsible to do so , nor is it in accordance with the precautionary principle .
I appeal to fellow Members : vote in favour of Amendment No 2 .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialists I welcome this report which will place serious and proper restrictions on a number of very dangerous substances that are now known to be toxic , mutagenic or carcinogenic to human beings .
We must push this report through .
As regards the critical issue here , which is the extension of this ban to products , the Socialist Group fully supports the second amendment which proposes this idea .
We recognise , of course , that further work needs to be done on this question .
We must consider these products , the level of risk they present , their contact with human beings and the places where they are used .
We believe , however , that this can happen further down in the legislative process .
This amendment should be supported so that these discussions can take place .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
The next item is the vote .
Mr President , I am prepared to withdraw Amendment No 10 if the House accepts the following oral amendment : we would retain the whole of paragraph 5 but the final part of the sentence would be amended as follows : instead of ' international NGOs that wish to enter Algerian territory freely ' , I propose ' international NGOs that wish to have access to Algerian territory ' .
Mr President , I would like to say that my group is withdrawing the first part of the amendment . What will remain will therefore be : ' requests that the Commission carry out a regular assessment of the economic , social and environmental consequences of the implementation of the Association Agreement ' .
Mr President , the Liberals have tabled an Amendment , No 2 , but I have consulted Mrs Bastos who has assured me that the text that we wanted to add about the local and regional governments ' involvement in the consultation in the border regions is already implicitly included in her text .
I should , for that reason therefore , like to withdraw the amendment .
- ( NL ) There is a desperate need for financial support for all eastern European countries , where , over the past decade , economies have collapsed and where no great improvements are expected in the foreseeable future .
Bosnia-Herzegovina is a special case .
Since 1992 , when the separation of this former Turkish province from Yugoslavia gained international approval , attempts have been made continually from the outside to create one state and to gather support from that country 's inhabitants for this purpose .
In actual fact , however , it is a state that does not belong to anyone .
It is a country simply made up of ethnic minorities .
Only the largest minority wanted this country and considers this as the country of the people who were Islamised under Turkish rule .
The two other groups , who felt slighted in the Turkish era , now feel more in tune with the neighbouring states Serbia or Croatia .
They experience the state borders that separate them from these countries these days as hindrances , and would like to see them removed as quickly as possible .
The latest election result is still being counted , but it is expected that the electorate has once again voted for different , conflicting nationalist movements , and that , in other words , the three groups each want a separate future .
How long do we intend to keep that country artificially alive with military power , leaders appointed from outside and external sources of funding ?
Our attempts will eventually result in failure once that country has survived the present difficult time .
- ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report because I believe it makes a very valuable contribution towards the process of improving evaluation as a tool for assessing the implementation of the EU 's objectives .
I also share the view that systematic evaluation is a prime instrument to ensure value for money for expenditure from the EU budget . Like the rapporteur , I also welcome and recognise the Commission 's efforts to develop a general evaluation culture in the institution .
Lastly , I fully agree with the call for the Council to follow strict cost / benefit criteria when requesting evaluation reports but I am also aware that the most difficult task is to integrate evaluation findings into future policy , budgetary orientations and resource allocation .
- ( PT ) We cannot overemphasise the importance of support instruments for small and medium-sized undertakings , which play a crucial role in job creation , in the impetus for investment and in the economic growth of the Member States and the European Union .
I fully agreed with the rapporteur 's very positive assessment of the overall results achieved in 2001 , in terms of the initiative 's development and its impact on employment .
The Commission report itself is relatively thorough , and the Commission has clearly responded to Parliament 's request for greater speed and urgency in producing it , although it is regrettable that some specific comments made by Parliament in its report last year have still not been taken into account , particularly with regard to information on hearings .
I also support the request to the Commission to present solutions to replace the ' Joint European Venture ' ( JEV ) , whose benefits have been hard to see and which is inadequate in its current form , as well as the following observation , which I believe to be of strategic importance and which is becoming crucial as enlargement approaches : ' the importance of stimulating investments and entrepreneurship in the candidate countries ' .
- ( PT ) Although it contains some contradictory and even negative aspects , the report makes significant improvements to the proposal for a directive submitted by the Commission .
It accepts some proposals for amendments tabled by our group as well as others , which improve the text and which we shall be supporting .
We welcome the fact that it puts forward measures intended to ensure compliance with the Kyoto Protocol , despite the USA 's unacceptable position of refusing to ratify it .
Nevertheless , the Commission proposal on the trading of greenhouse gas emissions allowances has not been sufficiently amended and so we abstained from the vote because we do not accept this principle , and we also have reservations about various other proposals for amendments .
- ( NL ) Mr Bob van den Bos and Mrs Lousewies van der Laan ( D66 party [ Dutch Democratic ' 66 party ] ) have voted against Mr Obiols I Germa 's legislative resolution to conclude an association agreement with Algeria .
They did , however , vote in favour of the resolution tabled by Mr Brok .
Algeria is at the moment going through a very unstable period , facing all kinds of violence and showing little evidence of democracy .
Human rights are still being violated on a large scale .
It would be a wrong signal to reward that country with an agreement precisely at this time .
D66 considers an association agreement with Algeria in this form unacceptable , because the means to enforce the human rights clause is lacking .
As is also underlined in the Brok resolution , the evaluation instruments for the application of the human rights clause in the association agreements are inadequate .
D66 is of the opinion that adequate instruments to enforce the human rights clause are to be sought before the agreement can have the desired effect , that of improving human rights in Algeria .
- ( PT ) Obviously , I have supported the setting up of this Fund , which expresses the solidarity of the entire European Union in light of major natural disasters that have taken place in various Member States . I have also supported most of the positions adopted by the rapporteur .
In this brief explanation of vote , however , what I wish to highlight is that it was our colleague , Franz Turchi , from the UEN Group , who had already tabled a proposal to this effect two years ago , which was regrettably not given a favourable response .
It took two further years without action and specifically , the serious floods that took place in August in Germany , Austria and in some candidate countries , to persuade the European Union to close a legislative loophole that was preventing the Community institutions from intervening in terms of providing financial assistance for the European communities that have suffered major natural disasters , a scourge that appears to be taking place with increasing frequency .
I suppose we could say ' better late than never ' .
- ( PT ) The report following up the Commission proposal contains various contradictions and negative aspects , specifically in its insistence on advocating temporary work as a response to the problem of unemployment , despite the proposals that we tabled to improve it .
Unfortunately , not all of them were accepted .
Nevertheless , I welcome the fact that the proposal I tabled designed to protect workers ' rights to a high-quality job with rights has been included .
Equally positive is the report 's insistence on the mutual recognition of qualifications , and its call for greater attention to be paid to early school leaving , to lifelong learning and to encouraging the learning of foreign languages , amongst other things .
Hence our abstention from the vote .
- ( NL ) This non-legislative report is brimming with fine things and statements of the obvious .
Of course , more women must be able to find work in knowledge-intensive sectors , such as information and communication technology .
In addition , it sounds good that a ' Statute for European Employees ' should be drafted , a European system of labour legislation and social security for mobile employees .
This fits in with the questions I am asking the Commission today about the Polish construction workers who work without collective labour agreements .
However , the gist of the proposal is about adapting people to suit the work , rather than adapting the work to suit the people .
It provides recipes for the way in which a labour market can function more effectively by better tailoring education to work .
It intends to make it easier for people to move thousands of kilometres to regions with a different language and a different culture , where the scope for employment happens to be greater .
If people really want to move , it is self-evidently a good thing that their qualifications should be valid even far away from home and that they should be able to take their pension rights with them .
Most people , however , do not want this , with good reason .
Europe is not America , where , out of financial necessity , people are forced to move such distances , which cuts them off from their families and friends .
Let things stay that way .
- ( PT ) As I advocated in my own report , around a year ago , on the performance of Eures in the 1998 / 99 period , the steps that have been taken , in the European Union , to increase professional mobility and to give all citizens access to this mobility are extremely important .
I support the measures designed to promote cooperation in the field of education and training with the aim of establishing a common framework for the mutual recognition of professional qualifications , in cooperation with the social partners and educational and professional training establishments .
I would also underline again the importance of launching a campaign to raise awareness of the possibilities opened up by the internal market and by the European employment market and of updating the Eures system ( so that all the information it collates reaches people seeking work and employers ) , as well as a permanent mechanism for analysing the obstacles to geographical mobility .
I regret , h