Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 10 October 2002 .
Colleagues , it is my sad duty today to mark the deaths of innocent people in two recent attacks .
We still do not know the exact toll of casualties caused by the car bombs in Kuta Beach , Bali on 12 October .
Our sympathy and condolences go to the families of all those 200 victims and more than 250 wounded .
They were victims of a terrible crime which , on behalf of this Parliament , I condemn utterly .
It is an unacceptable cost to pay for the lesson that stronger cooperation and constant vigilance are needed by all of us in the fight against terrorism .
The apparently unrelated attack in Vantaa , near Helsinki , that killed other innocents going about their business on the previous day , is also an act I condemn .
I extend on your behalf our sympathy to the families of the bereaved .
I ask you now to observe one minute 's silence as a token of our respect and sympathy for the innocent victims of these attacks .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Before we come to the order of business , I am pleased to take the opportunity to report to you something you will have heard about over the last twenty-four hours : the resounding ' yes ' vote in the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Nice .
The vote was carried by a majority in all 42 national constituencies in the country , reversing the previous vote where 40 constituencies had voted ' no ' .
The message I would draw from that for our Parliament today is that the leaders attending the summit meeting in Brussels on Friday should now understand clearly that there should be no new roadblocks on the road to enlargement .
The time to bring closure to enlargement is at hand .
October 's preparations for the summit meeting in Copenhagen in December now offer the opportunity to bring closure to this historic act of European reconciliation .
The final draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 17 October 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
Tuesday
As 70 individual amendments had been tabled to the report A5-340 / 02 by Mrs Grossetête on the Community Code for medicinal products for human use , in addition to the 132 amendments contained in the report itself , I had , pursuant to Rule 130a , after consulting its Chairman , asked the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to meet to consider the amendments .
A number of amendments , however , have been withdrawn in the meantime and a number are similar to those adopted in committee .
In the light of these changes , it would be more appropriate for me not to refer the report back to committee , but to allow it instead to be voted in plenary .
Mr President , it is a very wise decision of yours not to require us to have another committee meeting .
That starts the week on a good note .
However , you might like to ask somebody - I suspect it will be the inevitable Mr Corbett - to have a look at the Rules , because they are rather strange .
They state that : ' When over 50 amendments have been tabled to a report , the President may , after consulting its chairman , request the committee responsible to meet to consider the amendments . '
That leaves you and me looking through a lot of amendments that can sometimes be rather confusing .
What we need is either to have a stringent rule simply stating : ' When over 50 amendments have been tabled to a report , the President must request the committee to meet again ' , or else to drop this .
As it stands , it leaves it between the two of us .
I am only happy to say that I support your very wise decision .
Mr President , I too think it is a wise decision and it shows that it is right that there be flexibility in this rule .
It is an option open to the President after consulting the chair of the committee responsible , to be used when it will be useful and not to be used when it will not be useful .
The proceedings today have shown that , even when it is not used , it serves a purpose in putting on pressure for amendments to be withdrawn , thereby saving the rest of us a lot of time later in plenary .
Pursuant to Rule 111a I have received a request from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance for an extraordinary debate to be held during this part-session on the financing of the nuclear sector in North Korea in the context of the declared nuclear weapon programme .
The Commission has announced that Commissioner Patten could address this issue on Tuesday at 9 p.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of December 2001 , we voted on a report on strategy and organisation for energy development in the Korean peninsula , as a result of which we decided to participate in civil nuclear development in Korea .
Here I would like to mention three points from this report which , given what we have learnt over the past few weeks , are quite interesting .
One of the recitals of this report read : ' whereas the European Union recognised KEDO as a major industrial project constituting a vital contribution to nuclear non-proliferation and peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and , following negotiations with the founder members , signed an agreement ' .
Nuclear non-proliferation has not been observed , as North Korea has even decided to develop nuclear energy for military purposes , as we have learnt .
Furthermore , we have once again , in this highly intelligent report against which the Greens voted - we said that it was impossible for Korea to maintain what it claimed to want to maintain . We said on page 9 of this report , in Article 16 , that Parliament ' stresses , however , that it will continue to push for an appropriate Inter-Institutional Agreement ( IIA ) and that it reserves the right to block transfer of funds to KEDO at any point in the future ' .
The last point I would like to highlight is this : ' [ we stress ] , in conclusion , that the DPRK will have to show evidence of good faith as the KEDO project progresses , in particular when the final IAEA verification is due ' , etc .
This means that we need to discuss this matter , that we must call this agreement into question , that we must stop funding the civil nuclear sector in North Korea and that , lastly , we must fund a non-nuclear energy production sector for North Korea .
Consequently , we must enter into this debate to do what the Americans have done , namely to stop funding the Korean nuclear sector .
Do we have a speaker against this request ?
Mr President , does this mean that there is an undertaking to consider once again the possibility of including this item in the November agenda ?
That is a matter for your group and the other groups to decide at the Conference of Presidents .
The next item on the agenda is the Commission statement on the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is important because it is so closely related to the economic and monetary policy of the Union , because it is an incentive for structural change in budget management in many of our economies , because there is an economic slowdown and because it has provoked a debate about how to respond .
It is important that if we launch a debate on this , that we do so in very calm , rational and strategic terms .
In recent days there has been considerable controversy on this matter , not least sparked by remarks published in the newspaper le Monde .
I know that many colleagues in the House were anxious that we should be able to debate this matter briefly today , at the beginning of the week .
I am pleased that the President of the European Commission is here today to make a statement on behalf of himself and the Commission on the matter and then to open a short exchange of views .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I stand before you today at a time when we are all in good spirits and full of confidence in Europe 's future .
By approving the Treaty of Nice with a large majority , the Irish people have clearly indicated their support for the ideals and projects of the European Union .
I wish to express my thanks to the Taoiseach , Bertie Ahern , and to President Cox for their work .
With this result under our belts , we can embark even more confidently on the final stretch of the road to Copenhagen and final endorsement of enlargement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with pleasure , with great pleasure that I accepted your invitation to come to Parliament today together with Commissioner Solbes , who will give you an overview of the measures taken by the Commission and the current state of the economy .
I am very pleased to be here today to discuss with you the coordination of economic policies and the Stability and Growth Pact , in particular .
What I have to say is simple .
Economic and Monetary Union needs rules that are clear , effective and , above all , respected .
To achieve this , we need an authority that can act to protect the common good with due regard for the rules defined in the context of interinstitutional cooperation by adjusting economic policy to changing circumstances .
The Stability and Growth Pact has been and remains extremely important for Economic and Monetary Union .
The Commission , as the true , faithful guardian of the Treaties , has carefully monitored its implementation and will continue to do so in the future .
As the Italian Prime Minister who promoted and approved the Stability and Growth Pact and led the country into the single currency , and now as President of the Commission , I am a committed , firm believer in the value of the rules that underpin Economic and Monetary Union and the Stability and Growth Pact .
I am a staunch defender of these rules , this Union and this Pact .
Economic and Monetary Union has brought tremendous benefits both for the countries subscribing to it and for the other European Union Member States .
Gone are the days of the huge deficits common in the 1990s . Gone are the days when national currencies were exposed to the ups and downs of speculation .
Along with these benefits , however , Economic and Monetary Union brings specific responsibilities . Responsibilities for everyone - Member States , European institutions and ordinary citizens .
With a single currency , the euro , each Member State 's growth and jobs will depend not only on what is now our common monetary policy but on their own fiscal policies too .
Stability is the prerequisite for growth and employment in Economic and Monetary Union .
The Stability and Growth Pact has been the cornerstone for promoting and managing the culture of stability so successfully introduced with the Maastricht criteria .
Nevertheless , awareness of the extraordinary things the Pact has already brought about and will continue to bring about in the future should not blind us to the limitations of the institutional framework in which we have to apply it .
Still less does it mean enforcing the Pact inflexibly and dogmatically , regardless of changing circumstances .
That is what I called - and still call - ' stupid ' .
I do not think that it is the role of the Commission or of myself as President of the Commission to apply rules in that way .
Neither the Commission nor myself have been appointed to enforce rules blindly , ignoring their limitations .
The European citizens have a right to be informed , and we have a duty to tell them what we think is right , what we think works , and what , on the other hand , we think could and should be improved .
Politicians like yourselves , economists , bankers and businessmen , with whom I have discussed this matter a thousand times , have been saying for months and continue to say in private and in their everyday conversations the same things that I said openly and frankly in the interests of our institutions ' credibility .
It is therefore time that we started to say in public what we say amongst ourselves in private .
The public mistrusts us and our institutions not least because they suspect that that only minor matters are aired in public and that the truly important decisions are taken behind closed doors .
I am therefore pleased and proud that Parliament should be at the heart of this debate today .
The Pact is , as it should be , simple , but the situations to which the Pact applies are complex .
One of the responsibilities of the European institutions is therefore to be aware of the complexity and diversity of the economies of the Member States - applying the same criteria to large and small alike - just as we have the responsibility to keep track of developments here in Europe and in the rest of the world .
Indeed , we could hardly be unaware of the downturn in the economic cycle in Europe and worldwide .
This downturn is so marked that a substantial part of the global economy could be in danger of experiencing the kind of deflation that we thought we had put behind us .
At the same time , we realised that the Pact had not prevented some Member States from adopting fiscal policies incompatible with the objective of stability .
What were we meant to do in the circumstances ?
Were we meant to adopt an inflexible approach , trying to force the countries with the biggest deficits to stick to their budgetary targets regardless of the changing economic situation ?
Should we have made a further mistake , so compounding the mistakes made in the past when countries that had not balanced their budgets missed the chance offered by growth to balance the books ?
That , ladies and gentlemen , would have been the wrong way to implement the Pact .
Taking that approach could have jeopardised the economic prospects not just of the countries concerned but of the whole of Europe too , for we are bound together by the single currency .
If the European institutions had tried to impose objectives that were no longer realistic , they would now be accused of endangering growth and jobs .
I , however , want Europe to win both battles - stability and growth .
What a tragedy it would be if , in our endeavours to win the stability battle , we lost the trust and backing of our citizens , the trust and backing that are the foundations of the European democracy you represent .
( Applause )
This is why , last month , we floated ideas for making adjustments and introducing more sophisticated criteria for applying the Pact with a view to making it an increasingly valuable instrument for promoting stability and growth .
We suggested setting objectives that would restore balance and creating instruments to track progress .
To bridge the gap at this critical moment , we also suggested giving countries in need of adjustment more breathing space , setting out a more realistic course of action for consolidating deficits .
We are talking about criteria that will ensure both stability and growth . Indeed , they will allow stability and growth to boost each other .
We are talking about criteria that apply to all the Member States , both large and small , to the benefit of all the countries of the Union .
Moreover , ladies and gentlemen , these ideas are completely in line with what we have been saying for a long time .
Last year , in our communication on strengthening the coordination of economic policies , we proposed a number of major improvements within the present institutional framework .
As you will doubtless recall , we proposed developing information and economic analysis concerning the eurozone , improving the system of statistics we use , clarifying the principles common to fiscal and structural policies and , lastly , making our decision-making system more efficient .
Looking specifically at the recent case of Portugal , which was obliged to revise its own statistics substantially , I should like , in particular , to highlight the obvious importance of a proper system of controls on budget-related statistics .
We shall act in line with this approach when , as required by the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council , we put forward proposals shortly for improving both the transparency and the discipline of the Pact together .
We shall do so by trying to clarify both the underlying principles of the Pact and the basic principles that should underpin national budgetary policies , thus taking the reality of European economic integration fully into account .
For instance , we shall show that the need for clear rules can be made compatible with recognition of the fact that the Pact 's rules apply to different countries in different situations as regards levels of debt , financial burdens arising from the ageing of the population and the urgent public investment requirements .
If we apply the Stability and Growth Pact like this , it will truly come into its own as an instrument for coordinating economic policies , above and beyond its purely disciplinary aspects . It will , at last , become an instrument that is fully compatible with the growth and employment strategy adopted by the European Council at Lisbon two years ago , a strategy that Parliament has always supported wholeheartedly .
New and better rules are not enough , however .
In order to protect the European Union 's common interest , once such rules are approved , we will need the capacity to implement them too .
If we really want to solve the problems of growth and employment in Europe , we must achieve more intelligent - and more effective - coordination of economic policies , including the necessary structural reforms , coordination which is more easily implemented .
( Applause )
The distribution of responsibilities for coordination of economic policies must be clearly defined .
Europe 's citizens must be sure that the system is in safe hands , hands that are capable of supervising the system and ensuring consistency , both in quiet periods and , even more so , in times of difficulty and crisis .
As I am sure you will remember , ladies and gentlemen , two years ago , I raised this issue before you and I have come back to it on several occasions since then .
We need an authority that has the power to supervise the system in a way that is both rigorous and intelligent with due regard for the complexity of our economies , an authority that is capable of intervening in defence of the common good , so that each Member State can adopt the economic-policy measures necessary to prevent its economy from having adverse effects on the economies of the other Member States .
Only a strong authority can both apply the rules strictly to prevent behaviour that is off-course and adapt the rules to changing circumstances , where necessary .
I want to make this point even clearer . Budgetary policy is the responsibility of the authorities of the Member States .
That is true today and it will continue to be so in future .
For its part , the Commission is an institution whose sole mandate is to work for the common interest of Europe while respecting the full equality of all the Member States .
By its very nature , the Commission is therefore naturally suited to the role of steering , on the basis of the mandate and the rules established by the Council and subject to Parliament 's control , the system that must ensure the coordination of economic policies on a Europe-wide scale .
There are plenty of examples to support the idea of giving responsibility to an independent , impartial referee such as the Commission .
Today , I will mention only one , and the case in question is relevant precisely because it is very controversial . It concerns the early warning the Commission proposed to the Council a few months ago .
As you will all remember , the proposal was not taken up , despite the fact that both the Council and the Member State directly concerned agreed on the substance of the Commission 's proposed measure and , in fact , appropriated it .
In any case , the shortcomings of the decision-making mechanism are still there for all to see .
That is why the Commission 's first formal contribution to the work of the Convention included proposals to prevent such situations from recurring in the future , suggesting that the responsibility of the authority to issue such early warnings should be enshrined in the Treaty .
The Commission also proposed that the Treaty be amended to incorporate the coordination of economic policies more fully within the framework of interinstitutional cooperation guaranteed by the Community method .
Lastly , the Commission put forward proposals for addressing in full the need for unitary representation of the euro in international organisations .
Those , ladies and gentlemen , are the proposals we put forward within the Convention .
However , there is nothing to stop us adopting some of those proposals as of today .
Indeed , the changes are of great importance now and they will become even more important with the impending enlargement of the Union .
We therefore call upon the Council to consider these proposals as a matter of urgency .
In the meantime , we will continue to uphold the Pact 's current rules staunchly , fulfilling our responsibility to propose the improvements we regard as appropriate when and where this proves necessary .
I am especially grateful to Parliament for giving me the opportunity today to discuss an issue of such vital importance before the representatives of the peoples of Europe .
European monetary and economic policies cannot and must not be discussed behind closed doors .
A democratic Europe , the democratic Europe we all want must be a Europe where the policies that affect wealth , employment , growth and development are an essential part of open political debate .
Within the Convention , the Commission has made every endeavour - and will continue to do so - to point out intelligent ways of establishing a centre of responsibility and authority in the system for the coordination of European economic policy .
I call upon you , ladies and gentlemen , to support these efforts .
( Applause )
That is an interesting set of introductions for what I am sure is going to be an interesting debate .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating you , Mr President , on what has happened in Ireland .
You have had an incredible fight , with the support of many Members of this House , to all of whom I would like to express my gratitude .
I would also like to thank the Irish members of my group and of Fine Gael , which is in Opposition , and whose sense of responsibility to Europe led them to decide unequivocally in favour of a Yes vote .
That is a success also for you , Mr President , and I would like to offer you my warm congratulations .
It is a success for us all !
Life brings situations about which it is no pleasure to have to speak .
Today is one of them .
Whilst wishing to place on record my personal regard and fondness for Romano Prodi , the President of the Commission , as a person , I have to add that we are dealing here , not with relationships between people , but with the acceptance of responsibility .
That is why an overwhelming majority in my group is of the definite opinion that something has happened that must not be allowed to repeat itself in the same way .
( Applause )
Last Friday , the President of the Commission had this to say to Le Monde :
Mr President , Commission President Mr Prodi described the Stability and Growth Pact last week as ' stupid , like all decisions which are rigid ' .
Commissioner Lamy is also on record as having described the pact as ' medieval ' .
Aside from the questionable wisdom of using such strong language , especially to a newspaper from the country which is doing the most damage to what remains of the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact , one begins to wonder whether this is part of an orchestrated campaign .
My question to the Commission President is this : in making your remarks to Le Monde - and you have said that you stand by every word - was it your intention to launch a debate on how to reform the Stability and Growth Pact ?
If so , that is a debate we welcome , but surely a debate which would better have been conducted some months ago .
Had the Commission acted more firmly then , using the licence that we gave you when we invested you , its own authority and that of the Stability and Growth Pact might have suffered less damage .
In the current circumstances , no change is clearly not an option , but two principles must guide us .
The first is that a well-run economy and a stable currency require taxes and spending to be in balance over the course of the business cycle .
The second is that the rules are the same for all countries , large or small .
Those principles are at the heart of the Stability and Growth Pact and my group expects them to be the starting point for any reform .
If today marks the beginning of a debate on how to improve and strengthen the Pact , what reforms do we need to give it renewed credibility ?
First of all let us be clear on what we should not do .
We should not call into question the 3 % limit for deficits as we hit hard economic times .
If countries do not pay off their debts , then we will all pay the price in higher interest rates and a weaker currency .
The Liberal Group agrees with Mr Prodi that the Stability and Growth Pact must be applied intelligently .
That is why we supported the Commission 's decision to allow two more years for countries to return their budgets to balance , because growth had been slower than expected .
But we must not forget that postponement to 2006 came with strings attached in the form of a requirement to reduce structural deficits by 0.5 % year on year .
The Liberal Group believes that a new target for the structural deficit should be included in the Stability and Growth Pact .
That would increase pressure on governments to reduce their deficits in their good times so that they can allow borrowing to take the strain when times are bad .
On that analysis , any intelligent interpretation would clearly conclude that France 's recent budget makes no effort to reduce its structural deficit and is clearly in breach of the Stability and Growth Pact .
France must therefore face an early warning .
That is what we would like to hear from the Commission today .
When the Commission brings forward a proposal for such an early warning , then it will help to restore credibility to the Pact .
The Liberal Group agrees with you , Mr Prodi , that the Stability and Growth Pact needs authority behind it to apply it .
That is why we call for the Commission to have the power to issue early warnings against countries which are breaching the rules , whether Finance Ministers agree or not .
Only if the Pact has a strong policeman can Member States be forced into taking corrective action while they can afford to .
Let us be clear . We will not support any reforms to the Stability and Growth Pact which undermine the basic principles of fiscal responsibility and equality before the law .
The end point of reform must be a strengthened Stability and Growth Pact which punishes fiscal largesse and rewards countries which run their budgets responsibly .
Judging by the warm welcome which Francis Mer , the French finance minister , gave to your remarks in that interview , I fear that France will feel empowered to flout the rules .
If you wish to have the authority to enforce the Stability and Growth Pact , then you must earn that authority by acting promptly against France and any other countries which might be tempted to follow their example .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , we owe you a big thank you .
It took courage to say that the Stability and Growth Pact is stupid , and you have shown even more courage today in persevering and clearly defending your point of view .
We now need to go further , and revise this Pact and set a new objective .
The Pact is stupid when your house is on fire , and you are right , we must stop burying our heads in the sand .
The financial crisis is even more serious in Europe than it is in the United States .
We must be prepared for at least two difficult years of restructuring , with the inevitable social consequences that this will entail .
And we will not be able to overcome this crisis without strong public initiatives , which will require use of the budget .
The Pact is also stupid when the Union is moving away from the Lisbon objectives , as you mentioned .
It is stupid when enlargement would require a Pact for the countries joining the Union to bring their economies into line with those of the current Member States , with practical solidarity .
A Stability and Growth Pact worthy of the name would protect public spending of general interest , put a stop to fiscal competition that scorns ethics and effectiveness , provide the Union with a real budget , and guarantee the Member States ' capacity for action , while maintaining a discipline of control over public debt .
Mr Prodi , you are demanding that the Commission be given real authority over the coordination of economic policies , but we want more than early warnings and the authority to take corrective action .
What we want most of all is for the Union to adopt an economic policy that addresses the current economic situation and sustainable development , and although the Commission is in effect the only executive body designed to promote common interests , it does not yet have the necessary culture and legitimacy to implement an economic policy
That is why we are protesting so that the future constitution of the Union clearly establishes a new legitimacy and political will .
The Union would no longer be merely a marketplace but would participate in societal choices and concepts relating to the public economy .
Its mandate would come from the people and the powers of civil society , and parliaments would be set up to draft and monitor decisions .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , it is with joy and great pleasure that I would like to award you the order of merit of the dissident thinkers ' club of which I have been the president for some years .
Finally , thanks to your politically incorrect intervention - as shown by the reactions of some of those on the right - I felt we might actually be able to hold a real debate on the economic , social and environmental governance of Europe .
Furthermore , Mr Herzog is right to say that the Commission 's responsibility for this very economic , social and environmental governance of Europe must be anchored in the Convention .
Let us stop being so hypocritical !
When governments get into debt by taking the wrong decisions , we must tell them they have taken the wrong decisions .
When France is incapable of reforming its agriculture sector , following the Commission proposals for agricultural reform , we must say so .
When Europe , or Member States , take the wrong decisions on energy , we must say so .
There is , however , one thing we must put an end to if we want to avoid a situation where the citizens reject our Europe - which , let it be said in passing , has once again scraped a victory in Ireland - reforms cannot operate solely on the basis of the proposals of banks and employers , without considering those who , either now or in future , have to live with them .
These reforms must be socially , environmentally and economically equitable throughout society .
That is exactly what is meant by saying that this Pact is stupid .
Let us take the example of Germany , Mr Poettering .
Your great candidate has called for Mr Prodi to resign .
On behalf of whom or what would Mr Stoiber call for Mr Prodi to resign ?
Why did you not have the courage to repeat , here , in this House , in front of Mr Prodi , what your candidate said ?
I would have liked to hear you repeat the same thing .
We could have laughed about it together .
Secondly , I would like to know whether a country like Germany , which spent 600 billion in transfers from West to East for the unification , should be treated in the same way as any other country , be it small or large ?
Should the fact of having carried out these transfers , of paying pensions to people who have never contributed to the pension scheme , be taken into account , yes or no ?
Let us stop being hypocritical and , finally , let us thank Mr Prodi for having opened the debate .
Let us continue !
The dissident thinkers ' club will relaunch this debate in an even less stupid way than Mr Prodi .
( Applause )
Mr President , to my great surprise , I read in the paper at the end of last week that the President of the Commission referred to the Stability and Growth Pact as ' stupid ' in an interview .
I hoped that this was a misunderstanding but unfortunately , President Prodi persists in his opinion and is repeating his statement , which is , to say the least , injudicious .
Clearly , statements of this kind call into question the Commission 's policy on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact ..
We created this Stability and Growth Pact less than five years ago .
The Pact 's implementation benefits from clear and simple decision-making .
Unambiguous sanctions are also required .
Discussions about the Stability and Growth Pact and the possibility to improve the Pact are necessary , but these discussions should not put the Stability and Growth Pact 's credibility on the line .
Exposing a difference of opinion between the parties involved to the outside world spells , in fact , the end of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I should like to hear from Commissioner Solbes how he will be discussing the Stability and Growth Pact 's rules in a sensible manner , and in this framework , I should like to find out from the Commission what measures it intends to take in order to present the Member States ' budgetary issues in an adequate manner .
The European economy does not benefit from constant arguing between the parties involved about the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact .
If it continues in this vein , we are at risk of creating an instability pact , and surely this is not what we want .
Mr President , one of the following is true .
Either your statements are the result of collusion with individual Member States , in which case we can expect no transparency from the President of the Commission but rather what could be described as a Machiavellian approach to politics , not one advocated by the University of Bologna - if that is the case , tell us more - or else your actions and endeavours resemble those of a Pope informing us that , actually , the virgin birth is just the Church 's little joke .
If your intention was to launch a debate , as Mr Watson has suggested , then tell us the whole story , tell us , admit that the European economy 's real problems are not the result of the Pact and its alleged rigidity but are caused by unresolved structural problems , by the inability to reduce current public spending , which serves merely to nourish bloated administrations , by the inability to reform the welfare state , particularly pension systems , to eliminate the excessive rigidity stifling the labour market and enterprise or to progress along the road of privatisation and liberalisation .
It is no coincidence that the countries in the greatest difficulties are precisely those which have been most reluctant to adopt ambitious reform programmes in recent years .
This is what we want you to tell us , President Prodi , in this debate or next time you are interviewed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , although I very much welcome today 's debate , I would like to put it on record that I see the summons to you , Mr President of the Commission , to come to Parliament today , as amounting to a blue letter in response to your latest utterances on the Stability and Growth Pact .
A glance at history shows us that every currency union lacking the backup of political union failed .
The EU is not yet a political union , and so the Stability and Growth Pact is what might be termed a stopgap , an imaginary European Finance Minister .
Demolish it , and you imperil monetary union .
The Stability and Growth Pact is not stupid , but casting doubt upon it is irresponsible and indeed negligent .
The Stability and Growth Pact is an effective tool to counteract budgetary folly , a workable substitute for the common EU budgetary policy that , for the foreseeable future , does not exist .
The Stability and Growth Pact is neither complicated nor rigid ; it is flexible and simple enough , with its rule of no new debts in good times and up to 3 % of GDP room to manoeuvre in bad ones .
Most of our States abide by the Stability and Growth Pact .
Why , I wonder , are the majority in Europe taken to be the stupid ones , just because a few have problems and either have not done their homework or do not want to do it ?
As they say , people who do not take themselves seriously are not taken seriously by others .
What are people , the public and the candidate countries to be guided by and be able to hold fast to , if the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , and Member States , declare constitutional principles to be optional and sacrifice them to convenience and to the opportunism entailed in making policy on a day-to-day basis .
Running up debts may be opportune in the short term , but , in the long term , the debt trap jeopardises growth and employment , stability and social cohesion .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to use this minute and this debate to express gratitude and congratulations to the Board of the ECB and its President , Wim Duisenberg for their steady hand and for being an anchor of stability .
I would , though also like to tell the President of the European Central Bank that , when rain comes pouring in through the roof of a house , or water breaks into a ship , the caretaker or the captain must not go .
I beg Mr Duisenberg to call off the early retirement he has already announced , and to stay put .
I want to spare us a debate at the present time as to whether a country that openly defies the Stability and Growth Pact has any sort of moral right to propose a candidate as his successor .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , you said on Radio Europe 1 , and repeated today , that you were calling for a central institution to coordinate the eurozone countries ' economic policies .
I do not believe that we need a new institution .
We have one - the Commission !
Your task is to strengthen it rather than weaken it .
Your task is to implement the Treaty rather than to undermine it , and use enhanced coordination to make the objectives realities .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need more trust and less troublemaking .
My group is therefore showing the yellow card to all those who cast doubt upon the Stability and Growth Pact .
If anyone misunderstands that , we will have to show them the red one !
Mr President , the application of the Stability and Growth Pact has ended up in a dead end , because it has wrongly focused on current budget deficits rather than on the structural deficits , which are what really matter .
How long the Commission has taken to admit this !
I would like to remind you that this Parliament took the view in 1997 that the Stability and Growth Pact had to be flexibly applied , and there was a majority across the group boundaries in support of this .
The Stability and Growth Pact is basically suited to being used as an instrument to coordinate European finance policies .
The Economic and Monetary Union needs a regulatory framework , one that , when flexibly implemented , is able to take market trends into account .
A rigid interpretation , on the contrary , would let budget deficits increase as a result of the ensuing more pronounced tendency to cyclical weakening and the associated reduction in revenues and increase in expenditure .
The automatic stabilisers must , though , be applied by all , and comprehensively , when the economy as a whole is going through a slack period .
Their use should not be tied to good behaviour clauses that cannot be made good , or else the goals of the Lisbon process - competitiveness , full employment and social cohesion - will be out of our reach .
A balanced budget aims for the mid-point of a cycle , and this objective must always be considered against the background of the conditions of the economic climate .
That is why neither the Treaty nor the Pact envisage permanent precision or provide for a binding timetable , nor would such a thing be compatible with any interpretation of the Pact that accorded with its purpose .
What is unsatisfactory about the application of the Pact is the fact that it puts too little emphasis on economic growth , which means that a distinction has to be drawn between deficits that result from current expenditure and those arising from productive capital expenditure .
This could be done if European financial policy were to be guided by reference to the structural deficit .
Only then will the Stability and Growth Pact be able to play its part as a positive instrument of coordination .
That includes , however , efficient coordination of economic policies , with Parliament involved .
On this also , Mr Prodi and Mr Solbes Mira , I look forward to the Commission coming up with an unambiguous initiative .
Mr President , we requested this debate because we wished to state that it is time to suspend the Stability and Growth Pact in order to conduct a review of its irrational and incongruous criteria for nominal convergence , which do not take account of the problems and difficulties facing the Member States or their differing levels of development , which are a factor in making their economic problems worse and in hindering growth and the implementation of Community strategies on employment and on combating poverty .
This became clear at the first round table on social exclusion held by the Presidency and the Commission last week in the Danish city of Aarhus , and in which I took part in my capacity as rapporteur for the European Parliament .
Now , following the statements made by Commissioner Lamy and the Commission President , Romano Prodi , I can say that we agree with these statements .
This Pact is indeed stupid , as are all decisions that are rigid .
This Pact is a clumsy tool for economic governance and must be replaced with something more intelligent , since the 3 % rule is positively medieval .
All of these reasons prove that there is no sense in keeping the Stability and Growth Pact .
It makes no sense that Commissioner Solbes Mira , on the one hand , confirms that the targets for the stability programmes will not be met in 2002 - and this could not be clearer in Germany , France and Italy - but on the other , where Portugal is concerned , opens an excessive-deficit procedure and applauds the implementation of measures for antisocial policies that create more unemployment and more poverty , precisely in the country that has the worst economic and social situation and the lowest level of development in the entire European Union .
What is clear is that the Pact 's main function is to serve as a pretext , as a political cover-up for the most damaging , disastrous and revanchist government policies seen in Portugal since the revolution of 25 April in 1974 .
I therefore ask : is Commissioner Solbes Mira going to tender his resignation ?
Or is he going to opt for proposing the suspension of the Pact in order to hold a broad debate on the EU 's economic and social guidelines ?
And is he going to cancel the excessive-deficit procedure that he imposed on Portugal ?
Or is President Prodi going to do so in order to address the aims of sustainable economic development , of more jobs with rights and of greater social inclusion ?
I await your replies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start with a prefatory remark in order to highlight the climate in which we are engaging in debate .
The countries belonging to the European Community have at present a mountain of debt totalling EUR 4 700 billion .
What that means is that , taken together , the countries belonging to the European Community owe EUR 4 700 billion .
The annual interest payments alone , by which this debt is serviced , amount to EUR 230 billion per annum - more than double the European Union 's Budget .
I am sure that you , Mr President of the Commission , will agree with me when I say that it would be stupid and idiotic to open these floodgates even wider at the present time .
I will now turn to the Stability and Growth Pact , for which we have framed rules that are very clear .
With the objective of balancing budgets , the deficit may not exceed 3 % , and sanctions become operative if this 3 % rule is not adhered to .
That is the point at issue , and that is what we have to deal with now .
It was an enormous help to your country 's budget , at the time you were at the head of its government , that these rules create confidence .
This confidence led to lower interest rates , and that took a great deal of pressure off your budget .
My second point is that I believe it really would be stupid to gamble away these advantages now .
Mr President of the Commission , you said that there is a need in Europe for an authority that would have an undisputed role of economic governance .
You may not have used those words , but what you meant is a European economic government .
That is a view that I share .
In my view , that can only be the Commission .
What is required of such an economic government , though , is that it should lay down rules and see to it that they are adhered to , in order that they may send out the right messages .
Mr President of the Commission , by your interview with Le Monde , you sent the wrong message .
What we expect of you today is that you should make good that error and should do as Parliament demanded on 2 May 1997 and apply the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact - not flexibly , but strictly and consistently .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Stability and Growth Pact was adopted in 1997 as an extension to the excessive deficit procedure , the Maastricht Treaty having famously required that Member States had to remain below the excessive deficit limit in order to join the single currency .
Consequently , in spirit - not in letter but in spirit - the Stability and Growth Pact can be no better or worse than the Maastricht requirement in question .
Many people perhaps consider that the introduction and success of the euro are ex-post vindication of the inflation and excessive deficit limits , those all too restrictive limits .
They are wrong !
The strict limits imposed in Maastricht certainly succeeded in keeping prices under control , but they exacerbated unemployment in the European economy .
Unemployment and recession have not strengthened the value of the euro , they have undermined it , witness the fact that the euro fell by nearly 20 % against the dollar when it was introduced , at a time when budgetary deficits were under better control than they are now , while now that deficits are supposedly getting out of control , the euro is almost on a one-to-one parity with the dollar .
Witness also the fact that every time the European Central Bank has raised interest rates , that is , every time it has tightened monetary policy , the value of the euro has fallen rather than risen , contrary to the expectations of those who decided to raise interest rates .
The money markets will supposedly punish Europe for its governments ' lack of budgetary discipline by depressing the value of the euro .
Wrong !
The money markets know full well how important economic activity is to the value of a currency and appear to have no intention of punishing a reasonable relaxation in this restrictive policy - reasonable of course in that no one is talking about excesses or irresponsibility - at a time when we are on the brink of another major recession .
I think that this analysis justifies President Prodi 's choice of words and analysis .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , if the implementation of a policy to limit the new debts entered into by states adds up in practice to inflation-cutting measures combined with a simultaneous increase in economic growth , then there is nothing to be said against it .
Here lies the crux of the situation we are in today .
The best option for generating growth is to encourage demand by means of investments by governments , investments by enterprises and by private consumption .
If , despite the European internal market , nation states continue to assume that they must gain for themselves advantageous positions within the European Union - and that is possible in the absence of an adequate harmonisation of economic , fiscal and social policy - then , quite simply , the fundamental conditions for sustainable growth in Europe are not there .
Increased domestic demand will not be achieved by reducing wages , which diminishes purchasing power , or by increasing the tax burden on small businesses , which create more jobs and apprenticeships than anyone else , and it will not be brought about by taking so much of the tax burden off big businesses that they no longer pay anything at all .
Cutting investment rates during a slowdown , even though there is no inflation of any significance , has a procyclic effect and makes no economic sense .
There are marked differences between the budgets of the Member States .
The fact that shadow budgets are the order of the day means that there is , even within the European Union , no comparable basis for the calculation and management of budgets .
If this leads us to talk in terms of altering the Stability and Growth Pact , this must not be done because of the present complex economic situation , for that would be political opportunism ; instead , discussion must be a consequence of the construct being fundamentally dysfunctional .
Any reform of the Stability and Growth Pact must go hand in hand with greater coordination of European policies on the economy , social affairs , employment , tax and the environment , if there is to be any real upturn in investment .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , I should like to describe your statement in Le Monde as economically understandable and fair , but politically not very astute .
We only have to look at today 's debate to know what I mean .
It appears to be a debate between the people who create the impression that they want to do away with the Stability and Growth Pact altogether , on the one hand , and , on the other , those who have apparently accorded the present Stability and Growth Pact the status of holy writ .
This should not be what the discussion is about .
What should it be about ?
In my view , it should be about striking the right balance between the need , recognised also by my own group , to reach a structural credit balance in the medium term and the equally important need to take into account the economic reality and cyclical movements .
Is this now a licence , as some fellow MEPs call it , for every country to do as they like ?
No , indeed not .
It is , however , an incentive to further refine the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact by , for example , drawing a distinction between necessary investments , infrastructure and by showing concern on the one hand , and - we might as well give all the details - irresponsible election promises , on the other .
It is right in my view that countries experiencing an economic downturn , such as Germany for example , are given more time to get their budgetary position on track .
However , in my view , countries that are intent on a structural deterioration of their deficit by , for example , making out bad cheques , like France , should , in my view , be given a yellow card in future , with good reason .
Mr Prodi , if it was your intention to stir up a discussion about a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact , then you can count on my support .
I admire your courage when you say that you do not want to remain deaf and blind to the changing economy .
If that is the case , I can forgive you for your bad timing .
I can assure you : intelligent agitators invariably do well in the end .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , our citizens deserve a strong euro .
The euro can never become a dominant currency in the world , the sort we have set out to create , unless the aims of the Stability and Growth Pact are strictly adhered to .
I do not really understand why you are now saying that the Stability and Growth Pact is stupid .
Before the articles in the Pact were signed and sealed you were an economist , a qualified economist , and you were influential in the debate on economic policy .
Why did you not say these conditions were stupid before the Treaty of Amsterdam ?
We agreed this Pact for situations just like these : to make the work of politicians easier when there is a recession and it is difficult to balance public sector finances .
This is no surprise .
Economic boom periods do not last forever .
It is certainly no surprise for any Minister of Finance , and it cannot be a surprise for the Commission .
Booms are followed by recession .
It is quite obvious that it is more difficult to achieve the aims of the Stability and Growth Pact in a slump than it is during a period of economic prosperity .
These four Member States which are now in difficulties and which have promised their citizens something they cannot do are paying the price of not doing what they should have done when we had an economic boom .
Many Members of Parliament would be prepared to increase the Commission 's responsibility and extend its role in coordinating economic policy .
Unfortunately , however , remarks like these and the fact that they are being made by Members of the Commission at all , none of whose business this is in any way , do not in the least increase our faith in the notion that we should be giving the Commission a greater role in the coordination of economic policy in the Convention on the future of Europe .
When Commissioner Lamy , for example , condemned the Pact as being medieval he was evidently representing more the French Socialist Party rather than the Commission 's view on trade policy .
You really should withdraw remarks like these , and I am furthermore asking you to give more thought to what you say .
Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully endorse President Prodi 's frank , well-balanced report and Commissioner Solbes ' recommendations .
The need , which I fully endorse , for flexible application of the Stability and Growth Pact and for coordination of economic , social and environmental policies , starting with the eurozone , has , however , been completely disregarded during the recent years of recession , not least because of the serious forecasting errors made by the European Commission and the European Central Bank , which actually discouraged any attempts to promote or coordinate an active , counter-cyclical economic policy shared by the Union 's governments .
Moreover , it is true that the flexible , selective management of the Stability and Growth Pact cannot be left to the discretion of the individual governments , for this could result in the weakening of social cohesion and , at worst , higher inflation .
I therefore support the proposal to include the Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives , in other words the programming of public investment in the areas of research , lifelong training and environmental improvement and the creation of integrated European transport and telecommunications networks , as an additional objective of the Stability and Growth Pact , subtracting the sum of these investments from the total budgetary deficit of Member States ' governments .
This decision requires , of necessity , strong support from the European Community .
Indeed , the Community must be able , through the Commission , to assess , ex ante , the compatibility and conformance of the investments with the objective of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic economy based on knowledge , full employment and sustainable development in the world by 2010 , facilitating the coordination of these investments .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union has a single currency but it does not have a common economic policy .
It has a single currency but it does not have a genuine economic policy authority .
It has a single currency but it does not have a genuine federal budget .
Until yesterday , the Union had the Stability and Growth Pact : the wonderful substitute - yes , a substitute - for a non-existent economic policy , for a non-existent proper redistributive budget , for a non-existent economic policy authority , while even the single currency and the monetary area are far from perfect .
As you know , President Prodi , the credibility of the euro is linked , amongst other things - above all , I would say - to the Stability and Growth Pact and to its capacity to force the Member States to produce responsible budgetary policies : budgetary policies , I would point out , which they themselves have proposed and which are accepted by all their citizens .
Of course the Stability and Growth Pact is subject to constraints - that is clear and we are all aware of it - particularly at a time of recession such as that the Union is currently experiencing .
Nevertheless , Mr Prodi , it is one thing to find an intelligent way round these constraints , but it is quite another to actually remove them , to change the rules half way through the game , leaving a free-for-all .
What concerns me , President Prodi , are not the intelligent changes - which are always welcome - but the danger that budgetary policy will actually be renationalised .
This , President Prodi , is the most serious matter , the most perilous danger of all , for we could end up endorsing the policies of the irresponsible countries and penalising countries which have implemented responsible policies , the countries which have placed their trust in us .
Rewarding the grasshoppers and punishing the ants will not help the euro : it will do nothing to further European integration at this very sensitive point in its development .
This is why the European People 's Party will , through its members taking part in the Convention , acting in accordance with the mandate they received at the recent Estoril Congress , propose that the Convention should constitutionalise the basic principles of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I am sure you will agree with me .
And please , beware of fair-weather friends who arrive by your side at the eleventh hour !
Mr President , I welcome , understand and support the recent statements by President Prodi on public finance policy in Europe .
If I understood correctly , the Commission has now made an intelligent start to a process of defending the Stability and Growth Pact , which will only be possible if it demonstrates political courage and if it is able to break with some of its current positions .
We hope that the European Parliament , which is , by definition , the Community institution that is most open and most representative of the common citizen , understands and supports the positive process that President Prodi has set in motion .
Only those who have been going around with their heads completely in the clouds and divorced from Europe 's economic reality could be surprised today .
It was clear from the earliest days that the Stability and Growth Pact was founded on rules that would work reasonably in times of economic growth but which could prove to be a hindrance when faced with certain unforeseen circumstances and with only moderate growth .
The Europe of the Euro is founded on a framework of a single monetary policy and twelve separate budget policies .
This justifies the existence of clear rules preventing undisciplined economies , especially the larger ones , from jeopardising the stability of the system .
Budgetary rigour is the guarantee that today 's generation will not bequeath excessive debt to future generations .
Forcing States to rationalise their spending and to make their services more efficient is crucial to a genuine development strategy .
I am sure that we all agree on this .
Nevertheless , the disciplinary rules must be understood by the markets and must not contravene national policies and the legitimate interests and commitments associated with them .
This requires them to be worded flexibly , and adapted whenever this should prove necessary .
This is the original sin of the Stability and Growth Pact and this is why more and more voices are calling for it to be amended .
Closing our eyes to this new reality would be to reject out of hand all of our commitments , condemning the Pact and especially its aims , to total failure .
A static interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact is beginning to look unsustainable , because it does not respond to the current economic situation and even less matches the aims that the European Union set for itself in Lisbon of becoming , in the short term , the most powerful economy in the world .
Using the Stability and Growth Pact intelligently , emphasising the pillar of growth in the current economic situation is absolutely crucial for nature not to rebel and for the building that has been constructed so laboriously not to collapse .
Mr President , economies differ - that is just a fact .
The Stability and Growth Pact has to have a far more sophisticated interpretation .
The background for this has to be sound public finances and a stable economy .
Furthermore , as you have stated , it needs to take into account the economic cycle for budgetary policy .
Also , further reforms have to be sustainable , measured against the country 's debt profile .
We must also allow for public investment , because that can lead to the growth that you referred to in the Lisbon Summit and not just deal with welfare .
Countries like the United Kingdom for example after all those disastrous years of under-investment under Tory governments , need to catch up and we must be able to let them do that .
But the fact is that , as the old joke says , ' if you line up all the economists around the world head to toe , you may never reach a conclusion ' .
What we do not want is to line up the Commission head to toe and find out that all that is left is inconsistency .
Let us change the Stability and Growth Pact .
Let us make it flexible - you can help do that - but let us recognise that it has to be a sophisticated instrument in a real economy .
Mr President , the Stability and Growth Pact was introduced to safeguard the euro as a strong currency , but , in view of Europe 's generally poor economic position and high rate of unemployment , it should be permissible to rethink or refine the stability criteria for the precise reason that this will keep the euro strong .
A currency is as strong as its economy .
If the economy is limping along , the currency will be weakened in the long term .
The high level of tax in Europe weakens the economy and is not leaving private citizens enough room to manoeuvre or enough disposable income to boost consumer spending .
Also , too much money is being poured into the grossly distended bureaucracy of the civil service .
This must be changed .
The euro needs not only a pact for stability , but also , primarily , for growth .
Discussion of this issue is therefore both necessary and sensible , in order that the euro may in the long term become a strong rather than a weak currency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for this debate , which has not been purely academic , as it could have been , given its chance , idiosyncratic origins ; it has been a weighty debate on the economy which I hope can be repeated in the future .
The different positions - do not worry , Mr Poettering , I never mix personal relations with political opinions - which have emerged in this debate have revealed something important , namely that the system we are working with is unbalanced .
There is an ex post coercive instrument to ensure that the necessary rigour is respected - although , thanks to the lack of authority , a genuine obligation is not always imposed : it is often an invitation rather than an obligation - but there is no ex ante instrument to create the conditions for balanced development , to help the countries which are bound together in the single currency to achieve balanced development in terms of healthy public finances and employment .
We do not have an economic policy which we can evaluate and monitor together .
As a result , we will be in danger of breaking the code of Community living - and that really would be stupid - if we do not employ the political astuteness which we need to foresee disagreements and tension and to avoid a situation where we have to stand by , powerless , until the time comes to clamp down , with the risk , as we have heard , that the Member States will indulge in bargaining .
This is the direction the Commission wishes to take , so let us get started , as Commissioner Solbes said , and continue to exploit all the possibilities provided by the existing instruments , but we must ensure that European economic policy is no longer dictated purely by accounting instruments .
A number of specific references have been made to the European Central Bank , but the European Central Bank is doing its job properly , you know .
The problem is that we cannot leave it without support !
We have a European economic policy in which , thank God , there is a Central Bank which has been successful from the start , and for this we must give it its due because it really did start from scratch .
It has been a Herculean task to create a control and monitoring structure , an economic financial analysis structure , from scratch , with 12 different countries , and we must safeguard the independence of the Central Bank but not its isolation .
We are here today holding a debate , and the debate has revealed that the issue of an economic policy authority has not been resolved .
Mr President , I would like a further debate to be held on this matter .
Indeed , we share a single currency , and this means that we cannot devalue , it means that we cannot vary interest rates , it means that we really are tied to a system which is strong and rigid in many respects .
Well then , if we want this system to work , we must establish an authoritative institution to help us coordinate economic policy headings .
I am not pushing for the Commission to get the job here - I am putting us all forward as candidates .
I have never said that this authority should necessarily be the Commission , of course not !
This authority needs to be created , to be established , to be formed because we have to protect the single currency together , and we therefore have to move together towards the future .
I can assure you that , in my interview - which , I would stress - was a long one - the word which has been the subject of so much criticism referred not to the Stability and Growth Pact , as has been reported , but to the fact that the Pact has been interpreted too literally .
Reference has been made , for example by Mr Abitbol , just now , to Saint Paul : the problem is the difference between the spirit and the letter .
We are enclosed , shut away in a corner , and we have to work according to the letter of the law , and it is the letter which is stupid .
We have to have instruments , we have to use politics , we have to use the spirit of the law if we are to interpret our people 's problems .
Remember that , when there are discrepancies between different countries ' economic policies , things could come to a head at any moment . In this sense , Mr Watson , it was not by chance that I brought the subject up .
I gave the interview on purpose , although you are right - I could have discussed it with Parliament , and I will do so whenever you call upon me to discuss these matters , for they are the basis of our Community life .
I broached the subject because of the work of the Convention . We need to debate these issues so that the Convention realises that we are experienced , that we are capable of addressing these issues .
Another reason why I raised the matter is that the European people are calling upon us to discuss economic affairs not just in terms of finance and balancing accounts but in terms of things that affect their everyday lives , and I can assure you that this does not mean I have been lax or too flexible in economic matters .
In the past , I have even had the courage to impose a Europe tax on my country - specifically labelled a Europe tax - because I feel that the citizens have to be given clear , accurate information .
Clearly , we in this House have to discuss the issue of the spirit and the letter of the Pact , with due regard for the Pact and within the constraints of the current situation where we have to apply it to both large and small countries .
This is another of the problems which have emerged during this debate : do you apply equal rigour in the event of deviation on the part of France , Germany or Italy , whose deficits are approaching or have already exceeded 3 % ?
I can assure you that , if this information is confirmed by official notifications or Commission statistics , as agreed in the Amsterdam declaration , the Commission will apply the measures laid down in the Treaty and the Pact , it will discharge its duty towards all because that is its job .
I have said , however - and I reiterate it before the House - that this is not enough !
It is not enough to ascertain the existence of the deficit , closing the stable door after the horse has bolted !
Here , we have to develop a common economic policy - we owe it to our citizens !
That is why the word I used may have appeared rather strong .
My apologies to the academics , but I believe that this has served to show all of us what we must do in the future .
( Applause )
Mr President , during the night of 26 to 27 September , the ship de Joola sank off the coast of Senegal , taking with it many Senegalese , a group of Europeans , and Roel and Lisette Arendshorst from Groningen .
President Wade of Senegal has taken responsibility for this disaster .
Since his own country has no money for the recovery of the ship , President Wade has already talked about a burial at sea .
This is unacceptable .
For the relatives of the victims , it is of the utmost importance for the bodies of their loved ones to be recovered as soon as possible , since problems of identification will arise as time goes on .
As an inquiry has shown that the ship is stuck on a sandbank , it would be relatively easy to recover the bodies with the aid of sub-aqua divers .
This kind of recovery is not terribly costly but may still be too expensive for Senegal .
Last week , I already made an urgent appeal to Commissioners Nielson , Patten and Bolkestein to release European funding from the European Development Fund .
Time is pressing .
I still have no reply .
I should once again like to urge the Commission to offer financial support to Senegal as soon as possible so that the parents and siblings of Roel and Lisette , and the relatives of the other victims , no longer have to live with the anxiety and can bid farewell to their loved ones in a dignified manner .
If I understand correctly , Mrs González Álvarez , it may be that some questions need to be put to the Commission too , so that we can get to the bottom of the matter .
Mr President , I am very pleased that it is you who are in the Chair , for this afternoon I received a telephone call from a young woman .
She was the winner of the Miss Denmark contest .
She has decided - very courageously , I think - not to go to Nigeria to take part in the Miss World contest .
Today , she has , however , received a letter from the Miss World organisation , encouraging her to take part in the light of the fact that one of the Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament - and it was in actual fact yourself , Mr Imbeni - had encouraged the candidates to take part and so abstain from a boycott .
This young woman we are talking about is naturally rather confused , which is understandable of course .
I therefore want to ask you to confirm today , or to confirm to myself as soon as possible , that the European Parliament has not come out in favour of the candidates ' participating in the Miss World contest and to confirm that we have not therefore encouraged them to participate .
I should also like to ask you to confirm that the closest the European Parliament has been to discussing whether these women should boycott the Miss World contest has been the discussion we had in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities when women were specifically called upon to boycott the Miss World contest .
I hope that I can obtain confirmation now and , if not now , then in writing in the very near future .
Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , without using up too much of my fellow Members ' time , I can confirm that , firstly , my opinion is different from yours ; secondly , I expressed this opinion at a press conference ; thirdly , I did not speak on behalf of the European Parliament , of course ; and fourthly , I sent an e-mail to the Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , stating that , in my opinion , the decision made by the Committee on Women 's Rights to call for boycotting of the initiative was wrong , for a number of reasons which I am not going to go into here for fear of opening a debate which is not on today 's agenda .
Later , if you wish , tomorrow or the day after , I can explain to you why I feel that the line taken by the Committee on Women 's Rights was inappropriate .
Now , however , in my capacity as President of the sitting , I cannot speak on the matter .
The next item is the report ( A5-0332 / 2002 ) by Mr Andrew Nicholas Duff , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the impact of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and its future status [ 2002 / 2139 ( INI ) ] .
rapporteur .
Mr President , the future status of the Charter was one of the four key questions bequeathed to us by the now famous Treaty of Nice for consideration at the IGC of 2004 and since Laeken , it is a central question confronting the Convention .
This resolution , should it be passed , will represent a formal contribution to the Convention from the parliamentary delegation .
We have looked at the impact so far made by the Charter as a solemnly proclaimed instrument and we have found that much use is made of it by the Ombudsman , by Parliament , by the Commission and even sometimes by the Council .
We have found also some uncertainty among the citizens about the Charter 's scope as a solemnly proclaimed instrument .
For the courts , the Charter is already an important source of reference alongside the ECHR and the constitutional traditions of the Member States .
Yet the national constitutional tradition referred to is already broad and , in a Union of 25 plus Member States , it will become improbably vague .
Therefore , we conclude that we must incorporate the Charter firmly within the Treaties , so that what is at present an important source of reference will become a central source .
Commission Vitorino and his working group in the Convention are considering the technical and semantic niceties that will be involved in incorporation and I look forward to hearing from him how successful the efforts of his working group are proving .
This parliamentary resolution refreshes the political story of the Charter .
It says why incorporation in the treaties is important and why it should become mandatory upon the Union and upon the Member States , when and , in so far as , they put into effect European law and policy .
It also says why the Charter will become an important building block of the further development of the concept of European citizenship .
As we enlarge , the Charter succeeds in spelling out for all concerned why fundamental rights are so salient to bringing Europe closer to the citizen .
It proposes that we establish for ourselves our fundamental rights regime at the centre of the integration process so that it will stand as a jewel in the crown of our future constitution .
I commend the report to Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to congratulate Mr Duff , not only in his capacity as rapporteur for this report but also in his capacity as a member of the Convention drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The report we are discussing today is based on the previous positions held by Parliament , adopted when the Charter was drawn up , in the course of 2000 , and these recommendations fully respond to the aim of making this Charter the basis for a constitution .
I am speaking in my capacity as Commissioner but , of course , I cannot ignore the fact that , at the same time , I represent the Commission in the Convention on the Future of Europe and in that capacity , I chair the ' Charter ' working group .
Without going into details , I think I can tell the House that the members of the working group for the incorporation of the Charter into the Treaty have expressed broad consensus on the answers to give to the technical issues with which we are wrestling and which concern the modalities and consequences of the Charter 's potential incorporation into a future constitutional Treaty as well as the modalities and consequences of the European Union 's potential accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
I believe that there is an enormous degree of unity between the recommendations contained in Mr Duff 's Report and the conclusions of the working group .
To be specific , I would first emphasise my agreement with the fact that the Charter today is a reality that has truly taken root in European life , being used by citizens , by the Advocates-General , in judgments of the Court of First Instance , and by national courts , even at the highest level ; the constitutional courts of the Member States .
Mr Duff 's Report also makes the observation that incorporating the Charter will not attribute new competences to the Union .
The Charter is already clear on this matter but could be more explicit in the horizontal clauses providing for the incorporation of the Charter into the Treaty , especially in order to allay the fears that some people have expressed .
The Charter is not in itself a source of competences or a legal basis that will enable the Union to pass legislative measures .
It is a source of reference for the values that must be present in all EU policies .
By the same token , the Charter does not in any way limit the competences of the Member States .
It does not replace the system of Member States in the field of human rights , and is not designed to replace the role of national constitutions .
I therefore share the rapporteur 's opinion emphasising that the Charter must now be given binding legal force and a constitutional status , in accordance with modalities to be decided and which will depend on the future structure of the Treaties
It appears that two alternative solutions are being drawn up for this matter .
Firstly , one which in fact deserves the support of the majority of the members of the Working Group , the incorporation of the entire Charter , in the form of a title or first chapter in the Constitutional Treaty .
Alternatively , the inclusion in the work of the Constitutional Treaty of an article referring to the Charter containing the entire text of the Charter , dealt with in a specific section of the Constitutional Treaty or in a protocol .
It is also quite legitimate at the current juncture not to attempt to amend the provisions of the Charter before they are validated in the Constitutional Treaty .
The Charter represents the political commitment of the previous Convention , which this Convention must respect .
This does not mean , however , that some technical adaptations should not be made , especially with regard to the so-called ' general ' or ' horizontal ' clauses .
The ' Charter ' Working Group has been working on this matter and the aim is to come up with adaptations that do not affect the substance of the provisions and are instead designed merely to clarify the meaning of the current horizontal rules .
The European Parliament and the Commission have always looked favourably on acceding to the European Convention on Human Rights .
The rapporteur reiterates this point of view , which I welcome .
The members of the ' Charter ' Working Group take the view that the Union 's accession to the European Convention is fully compatible with enshrining a charter with constitutional value and binding legal force .
In this regard I believe that the result achieved by this working group will also receive a very broad consensus .
If the Union does indeed accede to the Treaty , it will become subject to external control , which is entirely in line with that exercised by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg over the Constitutional or Supreme Courts of the Member States .
In this sense there is no subordinate relationship between Courts and nor is the independence of the European Community 's legal system affected .
This issue is closely linked to that of the future legal personality of the Union .
The task of the Convention is indeed going to focus on incorporating a constitutional provision into the Constitutional Treaty to enable the Union to negotiate accession in practical terms with the Council of Europe and to decide , in accordance with normal procedure , when accession should take place and under what conditions , without in any way undermining the individual commitments of each Member State to the European Convention on Human Rights and its additional protocols .
I sincerely hope that incorporating the Charter into the Constitutional Treaty and the Union 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights will constitute two fundamental milestones in the process of giving the European Union a constitution that acknowledges the values and principles of fundamental rights .
Mr President , one of the main tasks of the Convention on the future of Europe is to respond to the question raised in Laeken almost a year ago about how appropriate it would be to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty on European Union .
A working group within the Convention was set up for this very purpose , competently chaired by Commissioner Vitorino and which is ready to make its conclusions public .
Today , the European Parliament , through the report by Mr Duff , seeks loudly to reaffirm the position it has always maintained .
I should like publicly to express my agreement with his conclusions and to take the opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on the extremely broad consensus that he was able to add to his achievements in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
We are in no doubt as to the need to make the citizens and their rights the focus of our shared existence .
What we have is not so much a market but a collection of women and men who give this Community meaning .
This is why we wholeheartedly call for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be incorporated as the major part of the future Constitutional Treaty of the European Union .
We are aware , of course , that many of the rights , principles and freedoms could have been worded differently and will have to be revised in future .
No human work is perfect .
From our point of view , however , that time has not yet come .
It is time today to clarify and strengthen the legal status of the Charter , giving it a binding nature and increasing the legal protection of European citizens from the European institutions and from the Member States when they apply Community law .
We therefore support the strategy advocated in this report and its main conclusions : to make it the major part of the new Constitutional Treaty , to lay down formal rules for its revision and , following the explicit attribution of a single legal personality to the European Union , to advocate accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Essentially , the debate we are having today might appear to be merely technical : what status will the Charter have in the constitution that will come out of the Convention ?
This debate poses a question that is absolutely essential from a political standpoint : what are we to do about the debate on citizenship within this Convention ?
Fortunately , our Charter does not simply address citizenship , but also represents , for our fellow citizens , an essential reference point , and from the beginning of this process , we have said that the Convention must aim for a more democratic , more comprehensible , more transparent Europe .
What our fellow citizens are asking is to be able to feel that they are European citizens .
It seems to me that the tool currently available to us to make citizenship come alive is the Charter .
So let us incorporate it .
Parliament has already requested this many times , and will do so again in voting for Mr Duff 's Report .
I believe this is a prerequisite for the work of the Convention to be accepted .
The question is knowing how to incorporate it .
My concern , personally , is that this incorporation would confer first-rung status on the Charter in the hierarchy of European texts .
This basically means that when one sector or another needs to lay down provisions in its field , it must respect the spirit and the letter of the Charter .
The question of a revision therefore arises , and we know that this is a debate that has caused much concern , including when the work of the previous Convention was concluded .
Like most of us here , I believe that the current Convention does not have the authority to re-open this text , and I also believe that this would be politically inappropriate .
The main thing is to check how this revision could take place , because there is no reason to imagine that these texts are written in stone .
We ourselves , in drawing up this Charter , took a few liberties with the text of the European Convention on Human Rights , due to the need to adapt and modernise it .
Let us imagine that our successors might also need to adapt the text : this would have to take place in the same conditions in which we ourselves wrote this text .
Basically , the Charter could only be revised according to the most restrictive rules proposed by the Convention .
My group and I have tabled an amendment to this end and I hope that Parliament will be able to adopt it when voting on Mr Duff 's Report .
I shall end with two brief comments .
First , I am anxious to know whether the debate - which is theoretically technical - on the so-called ' horizontal ' clauses runs the risk of limiting the scope of the Charter .
This should be our common approach : no reduction of the Charter 's scope .
Lastly , of course , I would like to express my support of the European Union 's signing up to the European Convention on Human Rights , on my own behalf and on behalf of my group .
In this way we will have a complete set of measures to protect the rights of our citizens and our residents .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the tireless rapporteur for his work on the Charter .
It is important that there should be no end of lively discussions of the Charter and of the position it is to occupy in relation to the work of the Convention .
I should also like to thank Commissioner Vitorino , not just for his principled support for further work on the Charter but also for pointing out that it would not be at all easy to incorporate the whole Charter into the future constitution or wherever else it is to be incorporated , the constitution 's being the most likely candidate .
What I think is important when we discuss these issues as politicians is that we constantly live in the tension between the vision and the reality . The vision is clear enough .
I must go back and say a little about the content , but we would all want the whole of the Charter to be incorporated .
The Charter is important .
It embraces important human and other rights that it is important to secure for the citizens of Europe .
On the other hand , we also need to decide our attitude to the facts , or current political reality , and ask ourselves how much of the Charter we could pilot through now that there are 15 countries in the EU , with the hope of there in actual fact being 25 once we have embarked upon the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is this tension that we always need to be clear about .
I support the Charter .
I have always thought it was a good Charter .
I have also worked on it in relation to the Danish constitution and must say that it is rather better and more forward-looking than , for example , that particular constitution read only as it stands and without the whole historical background .
I do not believe that all the existing constitutions are ideal but I also think , on the other hand , that the Charter is at present becoming something of a ' sacred cow ' .
I therefore think it good to be able to look at whether some articles are more important and more significant than others and at whether there are matters it might not be thought crucial to incorporate at this stage .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his openness and for making it clear that the issue is really not so straightforward as all that .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report deals with one of the most important problems that the European Constitutional Convention has to solve , namely how to integrate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the future European constitutional treaty and guarantee loophole-free protection of fundamental rights in the European Union .
Parliament has for a long time already been the motive force behind this issue in the EU .
This report , addressed directly to the Convention , finds Parliament again doing justice to its political role .
I would therefore like to say how very grateful I am to the rapporteur , and , for that very reason , address three issues that are also reflected in my amendments .
For many people , the primary and justified expectation is that the Convention will decide in favour of the incorporation of the Charter into the constitutional treaty , and so it must be ensured that it contains not merely guiding principles for the institutions of the European Union ; these must give rise to binding rights , which are to be safeguarded by the European Union and , which , if need be , can form the basis of any citizen 's appeal to the courts .
The report - in its item 1 , for example - is quite right to frame this as a demand .
I take the view , though , that Parliament is frustrating its own objectives when it is stated , under item 2 of the report , that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be incorporated into European constitutional law only in the form of a preamble .
A preamble could perhaps serve as some sort of pretence of a future constitutional treaty , but , in legal terms , it is not a norm relevant in law .
I believe that such a stance on Parliament 's part would be understood by nobody at all .
Secondly , we are right to demand that the EU should accede to the ECHR .
It is already becoming evident that a majority in the Convention favours this position .
If Parliament wants to continue to be the motive power behind this , then , I believe , it must also call the associated problems by their proper names .
I consider Recital Z to be inadequate in merely pointing out that the ECJ stands in the same relation to the ECHR as does any national constitutional court .
To say that is to draw a veil over a problem , as the fifteen Member States take very different approaches to the issue of relations between the national constitutional courts and the Court of Justice in Strasbourg .
In my judgment , the constitutional treaty must give its own answer to the question contained in the report .
I will make my third point to the rapporteur later on .
Mr President , it is in the nature of fundamental rights that they are not conferred but merely acknowledged , and that fundamental rights are perforce derived from human dignity .
The Council 's refusal to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding in law therefore puts us in an absurd situation , in which , on the one hand , fundamental rights are regarded as an inevitable consequence of the recognition of human dignity , whilst , on the other hand , people are denied the chance to exercise their rights .
I thank the rapporteur for again making it clear that it is Parliament 's top priority to incorporate fundamental rights into the European constitution , and indeed that they are a foundation stone without which a constitution is utterly unthinkable .
I concur , though , with the comments made by the lady who spoke before me , in that it is not the preamble that I envisage being used for this purpose , but Article 1 of the constitution , but I do not imagine that there are any serious differences between us on this point .
I am , secondly , grateful to the rapporteur for his observation that we must not allow the chapter on the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be reopened and renegotiated in the Constitutional Convention , which has no mandate to amend the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
If we were to again call the Charter into question , it would damage the credibility of the first Convention as a whole and thus also shatter the method of the Convention as such .
Yet there is , to my mind , a certain contradiction - and hence my question to Commissioner Vitorino , who has picked up this point - in the announcement that amendments are to be made to the horizontal provisions , which form an essential part of the stipulations on the scope and effect of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is perfectly conceivable - and some discussions lead me to suspect it - that an attempt is being made to use the horizontal provisions to limit the Charter 's scope .
Any such attempt must meet with resistance from us .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Duff for his excellent report and also Commissioner Vitorino for his expert comments .
Anyone who had the honour of being actively involved in the Convention that drafted the Charter will realise that the broad consensus was not self-evident at the time .
It is the result of very thorough , exhaustive and intense efforts .
For that reason , we must prevent the text of the Charter from being re-submitted for discussion .
Sterling work was done at the time .
Tabling sections of the Charter for discussion will only weaken this excellent piece of work .
My advice therefore would be to leave the Charter as it is , except for technical changes .
This is the first point I wanted to make .
My second point concerns the combination of the Charter with the ECHR , which has spawned more difficulties than necessary .
This is evident from a number of articles written by judges and experts from the two courts of justice in Luxembourg and Strasbourg and is also clear from the work of Mr Vitorino 's Convention working party .
It turns out to be highly feasible to synchronise the work of both courts with regard to the ECHR and with regard to the Charter .
This is also the view taken by our PPE-DE Group here and by the PPE-DE Group in the Council of Europe .
We are therefore of the opinion that the path has been cleared for the Charter 's inclusion in the new constitutional Treaty .
It is our desire to do this and we will therefore commit ourselves to this in the Convention .
This brings me to my third and final point , namely the Charter 's importance for EU citizens .
It is crucial for the rights of our citizens to be firmly anchored in the new constitutional Treaty that is being drafted .
We know all too well that citizens ' rights , minorities ' rights , and social rights are still very fragile , particularly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It is all the more important that these rights are enshrined in the new treaties and , above all , in the constitutional section of the Treaty .
These rights should , in my view , be enforceable .
In that way , citizens in Western and Central Europe can count on the same constitutional rights - rights enshrined in a European constitution , guaranteed by the Union and , if necessary , enforceable by European courts .
This seems to me to be the thrust of the Duff Report , which is why we will be endorsing it .
Mr President , the Charter is a milestone on the road that leads to real EU citizenship , and it also sets down in writing that it is people , rather than the market or power , who should be at the heart of European politics , and so I join with all those who have said that these rights must not exist only on paper .
They must also become binding .
Congratulations to the Commissioner and the rapporteur on their intention that the Charter should form part of the constitutional treaty .
I agree that it should not be mentioned only in the Preamble , but that the Charter should form the first chapter of the constitution .
We are always saying that this constitution should be able to be read in schools .
This Charter is wonderfully readable ; it would make a fine preface for a European constitution , and its reflection of Europe 's values leads me to believe that it should actually be printed in its entirety .
My second train of thought leads me to the view that the Charter should be incorporated without any changes being made to it .
It was the subject of really lengthy discussion in the first Convention , and I cannot see any reason to amend it again .
At most , there might be a need for editorial adjustments to the transversal articles , but not substantial alterations .
They contain everything on the Charter 's scope , and do not need to be duplicated and made more complicated .
Our rapporteur is to be thanked for his excellent report , which will without doubt become an important document for the Convention .
Mr President , the subject of the report is ostensibly the effect of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
One looks in vain to the report , however , for a serious discussion of this legally and politically quite crucial issue .
I shall content myself with making two points .
First of all , why do we need an EU Charter at all when we have the European Convention on Human Rights , endorsed by all the EU Member States ?
The answer is , because the EU as such has not endorsed the Convention .
By making a simple treaty change , the EU should , however , endorse the treaty as a matter of course , and that is something also recommended in the report .
When that happens , however , there will be an inevitable clash between the Court of Human Rights and the EC Court of Justice .
The report 's talk of smooth cooperation is sheer nonsense , legally speaking .
Secondly , the crucial part of the Charter 's agenda is about promoting the EU 's permanent expansion .
The Charter is purely and simply a building block for an EU federal state .
Both citizenship and a constitution are part and parcel of a federal state .
As is apparent from , for example , paragraphs 7 , P , X and N , the citizens of the European Union are being subjected to the EU 's federal authorities . This all constitutes destructive and outrageous interference in matters of national law , and the fact that a veil is being disgracefully drawn over this is reason enough for voting against the report .
Mr President , a Constitution and the Charter of Fundamental Rights are the two faces of the new Europe that we are building because democracy cannot be organised with twenty-five countries without binding fundamental rights .
Firstly , because the credibility of enlargement and confidence in it must be founded on a common stock of principles and rights which consolidate relations between States and citizens , whom history has deprived of the ability to live together and to trust one another .
Secondly , because the new citizenship of the Union , which places European citizens at the heart of European legitimacy , requires their defence and protection against any abusive behaviour that could result from the centralisation of power in the name of efficient decision-making .
We must therefore find a basis for giving the citizens direct access to the Union 's courts and we must similarly define the mechanisms that will persuade national courts to apply the Charter in the name of the citizens .
The status of the Charter must , therefore , be raised to that of primary law , making it a fundamental source of reference for the Court of Justice and for national courts , thereby making this instrument basic Union law and a genuine integral part of the Community 's legal acquis .
What kind of area of freedom , security and justice would we be building without a Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
What kind of model for civic and political co-existence could exist without this ?
Mr President , no new competence is being created as a result of the Charter .
On the contrary , it limits the exercise of power of the future Union .
Furthermore , no right is being removed from those already enjoyed by the citizens of the Member States , and nor is any higher protection being diluted into a Charter that lays down only minimum rules .
Consequently , if we wish to have an organised democracy , based on common values , let us make the Charter form the basis of a Constitution , making it the fundamental source of reference and protection for the Union 's citizens .
This is what the report states , this is the opinion of Mr Duff and this I believe , in fact I am sure , is the opinion of Commissioner Vitorino .
I heartily congratulate both of them !
Mr President , you will not be surprised that , as a British Conservative , I am going to sound a slightly discordant note in these otherwise harmonious proceedings .
I agree that it is right that all the institutions of the EU should observe the same standard norms , but I am still less convinced that such legal constraints need to be included in the Convention .
I also feel that they should not be enforceable by the EU on Member States beyond the present commitment represented by their signatures on the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
They should not apply to private companies , individuals or organisations , nor should they cover matters of social affairs , employment or cultural policy .
We are being presented with a vehicle filled with good intentions .
However , I fear we are also opening up a nightmare of duality in the appeal , on the one hand , the European Court of Human Rights and , on the other , the European Court of Justice .
We have cases changing from one to the other , profiting only the lawyers .
I am sorry for those of my colleagues who are distinguished lawyers , I do not wish them any diminution in their profits , but this is not something we should encourage .
Recital V shows that this is already happening .
The prospect of conflicting authorities being announced in the two courts is bureaucratically intolerable and a judicial nightmare .
Paragraph 2 also concerns me .
The Charter must bind the Commission , the Council , Parliament and the Committee of the Regions , but should it be a ' central reference point for the European Court of Justice and national courts ' ?
No , it should not be a central reference point of national courts .
This is another indication of the potential for confusion .
This confusion must be sorted out before this report is adopted .
I urge Parliament to reject this report and allow the committee to resolve it .
Mr President , there is no doubt that , for many countries , the easiest solution would be to incorporate the Charter with reference to Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
That would presumably be the easiest solution for my own country too .
All the same , I do think , however , that we must think longer and harder , for if the idea is that people should identify with the treaty , they must be able to consult the treaty or constitution and see outright what rights they have in relation to the EU .
I therefore think that the maximum solution should be chosen whereby the EU is endowed with legal personality and accedes to the Convention of Human Rights , for this solution would give the Court of Human Rights more authority in relation to the EC Court of Justice .
If we opt for the maximum solution , however , we must at the same time be open to the anxieties that might legitimately be felt by certain Member States , especially when it comes to issues of national identity .
I should perhaps have liked to have seen the rapporteur insert just one simple clause to the effect that we must bear this concern in mind , for if we in actual fact listen to the legitimate concern the Member States may have and , at the same time , opt for the maximum solution , I think we shall succeed in combining the broad vision with the facts .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank all those who have spoken , and especially those who agreed with the report .
I also strongly congratulate Commissioner Vitorino for successfully brokering an agreement in his working group on the technical and semantic problems which have confronted some representatives of Member States .
On the question of the preamble , I quite agree and I will accept Amendment 7 .
To my Eurosceptic friends , I say that this is not some subversive plot .
The Charter carries great authority and legitimacy . What it lacks is clarity and legal certainty .
It is precisely to ensure that we can improve the position as regards certainty and clarity that we are seeking its incorporation .
We are not being shamefully silent , as Mr Crowley said , on the impact on national law .
The charter primarily concerns the competences of the European Union and the powers of the Union authorities .
Finally , can I say that Lord Stockton and I find ourselves in appropriate political parties in Great Britain .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Statement in writing ( Rule 120 )
Mr President , Mrs Lambert , ladies and gentlemen , the Lambert Report that we are today debating deals with a crucial proposal for a directive frequently referred to as the Directive on Qualifying for International Protection .
I believe that this directive constitutes the core of the common European asylum system , the need for which was underlined in the Treaty of Amsterdam and in the conclusions of the Tampere , Laeken and Seville Councils .
The Commission agrees with the European Parliament that the harmonisation at European level of policies in the field of refugees is absolutely crucial .
This is not , in fact , merely an issue of harmonisation : it is a matter of responding to problems facing the Member States in the field of asylum that can only be addressed appropriately at EU level .
This applies perhaps particularly to the criteria for receiving international protection .
The various national systems currently contain different criteria for citizens being able to receive protection and an at times highly disparate set of laws on refugee status or on subsidiary protection .
These differences between the various national systems cause secondary movements , which is undesirable as far as all EU Member States are concerned .
In order to create a situation of equal treatment , the proposal for a directive on qualification for international protection contains standards for a common definition both of refugees and of those who are entitled to subsidiary protection .
It also contains standards for rights to be granted to these two categories of people .
It guarantees a minimum level of protection in all Member States for anyone in genuine need of international protection , and at the same time prevents abuses in requests for asylum , which damage the credibility of the system .
The proposal starts from the premise that international protection must only be granted by Member States if there is no effective national protection in place against persecution , regardless of the source of this persecution .
Lastly , we must emphasise that the subsidiary protection proposed in the directive must be considered to complement the system of protection enshrined in the Geneva Convention on refugees and must be implemented in such a way so as not to damage but to complement the current refugee protection system .
The Danish Presidency 's idea , supported by the Commission , is that rapid political agreement should be reached on this proposal , together with the regulation determining the Member State responsible for studying asylum requests , known as Dublin II , and the amended proposal for a directive on asylum procedures , specifically at the end of November at the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
It is therefore extremely important for the Commission that Parliament adopts its position on the directive as rapidly as possible so that the Council can debate this issue in light of your opinion .
Mr President , as we have just heard the proposed directive is effectively the linchpin of the common asylum policy , setting out the basis for minimum standards for people qualifying as refugees under the Geneva Convention and subsequent protocols , and also the criteria for people entitled to international protection under other international conventions and human rights legislation .
I personally regret the decision to apply this directive only to third-country nationals and stateless persons , thus removing the EU Member States from its scope , and I shall be voting for the amendments by the GUE / NGL Group to that effect .
However , the basis of the Commission 's perspective is the need for protection and our responsibility to provide it .
The majority of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs supported the Commission in upholding the 1951 Geneva Convention , which does not differentiate between different actors of persecution , and welcomed the move away from the narrow view held by some governments and parties that only state persecution creates official refugees .
Full application of the Convention would take account of , for example , those suffering at the hands of the FARC , a non-state agent of persecution in Colombia , and would also cover political opposition in Zimbabwe and countless other instances .
We disagreed with the Commission , however , on the point of protection being afforded by a state-like agency , such as the UNHCR , and felt that this effectively imposed the duties of a state on a body that could not be held legally accountable .
The majority of the committee chose to support amendments by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , which strengthen the position of women as a social group liable to persecution in some countries , and have included the example of genital mutilation in line with a previous Parliament decision on the issue .
We also took the view that sex and sexual orientation should be taken into account when looking at the definition of a social group .
This has been emphasised by the Union under the Copenhagen criteria and the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We are well aware of recent cases of persecution in , for example , Egypt and Jamaica .
The majority of the committee does not support the view that this directive should deal only with refugee status and that subsidiary protection could be dealt with at a later stage .
We agreed with the Commission and the UNHCR that it was appropriate to deal with the two categories together and not just for administrative reasons .
The complementary systems consider first of all whether a person needs protection .
If they do , then their status needs to be defined .
Even a full application of the Geneva Convention does not meet all protection needs and that is why many Member States have additional categories .
It is not true to say , as some do , that those in the additional category necessarily stay for shorter periods or face less serious problems in their country of origin .
If we are to have a common asylum policy , we have also to deal with these additional needs and it makes sense to deal with them together .
We need a holistic approach that meets our international obligations and the needs of those we aim to protect .
Because we see the two groups as complementary , the committee majority chose to accord similar social rights to the two groups .
It must be sensible to allow those who wish to work , train or acquire an education to do so .
It benefits the individuals , our society and their country of origin on return and , by meeting basic social needs , we can avoid larger social costs .
The EU 's own social inclusion strategy recognises the links , for example , between poor housing , poor health and poor educational attainment .
If this applies to our own nationals , it seems only reasonable for those entitled to international protection to benefit from an equivalent entitlement if we are to avoid creating social exclusion , contrary to our own EU policy .
Our committee also agreed by a majority to a definition of family that aims to maintain the principle of family unity and to embrace a wide definition of family .
That is a familiar argument in this House .
It seemed sensible to accord similar status to all family members , if only to avoid the bizarre situations which sometimes occur when one family member can be accorded refugee status and another , on the same information , is denied it .
We also agreed to uphold the effective right of conscientious objection on the grounds of religion or belief - a right internationally acknowledged .
In conclusion , I should like to thank all my colleagues for their serious work and commitment on this report , whether we agreed or not .
The committee has made positive amendments to the Commission 's already sound proposals and I trust this position will be maintained in the vote tomorrow and supported by the Council .
A positive position there will be a strong assertion of Treaty obligations and the humanitarian response of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission draft and the accompanying Parliamentary report , which we are debating today , can be described , without qualms , as the European institutions ' admission of bankruptcy as regards asylum policy .
Mr Vitorino , it is you who bear primary responsibility for the fact that , in the course of three years , your House has failed to produce even one single proposal on the right of asylum on which we might come to a compromise .
What is even worse is that your House does not yet , for any practical purposes , separate the three pillars of economic migration , asylum rights and subsidiary protection .
That is why your proposals regularly end up in the Council 's waste paper basket .
The left-wingers in this House , though , also bear their due share of responsibility for the failures to date .
Even the Commission is going beyond the harmonisation of minimum standards , yet , as a matter of principle , the left-wingers keep on making the proposals broader .
There is nothing , though , to equal the mendacity involved in you delivering great speeches in this House on asylum policy and allowing yourself to be lauded as the defender of refugees ' rights , while your own left-wing governments , in Great Britain and Germany for example , boast about their strict policies on asylum .
Even Mr Cohn-Bendit argued on French television last week in favour of tighter regulation .
Why ?
Because , at home , you are subject to quite another kind of public scrutiny , and there you have a responsibility to our citizens , whose capacity for assimilating refugees has limits - limits that you consistently disregard here .
Tomorrow , then , we will be putting our amendments to a vote by roll call in order to expose your hypocrisy to the public gaze .
Let me turn now to the report . There is nothing new about your proposal to expand the definition of ' refugee ' far beyond what is contained in the Geneva Convention .
Hitherto , this has always been rejected by us , by the Council , and even by the minister in Germany 's red / green government .
If you have your way , people receiving subsidiary protection will be treated in almost the same way as recognised asylum seekers .
That , though , is quite nonsensical .
In Germany , we have known refugees from civil wars not to apply for asylum , because , as a rule , they want to return to their country once the civil war there has ended .
Integration in the host country is not for them , nor do they want it in the least .
Anyone who demands compulsory schooling for the children of these refugees must need his state of mind examined .
Most of these children speak not a word of the host country 's language , and you want to have their status reviewed only after five years instead of after one !
I can imagine no situation in which the conditions giving entitlement to subsidiary protection are present five years running .
No , different groups need different arrangements , and so the Council is right to call for two different approaches .
Why does this directive again concern itself with the reunification of families ?
After the first flop that you and the Commission produced here , I wonder if you , Commissioner , are working on a new holistic approach ?
So what is it to be - an integrated approach or rules in every single proposal ?
I do not doubt that the Council will chuck this proposal in the dustbin as well .
You , though , will in future prefer to talk about open coordination , and will thereby conceal the fact that a European asylum system has been a failure , a failure you yourself provoked .
Your proposals have a damaging effect on European integration .
We reject them and support the amendments tabled by our - and your - chairman , Mr Hernández Mollar .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is surprising , considering what is happening today in Belgium , to hear so much criticism of the Commission proposal . Indeed , in my view , it is a great credit to the European Union and this House .
We must bear in mind that , in the year 2000 , 389 000 people made asylum applications , spread throughout the 15 Member States .
Perhaps we should show a degree of humanity and realise that , behind all the speeches that we make in this Chamber , there are men , women and children who are fleeing persecution and conflicts or who are seeking to escape from a life of poverty and deprivation .
Have we already forgotten that it is as a result of what we have experienced here in Europe in times of war that we have built up what now constitutes and justifies our presence in this House ?
In our States in crisis , since the events of 11 September , those seeking asylum and international protection have been perceived by many as a threat to law and order , to social stability and even , in some cases , to national security .
It is our duty , because we have a duty to remember , because it is the very justification for our existence , because we are essentially a democratic body which defends human rights , to give everyone a chance and to stop the European Union becoming a ' Fortress Europe ' which is closed to the rest of the world .
Following on from other reports already adopted by Parliament , I believe that the proposal before us today makes it possible to establish something that is a real credit to us , in other words an area of freedom , security and justice .
Furthermore , in order to introduce some coherence between the regulations and laws of the Member States and to define a platform for common standards , we are establishing , through this proposal for a directive , minimum standards on the definition and scope of the status of refugee .
Let this be clear : the minimum standards are not aligned with the lowest common denominator , they do not make it possible to do a U-turn and to seal up Europe , the very place where the Geneva Convention was conceived - it is necessary to point this out again ?
The main victims of violence , trafficking and mutilation are women and girls .
It is necessary , in particular , to ensure that they benefit from assistance , protection and services , and , at the same time , to make these women , who are at the greatest risk from discrimination in their countries of origin , less easy prey for traffickers of human beings or pimps , who deceive them with the offer of trips or visits to our countries .
That is why this proposal for a directive , which seeks , furthermore , to protect these women and children , must enable them to exercise their rights , must enable them to make an asylum application , must enable them to expose the specific forms of persecution that they have endured , because these are , first and foremost , attacks on respect for fundamental rights .
It is this , discussions on directives such as this , which justify our continued presence in this Chamber .
Mr President , three years ago , the Tampere European Council gave the initial impetus to a common European asylum and immigration policy .
The objective was to have common rules adopted that would make the EU into an area of freedom , security and justice .
That was the point of departure .
Three years after the Tampere meeting , we must now take a practical stand on an important step towards fulfilling that vision .
Those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are satisfied that our attitudes have been taken into account in the work of the committee .
In our view , it is a coherent and well-balanced report that has been presented for debate here in the Chamber .
It is important that we obtain common minimum standards for refugees .
If the rules are to be effective , it is also important for all the Member States to have a common definition of what a refugee is .
I am pleased that the report contains general rules for determining whether or not international protection is properly justified .
Today , a number of the Member States have problems related to asylum and immigration policy .
Each year , a large number of illegitimate asylum seekers enter the EU .
They are a burden on the whole system and a drain upon those resources that could be used for the benefit of those who have real needs .
Illegal immigration and people smuggling must be combated , but genuine refugees must be helped .
It is this balance for which we must strive and which , in my opinion , the report makes possible .
An important prerequisite of its being possible to put this proposal into practice is that we obtain a common definition of refugees with subsidiary protection status .
It must be based upon relevant international conventions such as the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and the UN Convention Against Torture .
I support making the concept of subsidiary protection status a part of the common refugee policy .
Asylum policy is one thing , however , and integration something else .
It is important for third country nationals to be given the opportunity of making headway with their lives in their new countries .
That is something which quite a few EU countries know already .
For example , Denmark and Sweden have set to work on active integration policies .
The proposal has elements relating to common rights for third country nationals with legal residence in the EU , and these rights must form the basis of a sensible and necessary integration policy .
Overall , the report takes a balanced view of the problems with which we are confronted , and I hope that it will be able to attract a broad majority in Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to start by saying how necessary it is to lay the foundations for a policy shared by all the Member States on immigration strategies , on combating illegal immigration and therefore on a common definition of the right to asylum too .
In particular , as regards the right to asylum , many Member States complain that the amount of applications they receive is excessive , condemning the attempts of some asylum applicants to abuse asylum procedures in order to get round Member States ' immigration laws .
Indeed , it is essential to make a clear distinction between immigration , illegal immigration , the trafficking and exploitation of human beings and the right to asylum , the latter being a right which must retain its valuable , specific status as a human right which must be safeguarded .
From this point of view , the report , pursuing what is supposed to be an open , progressive line of reasoning , widens the definition of the right to asylum - a fundamental right which , as such , cannot have too wide a definition - excessively and inappropriately , first and foremost because those requesting protection and those requesting the status of refugee are , in practice , placed on the same level , and secondly , because the report proposes too wide a definition of the right to asylum granted subsequently to family members too .
Indeed , family members eligible for international protection include same-sex partners and partners ' children , and likewise , when it comes to minors , members of a minor 's family other than the minor 's actual parents can be considered to be their parents , and they therefore do not necessarily have to have lived together with the applicant in their country of origin .
Therefore , unless amendments are adopted which make substantial changes to the text , particularly with a view to reducing the scope of the definition of ' family member ' in the context of the right of family reunification , my group will vote against the motion .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the Commission and Commissioner Vitorino on their sound proposal .
I have one point of criticism .
The Commission proposes an asylum system that includes a refugee status and a subsidiary protection status .
It thus creates the possibility of treating persons with refugee or subsidiary protection status differently .
Given the importance of equal treatment of persons in the EU Member States , it would have been preferable if the Commission had not drawn this distinction .
Fortunately , the directive in question concerns minimum harmonisation and Member States may go further when they transpose the directive into national legislation .
They are free to give persons with a subsidiary protection status equal treatment .
The Lambert Report is keen to extend the Commission 's proposal .
Although meant well , the proposed amendments will , in my view , in fact , hamper the proper implementation of the directive on account of their subjective content .
Accordingly , an asylum seeker must be given the benefit of the doubt when he makes conflicting statements as a result of traumatic experiences .
In evaluating whether fear of persecution is real , consideration must be given to the gender , sexual identity , sexual orientation and health of the refugee and the habits and customs in a country .
The Member States should retain a certain level of policy freedom .
In addition , a workable system requires that the officials who carry out the policy should have a certain level of discretion .
The proposals tabled by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs unnecessarily restrict this discretion .
They will at best lead to more bureaucracy and less freedom in the assessment of individual cases .
I will therefore not be endorsing these proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , I share the view that the directive to be drafted here is a fundamental one , and it is our common opinion that asylum law is in urgent need of harmonisation .
Between the rapporteur 's approach and that of the European People 's Party , however , there are fundamental differences .
What are these differences ?
You propose a common approach to dealing with subsidiary protection and the protection accorded to refugees .
We are opposed to that ; we want separate directives .
You propose extension of protection far beyond the bounds set by the Geneva Convention .
We want the Geneva Convention retained .
You want to take family reunification much further than consensus in this House has previously allowed .
We want the nuclear family .
You want to grant subsidiary protection , for five years and with a residence permit , immediately .
That does not make sense , so we want protection to be given for as long as it is reasonably needed .
So it is that the measures you are presenting here do not ensure that help is speedily given to real refugees under the Geneva Convention , but rather incite the use of asylum for immigration by economic migrants , and that tends towards its misuse .
What we find lacking in the Lambert Report , though , are primarily calls for quick procedures enabling us to decide in the minimum of time who is a refugee and who has a chance of asylum .
At present , that amounts in any case to some 90 % of applicants for asylum .
Your report contains no reference to an EU-wide list of safe third states and states of origin .
It contains nothing about applicants being required to go back if they are not given permission to remain , nor does it contain measures to ensure that they do so .
Nor does it contain any demand for the European Union to conclude agreements with third countries , countries of origin and transit countries , to take applicants back .
Finally , it contains no firm demand that Dublin II be used to prevent asylum shopping .
In so many respects does this report contradict our thinking that I have to say that the European People 's Party is unable to support it unless the relevant changes are made .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's draft directive is meant to provide a minimum level of protection in the Member States for such third-country nationals as are actually in need of protection .
This implies , though , that secondary migration , in other words , the misuse of asylum to which Mr Vitorino referred , will thereby be kept under control .
So , Mrs Lambert , the prime requirement when it comes to dealing with economic migrants is support for impoverished countries , in order to prevent human resources from haemorrhaging away through emigration and to promote economic growth with a better quality of life for the people .
The subject of asylum is seen as sensitive in all the Member States , as is shown by the fact that it has been impossible , to date , to get any of the previous draft directives on this subject adopted by the Council .
I therefore regard the rapporteur 's approach , which involves extending the already very far-reaching Commission proposal still further , as being quite utterly wrong .
It may soothe our own conscience to grant asylum also on economic grounds , but it does not help this Parliament to be taken seriously in our Member States .
The proposals for extending the scope of asylum to citizens of the European Union show how some MEPs regard ideologies as more important than sensible solutions .
Solutions , though , are what the citizens of our countries have every right to expect .
We and the people in our Member States are of one mind in believing that those who are persecuted must be given humanitarian aid .
This does not mean , however , that the granting of asylum can solve all this world 's social , economic or environmental problems .
On the contrary , that leads to the great benefit of the right to asylum being nullified .
We , the representatives of the people , have the task of finding pragmatic solutions , on the one hand for the European Union , and on the other for the asylum-seekers .
A forward-looking asylum policy in the EU must also take into account the circumstances and needs of the people in our Member States .
The report before us does nothing of the sort , and so the PPE-DE Group rejects it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's plenary has been studying various proposals to establish a common European asylum system , thereby pursuing the aim of gradually developing a genuine area of freedom , security and justice , which must be open to persons who , in various circumstances , legitimately seek protection in our Community .
Recently , at the Estoril meeting , the PPE-DE Group attached importance to these matters by holding their own seminar on this issue , the conclusions of which were reproduced a short while ago by Mr Pirker .
We agree with a common asylum policy that contains minimum rules designed to ensure a minimum level of protection for persons in genuine need of it .
We also agree with the aim of restricting the secondary movements of asylum seekers by reducing the differences that exist between the legislation and practices of the various Member States in this field , as well as imposing a fair division of efforts between the States .
We also agree that refugees , like any persons benefiting from other forms of protection , should be able to live with dignity in the Community of which they are a part , which can only happen if we protect their personal and social rights .
In these matters , however , it is better to move slowly and appropriately rather than rapidly and get things wrong .
Policies that appear to be very generous end up creating feelings of rejection and increasing xenophobic reactions that we can only condemn .
Even following 11 September , we have seen , amongst the public , suspect attitudes and increasing hostility towards asylum seekers , refugees and immigrant communities .
From this point of view , we must acknowledge that the Lambert Report has not helped to generate the consensus that would be useful and desirable in these matters .
Without wishing to dramatise , Mr President , this proposal contains a core of minimum standards that reveal the legislative courage to respond effectively to the issue of citizens of third countries in need of international protection , at the same time eliminating national differences in the way in which persons are treated , avoiding the need for secondary movements .
This , at least , is our view .
I therefore wish to highlight an extremely positive aspect of the Commission proposal , which is the complementarity of the dual status of international protection in which , in addition to the narrow approaches of the 1950s , the concept is extended to subsidiary protection , clarifying the concept of the perpetrators of persecution not limited solely to the State and its agents but also to material circumstances and others in which the outcome is that the State does not give protection , either because it cannot or because it does not want to , and we can all recall such situations in Africa and in Latin America .
We also have the concept 's inclusion of the protection organisations of stable quasi-State authorities , which must be held responsible in practical terms for the protection of individuals who fall outside the scope of simple peace or military security missions , which often relegate into second place the effective protection of individuals and respect for human rights .
Lastly , extending refugees ' rights in terms of periods of residence , employment and integration mechanisms , which concern every aspect of refugees ' citizenship .
The violence arising from poverty and from other social scourges is not included but I hope that this will be covered in future by means of a broader concept of common asylum policy .
For the moment , however , a good part of the ground has been covered , as have the bases for a common European asylum policy .
The Commission should , in our opinion , be congratulated on its work , but the Council must not continue to defraud us , demonstrating its congenital inability to take a decision , as is traditional and as usually happens in these matters .
Nor , Commissioner , will the Council be receiving from this House , from this Parliament , an endorsement for its inefficiency , ineffectiveness and for failing to vote .
Mr President , I should like to respond to a few of the points that have been raised in the debate this evening .
The first point concerns Mr von Boetticher 's contribution , the first of the right-wing Christian Democrat hit-and-run contributors .
He hits out at the left in the Parliament , he hits out at the governments in the United Kingdom and Germany , and then he runs out of the Chamber so that he cannot hear the debate .
He runs away from the debate and he runs away from the reality .
The reality is that there are millions of people in the world who are seeking sanctuary in the European Union .
It is a situation that needs a sympathetic response .
It needs Member States to look at the situation and to try to address the position with compassionate moves .
This is why my group on this side of the Chamber makes no apologies for supporting a common European asylum policy , believing that it is the only way forward for the European Union .
I say to those Members opposite who say they are going to vote against these measures tomorrow and who , like Mr Coelho and Mrs Klamt , have said nice things about a common European asylum policy : you cannot say nice things about it on one occasion and then , every time there is a vote , vote it down .
Mr Pirker has spelled out the objections but it is not being consistent when one Member of your group , Mr Helmer , is writing that they should end the automatic rights or end the Geneva Convention and end the automatic right of entry for those deemed to be suffering from persecution .
We need to be absolutely clear where they are coming from .
On this side we are quite clear in our approach .
We will support this report .
We very much believe that there need to be minimum standards .
There need to be proper standards for asylum seekers , to recognise that they are invariably desperate people seeking desperate measures to escape from the appalling situations in their own countries .
We should be compassionate in the role that we seek to play .
We should be compassionate in our reports .
That is why I am very happy to commend the rapporteur on this and to congratulate the Commissioner for bringing it forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for this debate , which has raised some extremely important questions , to which I should like to respond .
Firstly , the Commission unequivocally defends the primacy of the implementation of the 1951 Geneva Convention , which is binding on all Member States .
We have also covered rules on subsidiary protection and , on this matter , I should like to put Mr Berthu 's mind at ease : we have created nothing new ; this is not the invention of a Commissioner 's Machiavellian mind .
Subsidiary protection is already in place in our fifteen Member States .
It arises from international commitments given by these countries , for example , when they signed up to the European Convention on Human Rights , specifically the criteria laid down in its Article 3 .
With regard to the scope of this directive , I should like to say that the Commission does not accept the proposals for amendments tabled by some Members , seeking to add new grounds or to add an exhaustive list of exclusion clauses for the definition of a refugee under the Geneva Convention .
We cannot accept these because the European Union does not have the authority to amend the content of the Geneva Convention .
It can only be amended with the agreement of the 150 States that are parties to it .
This process has been opened by the United Nations High Commissioner but we are not in a position unilaterally to amend the Convention .
Similarly , we believe that the proposals on procedural guarantees , as generous as they are , should not be included in this directive .
The issue of procedures should be dealt with in the proposal on that subject , on which the Commission has tabled an amended proposal .
By the same token , I wish to say to Mr Pirker that this is not the proper place in which to deal with issues of return , the Dublin II Regulation , or cooperation with third countries .
These issues are important , I agree with you - and the Commission will be working on them , as indicated at the Seville Council .
Last week , therefore , the Commission tabled four new proposals for negotiating readmission agreements with Turkey , Algeria , Albania and the People 's Republic of China .
Over a year ago , the Commission presented a regulation on which State should be held responsible for studying asylum requests , known as the ' Dublin II Regulation ' , which , I hope , will be concluded by the end of this year and the Commission will , in November , present its action plan for returns policy , as well as a framework for financial action for cooperation with third countries in the fight against illegal immigration .
With regard to the issue of equal rights amongst refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection , the Commission believes that the rights pertaining to the beneficiaries of these two different types of protection must be the same .
We feel , however , that there should be a ' cooling-off ' period and , therefore , we proposed that there should be a distinction , precisely in order to acknowledge the primacy of the implementation of the Geneva Convention .
Finally , why did we include subsidiary protection in this proposal ?
Let us be quite clear about this .
Today , in all Member States of the European Union , the majority of persons receiving international protection do not receive this protection under the Geneva Convention but under systems of subsidiary protection .
And if we wish to combat secondary movements , if we wish to combat ' asylum shopping ' it would be of little value merely to include only the Geneva Convention .
The essence of ' asylum shopping ' , the essence of secondary movements lies in the competitiveness of subsidiary protection systems , to which we can add - please forgive me for saying so , ladies and gentlemen - that it is unfair to accuse the Commission of extending the concept of economic refugees by means of subsidiary protection .
On the contrary , only by dealing with the harmonisation of subsidiary protection will it be possible to adopt the so-called single procedure , which has been welcomed , as a matter of fact , by an increasing number of Member States , in which requests for asylum are studied in order of priority in a single administrative process and are subject to a single final decision .
This is known as ' streamlining procedures ' .
This is a way of rationalising procedures that saves time , administrative means and money without having to provide unnecessary resources .
Finally , Mr President , Mr von Boetticher claimed that I bear a major responsibility for this matter and in doing so paid me a compliment which I really do not deserve .
It is not the Commission proposals that are blocking the Council 's decision-making ability .
I must tell you sincerely that this is an area in which the Member States have initiative of legislation .
Can Mr von Boetticher have asked himself why if , in these matters , the Commission proposals are as bad as he says , no Member State has tabled a proposal that has rapidly achieved the consensus of the fifteen Member States and has been adopted ?
This is an issue which I believe is relevant .
The only innovation in this proposal , admittedly , is to extend the concept of cause of persecution to cover persecution by non-State actors .
This is true .
This is the situation in thirteen of the fifteen Member States , and has recently also been incorporated into German law .
Am I really the most appropriate target for Mr von Boetticher 's words ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I first wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld , who has studied this matter , to which she has dedicated considerable energy and commitment here in Parliament .
As she points out , hacking , viruses and denial of service can have very serious consequences , both as a result of individuals acting in their own interests and as part of organised crime or terrorism .
The Commission proposal aims to approximate criminal offences of unauthorised access or illegal interference with information systems and follows consultation with professional sectors and with the authorities responsible for implementing the law , as well as discussions with experts in the European Union forum on cybercrime .
The Commission is seeking to establish a degree of approximation in legislation at European level , but which is in line and coherent with the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention of November 2001 .
Article 3 of our proposal defines unauthorised access to an information system as an offence .
What we are attempting to do is to punish hacking .
Such unauthorised access must be punished when perpetrated against an information system that is subject to specific protection measures or with the intent to cause damage to a singular or collective person , or with the intention of obtaining economic benefit .
Equally , we are making illegal interference with information systems a crime , thereby addressing the issue of attacks by means of viruses and denial of service as well as the disruption of websites .
The Commission proposal requires all offences to be committed in an intentional and unauthorised way and focuses above all on serious cases , the criteria for decisions on which must be decided on by the judges of the courts in each Member State .
The proposal caters for aggravating circumstances and also seeks to force Member States to designate operational points of contact , available around the clock and seven days a week , with a view to facilitating the exchange of information on attacks against information systems .
The Commission considers that the rapporteur is entirely right to emphasise that the actions to be punished should not be considered to be insignificant or minor .
Recital 12 of the Commission proposal therefore suggests that we must avoid excessive criminalisation , particularly for behaviour which is not very serious or which is even insignificant .
The Commission agrees , for example , with the proposal for an amendment tabled by the rapporteur on this issue .
With regard to the issue of data protection under the third pillar , we are working on this matter , but I would like to ask Parliament not to suspend implementation of this proposal for a framework decision until there is a specific instrument to protect data under the third pillar .
Instead , I think that specific reference must be made to respect for the principles established in the Council of Europe Convention on Data Protection , which must be fully complied with in this field of the framework decision 's implementation .
As a matter of fact , this was the solution adopted for the issue of the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
I wish to thank the rapporteur once again for her contribution to this important debate which , I believe , has been much hoped for by public opinion in the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , we have followed each other 's efforts for many years in the fight against cybercrime and no doubt have many basic values in common .
Mr Vitorino knows as well as I do that we are concerned here with a framework directive .
Because the European Parliament has significantly weaker decision-making powers than it ought to have where framework directives are concerned , I would take this opportunity to draw attention to this deficiency , as I also did in the case of the point raised by Mr Vitorino when commenting upon the amendment .
I understand his point of view very well , but it is from our position here in Parliament that we must exert pressure on the Convention and on developments , for what we have here are extremely worrying threats to our common union .
There is information to the effect that criminal organisations have infiltrated vital infrastructures .
They have obtained access to digital circuit-breakers , which means that electricity and water can be switched off and transport brought to a halt .
In particular , there have been incidents in the area of aviation that have affected the operation of control towers .
Terrorists could switch off both gas and water , increasing the damage caused in connection with a physical attack .
That is , of course , a situation that we must do everything to avert .
We are concerned here with cross-border crime .
The Commission 's proposal is a good one .
I admire Mr Vitorino for his ability to present sound proposals , in spite of the defective framework he has to work within .
The idea of these minimum / maximum penalties that we traditionally use for harmonisation purposes is sensible and fair .
It may also put an end to the type of ' legal shopping ' , which we cannot of course encourage , in which criminals have the option of being sentenced in countries that have lower penalties .
We are also concerned here with intent .
That too is abundantly clear , which I think is very commendable .
There must be intent , the purpose being to cause damage or to procure an economic benefit .
I think that this is a proper approach .
I approve of the spirit of the Commission 's work , but I want to repeat that the decision-making process is unacceptable .
The EC Court of Justice has no competence in the area of the third pillar .
The current system causes democratic rights to be neglected .
Human rights lie outside the jurisdiction of the Court .
That is why I give extra special emphasis to this in an amendment , something which Mr Vitorino too surely understands .
The crimes in question can have long-term consequences , and they have direct effects upon people 's private lives .
We must obtain democratic control , and I should therefore like this legislation to begin to apply from the day on which we have proper protection in this area and also data protection in the area of the third pillar .
That is something I should obviously like to see right now .
I fully appreciate that the operational contact points have to be set up .
I do not want to slow things down in any way , but I want to give some impetus to democratic development .
That is as far as we can get with today 's decision-making system .
I hope , however , that a new constitution will mean our sorting out these issues and really being able to obtain a legitimate system .
Commissioner Vitorino has already made positive comments about the amendments .
That also applies to the subtle attitude to legal persons .
I am also pleased that we have a common position where minors are concerned .
I want to conclude by thanking all my fellow MEPs .
I have tried to strike a balance involving as effective an assault upon crime as possible . At the same time , I have tried , within our present framework , to raise the profile of human rights and the protection of privacy .
I want the Convention to feel it is under pressure , which is why I have written in this way .
That is something which Mr Vitorino surely understands , and I hope that he will help exercise this pressure .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Cederschiöld on the excellent report she has presented , which the European People 's Party supports and will vote for .
We are facing a problem of considerable topical interest , which has assumed worrying dimensions and which has today become a form of organised crime , with a transnational nature , which must be responded to at Community level , because the new information and communication technologies have a fundamental impact on the daily life of the citizens and on the economy of our societies .
It is therefore crucial that there should be rigorous protection against potential abuses or criminal acts .
Hacking , in whatever form , is an economic risk , risks a loss of confidence in electronic commerce and also poses a threat to individual privacy .
The targets of these attacks are not only network operators , Internet service providers and electronic commerce businesses , but also private persons who have no commercial intentions .
The protection of information systems is a crucial element in creating an area of freedom , security and justice .
We must , however , guarantee that no restrictions are imposed on fundamental rights and freedoms , that fundamental principles of law are not changed and that individual acts that take place purely as a result of mistakes in the use of new technologies are not punished .
As I have already said in this plenary , security is and must be only one tool for safeguarding these fundamental rights and freedoms .
The Cederschiöld Report contains five essential points : firstly , the approximation of criminal law in the Member States in the field of attacks against information systems ; secondly , stepping up police and judicial cooperation in this field ; thirdly , enhancing prevention , promoting a culture of security , making actors aware of security risks to information networks ; fourth , the existence of flexibility in criminal law on unimportant issues or those of lesser importance , thereby avoiding imposing binding , criminalising measures at European level ; fifthly and lastly , and this demonstrates special consideration for young people , to allow judges the possibility to acquit minors who are charged for the first time with this type of offence , and who did not commit this misdemeanour with the intent of causing damage or procuring an economic benefit or creating prospective profits for a criminal organisation .
Mr President , despite the excellent work of Mrs Cederschiöld , who has made considerable improvements to the Commission proposal , we will vote against the motion , for there are at least four basic problems whose importance cannot and must not be underestimated : firstly , the typically European obsession with over-regulating the Internet with specific laws ; secondly , the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice based on the harmonisation of permitted terms of imprisonment ; thirdly , the excessive control measures which automatically criminalise all behaviour which could be described as an attack against information systems ; and fourthly , the illusion that it is possible to clamp down on crime by making sentences harsher rather than by improving the effectiveness of controls .



Basically , we believe that it would be preferable to address the issue of crimes committed on the Internet with criminal law instruments already in existence rather than producing piles of specific legislation based on technological considerations which , moreover , would be characterised by the flaws which I have mentioned .
These are the reasons why we will be voting against the motion .
These problems were essentially also raised by Mrs Cederschiöld and Mr Coelho , but we feel they are vitally important and cannot be ignored .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , data processing and information transfer , and the assurance that these activities can be free from interference , are vitally important in today 's information society .
Who of us has not been afraid a virus might have got into their computer or actually suffered damage caused by a computer virus ?
Viruses can have unforeseen consequences for those using computers .
Examples might include data altered or destroyed by a virus in air traffic control systems or in files held by healthcare units such as the intensive care department of a hospital .
This could have fateful consequences for both individuals and large numbers of people .
Computer viruses in the future could cause legal uncertainty on a large scale and prevent electronic commerce and people 's private business from being transacted electronically by sabotaging the reliability of electronic documents .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , our efforts to promote electronic commerce , for example , by creating the necessary legislative frameworks , will be in vain if these systems are not dependable .
I am very concerned about the opinions of experts who say that those who are creating new viruses these days are less and less those who are just playing around .
At first viruses were turned out by schoolchildren and students , who produced them mainly for fun and publicity , but more and more frequently viruses can destroy hard disks and all installed programs .
According to the experts macro viruses already account for 80 % of all viruses .
People want to protect their privacy from intruders .
I therefore agree with the views expressed earlier that hacking is turning into one form of organised crime , one that must be prevented particularly in the international context , because it is , by its very nature , a cross-border crime .
The Commission proposal to prevent attacks against information systems and for the approximation of criminal law measures taken by Member States is thus a step in the right direction .
Finally I want to thank our colleague , Charlotte Cederschiöld , for the valuable work she has done .
I especially agree with her observation that the Union still has not enough data protection rules to deal with third pillar matters .
The European Parliament on many an occasion has called for such rules to be drawn up , and I would urge the Commission to commence drafting them immediately .
Mr President , I wish to say that , in the Commission , we are not simply obsessed with issues of suppressing crime ; there are many other initiatives underway in this field ; in prevention , security , and encryption and in guaranteeing the privacy of information systems .
This was not the subject of this debate , which is why I did not refer to our actions in this field , but was taking them for granted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , I speak as shadow rapporteur on behalf of my group .
We congratulate Mrs Frays on her report and will broadly support its adoption .
We have tabled two amendments which we hope the House will accept .
The report constitutes a useful analysis of measures to encourage theatre and the performing arts throughout the EU , particularly focusing on the need for mobility .
Presaging the enlarged EU , the rapporteur 's explanatory statement notes that the candidate countries could not support cultural programmes through the PHARE and TACIS programmes but that artistic cooperation has been enhanced through the THEOREM programme , by which they gained access to the Culture 2000 programme last year , as Commissioner Reding has just reminded us .
In Mrs Fraisse 's speech she drew attention to the need for vision and coherence in cultural matters in the EU and particularly in the enlarged EU .
I very much support that .
It is timely , following the Commission 's announcement of approval for the ten candidate countries to accede to the EU and this weekend 's referendum in Ireland , which cleared a potential obstacle to the enlarged EU .
The EU 's character is going to change very dramatically , particularly with the accession of the Central and East European countries .
Culture surely has a huge role to play in this respect .
To what extent does the existing programme deal with the years of collective amnesia in Western Europe , perhaps not so much in Germany and Austria , where there were always historical and family links , but in other countries where the shadow of the iron curtain still exists .
Bearing in mind Mrs Fraisse 's call for vision and coherence , have we really done enough to bring home to the public in the present EU what completing the European family is going to mean , in the theatre and performing arts as well as other cultural fields ?
When Stalin outlined his project for Central and Eastern Europe , Winston Churchill 's reply was ' the eagle must let the small bird sing ' .
I wonder whether we feel today that all the institutions of the EU have done enough to let the small bird sing .
Mr President , I too should like to take my turn in congratulating the rapporteur for having made a quantum leap and married her vision to political considerations , a rare feat indeed here .
We all want a revival of the arts , and the performing arts in particular , and we feel that enlargement really will allow us to enter a new era in Europe .
I am sure that each and every one of us , like the Commissioner , is eager to contribute to this revival in our own way , by providing a number of political tools .
I have to say that the report , which I made a point of sending to numerous theatrical agencies in Greece , has excited a great deal of interest and they are waiting to see how tomorrow 's vote goes and who votes against it .
I think that political intervention to bring about an area of performing arts is extremely important and I just have one or two comments to make .
Commissioner , I know that you are not responsible , but the statistics are so late , they are causing confusion and muddying the waters .
We need these statistics and your support is important here .
It is also important for dramatic works to be translated .
They cannot appear first in book form and then as translations .
Dramatic works really do need to circulate among artists as translations if they are to travel .
And finally , the whole situation is in a state of flux .
We have a Canadian initiative on international cultural collaboration , we have the ongoing discussion within the World Trade Organisation , and we shall have to wait and see how these situations develop .
So we have to harness our vision to political ideas which will bring about a cultural policy which revives rather than renationalises the performing arts , a policy that offers specific ways of making our dreams come true for European culture .
Since time immemorial , people have been involved in theatre in one form or other , and each nationality has developed it own preferences and forms of expression .
I would therefore like to thank Mrs Fraisse for her initiative to map out the state of affairs with regard to performing arts in the EU and the candidate countries .
Given the wide area and the many variations in the different countries , it is a valiant and successful effort .
Nevertheless , I should like to make a few observations .
Firstly , theatre exists by the grace of its producers , directors and actors , and I should like to add the theatre-going public to this list , for without an audience , there is no theatre .
Many theatres and theatre forms have followers who unite in one way or another in ' friends of ? ' , and I believe that they too deserve a mention when the topic of supporting the dramatic arts is mooted .
They offer incentives , information and bring theatre to the attention of a wide public .
This aspect is , sadly , missing from the report .
Secondly , I should also like to expressly draw your attention to the role of information technologies in modern theatre .
Modern theatre productions increasingly incorporate modern technology in their performances .
This trend deserves our attention and must certainly be included in fresh theatre policy , for it indeed pertains to a typically European task in the field of innovation .
Thirdly , my group has major objections to the appeal for more financial support .
We believe that enough attention is being given to this aspect by ' Culture 2000 ' , the structural funds and the Socrates and Leonardo programmes , upon which the Commissioner , in fact , enlarged .
Finally , more tax allowances for the mobility of those who are culturally active is a taboo subject in my group .
We agree that double taxation is naturally exaggerated , but the award of special tax allowances would be a reason for us to abstain from Mrs Fraisse 's entire report during the final vote .
Mr President , Mrs Zorba , Commissioner , on the contrary , theatre is not dead .
It has been pronounced dead at regular intervals ever since it came into being .
It lives !
Deserving protection as the biotope of every democratic society , the theatre lives not only thanks to the antics of its exponents , but also thanks to public interest and childlike curiosity , and thanks to national policies .
We all know that this responsibility is borne by the Fifteen , soon to be twenty-five and more .
Like Mr Beazley and others who have spoken before me , I wonder whether everyone is truly aware of the enormous political and delicate task that we have been set to do .
The business world has galloped on ahead , but the EU 's citizens are still tottering along behind integration .
Europe must help where it can .
Let me first thank you , Geneviève Fraisse , for your initiative , and for this wonderful report .
If , within the internal market framework , we enact laws relating to culture , we must also make full use of every instrument at our disposal in the service of the many kinds of theatre - whether houses rich in tradition , buildings commandeered for alternative uses , streets between Lisbon and Helsinki , Athens and London - to protect this diversity , helping it to develop further and come to full bloom .
This will call for a shared effort on the part of all of us .
It is primarily to the Member States that I appeal .
We have to do away with fiscal discrimination as part of European mobility policy and as an essential contribution to integration .
We have to exploit to the utmost all the options that the framework of the sixth VAT directive offers us and win over the media , for they - especially the public broadcasting institutions - are our partners .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your observations .
Take this report as a mandate and as a support .
Do not let it gather dust in a drawer ; it is too valuable to be eaten away by moths .
No holes in the Budget are stopped if we cut back on art and culture ; we are just the poorer thereby .
Mr President , I am not going to speak to you about those working in the entertainment industry on short-term contracts , the number of which has doubled in France in five years and has reached the incredible figure of 90 000 , and whom the rapporteur is trying to federate . I shall , instead , speak about pluralism in French television , particularly as far as the so-called public service networks are concerned .
We must do everything necessary so that these television channels , which receive more than EUR 2 billion in subsidies from the French Government every year , at last respect the principles that are at the very core of their public service duty , in other words , the principles of democracy and respect for all political opinions .
I am speaking of the so-called journalists and big prize-budget producers who are behaving in the manner of the worst campaigners of politically correct misinformation .
In this respect , the disgraceful behaviour of Antenne 2 and FR 3 between the two rounds of the French presidential election was unacceptable and flouts the most basic rules of the professional code of ethics of journalism .
It would be a great credit to the current government to impose the necessary penalties against the two or three presenters who were guilty of professional misconduct .
Lastly , in order to avoid confusion between journalism and propaganda in the future , each state or private television channel should organise a debate involving the main representative political views ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I assume that it had escaped Mr de Gaulle 's mind that our discussion today is on theatre rather than television or journalists .
I would prefer to speak to the matter on the agenda .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Fraisse and say something on just a couple of points that have not yet been mentioned today .
First of all , I am glad that a Member has taken up this matter again after an interval of ten years , in the course of which the issue has lost none of its topicality .
It was in 1992 that I produced a report on the state of artists , and I can only say that I still search in vain today for the practical results that the Commission could have brought about in these ten years .
Whilst believing that the topics addressed today are very multi-faceted , I would nonetheless like to limit myself to two things , the first being the way in which the cultural sector is financed at both national and European level .
It is the subject of politicians ' speeches , but does not give rise to political action , and it is for that reason that I believe much is still amiss in this area .
I would like to observe that there are two things that are in need of improvement .
Firstly , the Culture 2002 programme , to which Mrs Reding has already referred , has to have more money allocated to it ; if the Council of Ministers suddenly attaches such importance to culture , then it should provide funds for it .
In addition , we should also bear in mind that it is the performing arts that are popular with quite specific viewers and listeners .
So far , these are small-scale projects , for which the Commission has no love , but which we want because the public likes them !
Secondly , the private sector must be involved more than it has been before .
Patronage and sponsorship are important .
There are no Budget resources available , and so we have to look for ways to enable people with a lot of money to spend it in the right way .
That is why we should do more about this .
I regret the way that the coalition agreements in my own country mean that it is precisely this that is to be done away with .
Thirdly , artists face a very large number of technical obstacles in terms of the material they have to work with , and here in particular the Commission could really do something , for example , for circuses and small travelling theatres .
Please do something in this area ; it would be a great help to the performers !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Fraisse 's Report contains many positive points , which require answers at Community level if we persist in hoping that Commission policies will produce a genuinely European stamp for these projects .
Recital F rightly points out that the vitality of the theatre and performing arts should not depend chiefly on public subsidies .
It is , in fact , extremely important to boost the diversification of funding sources and to strengthen sponsorship policies , with the corresponding tax relief likely to attract sponsors .
It is also important , however , that the performing arts develop a satisfactory business dimension .
We live in a market economy and neither the State not the European Union should act as a wet nurse or a nanny for cultural creation .
There is no justification whatsoever for the performing arts as a rule to be directly supported by a system of public subsidy for productions .
It is more important for cultural creation to run the risks inherent to it and that public resources facilitate international promotion , distribution , greater accessibility of content through translation and subtitling and proper co-production , in the spirit of the ' Culture 2000 ' Programme .
There is , however , every reason why artistic training from childhood , as well as contact with cultural creation in all spheres - and therefore with the arts and performing artists - judiciously promoted from school onwards , should make a decisive contribution to finding new publics , which we can expect will lead to an increase in the demand for cultural consumption likely , at least in part , to sustain the corresponding supply .
What makes no sense is to reduce supply and funding for supply without seeing any significant growth in audiences , which are still lacking .
Let us hope that the Fraisse Report is also a step in this direction .
It was a misunderstanding .
I thought that you were asking to take the floor , when in fact you were applauding the rapporteur .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 9.50 p.m. )
Medicinal products
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy by :
Mrs Rosemarie Müller ( A5-0330 / 2002 ) on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products [ COM ( 2001 ) 404 - C5-0591 / 2001 - 2001 / 0252 ( COD ) ] ;
Mrs Françoise Grossetête ( A5-0340 / 2002 ) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use [ COM ( 2001 ) 404 - C5-0592 / 2001 - 2001 / 0253 ( COD ) ] ;
Mrs Françoise Grossetête ( A5-0334 / 2002 ) on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 82 / EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products [ COM ( 2001 ) 404 - C5-0593 / 2001 - 2001 / 0254 ( COD ) ] .
Commissioner Liikanen has the floor .
. Mr President , before briefly introducing the three Commission proposals , I would like to thank and congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs Müller and Mrs Grossetête , as well as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for all the work and effort they have put into finalising these three reports .
Let me start with the objectives of the proposals .
There are three .
First and foremost , to guarantee a high level of health protection for European citizens , and that is always the starting point .
Secondly , to increase the availability of innovative medicinal products and , at the same time , favour competition with generic products , and , thirdly , to prepare for enlargement , which will very soon become a reality .
As far as the concrete proposals are concerned , I will concentrate on three of them .
First , the need to reinforce the role of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency and the centralised procedure .
Why ?
Because the objective is to make new innovative medicines available to all EU citizens , at the same time .
This is a question of equality of all patients in Europe .
Thus , the Commission has proposed that the centralised authorisation procedure for all medicines containing new active substances be made mandatory .
This is the Community solution to the issue of innovation availability and I hope that this House will support it .
Additionally , this would produce economies of scale , save resources and time and , finally , lead to improved regulatory efficiency .
The Commission wants , especially in the enlarged EU , to ensure that patients have quicker access to innovative medicines .
The mutual recognition procedure has shown its limits .
The evaluation process at the London agency takes an average of 180 days - clearly fewer than the maximum of 210 days provided for in the legislation .
The centralised procedure would also be positive for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Let us take the example of biotechnology .
SMEs are very active in this field , where centralised authorisation is already mandatory .
Experience has not brought any major problems to light .
The benefits of a centralised procedure for SMEs are obvious in areas such as orphan drugs , where most of the marketing authorisations are granted to SMEs .
This said , the Commission could , with a view to an overall solution , seek supporting measures for SMEs if there are particular obstacles , to help SMEs overcome them .
Secondly , we need to find the right balance between innovation and competition from generics .
Why is this so important ?
To put it in a nutshell , we need innovative products for the benefit of patients and we need generics to help reduce the pressure on health care costs .
How then are these needs to be balanced ?
For innovative medicines , the Commission proposes a new data-protection period .
For generics , entry to the market will be speeded up .
How will this happen ?
First , the Commission proposes to harmonise the national data protection periods at 10 years across the board .
This will provide a harmonised solution for Europe .
The protection period will give the innovative pharmaceutical industry an opportunity to recover its R & D investments .
This will also allow for the smoother operation of the internal market .
To reward further innovation and research in new products , the proposal provides for a possible extension of the protection period up to 11 years .
For generics , the Commission proposes to change a long-standing EU policy .
We propose now , for the first time in EU legislation , that trials may begin on generics before the expiry of the patent or other form of intellectual property protection .
This will speed up the marketing of generics on most of the national markets and will substantially help to increase competition .
The Commission believes that this is a balanced proposal .
It takes account of the interests of the innovative European pharmaceutical industry , which is losing ground compared with the industry in the United States .
It means fewer jobs and less research in Europe unless we do things differently .
At the same time , it will facilitate the development of a competitive market in generics , and that means medicines at lower cost for European citizens .
Finally , I should like to say a few words about controlled access to information for patients .
I knew this would be a difficult discussion , but , first of all , the Commission is not proposing an American type of direct advertising to patients .
The discussions have concentrated to a large extent on the US model , but this is not our model .
The facts of the matter are that a lot of fragmented information is already available on the web , at least for English-speaking patients .
This has two major drawbacks : firstly , it discriminates against non-English-speaking people and , secondly , it means that the information can be piecemeal and unreliable .
Our proposal is that European citizens should obtain information that has been validated by European regulatory authorities and that follows guidelines to be agreed between the Member States and the Commission .
It is a prudent proposal .
It is a European pilot project , and has nothing in common with the US model .
The alternatives to what we have today are , on the one hand , the continuation of massive direct advising to patients via the web .
We cannot change this situation by our legislation .
The alternative is to enable patients to obtain sound information , validated by the competent European authorities , on medicines for a small number of diseases .
I think that this second option increases both choice and security for European patients .
In conclusion , the Commission proposals aim to guarantee a high level of public health to European citizens , to increase , in a balanced way , the availability of innovative medicinal products and generic products and also to be ready for enlargement .
This is a challenging piece of legislation .
I am looking forward to the debate in the House today and to continued cooperation with Parliament and the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in examining the legislation before us , we need to consider whether more EU involvement is needed when it comes to approving innovative medicinal products , or whether the mutual recognition procedure is the best approach .
In other words , do we want a more integrated internal market for medicinal products with a view to giving patients throughout Europe swifter access to new , safe and effective medicines , or is the idea that extremely complicated authorisation procedures should continue to keep new medicines out of patients ' hands for as long as possible ?
I would like to argue in favour of the wider registration of medical products with new active substances .
This has advantages not only for patients , but also for companies , because they can market medicines more quickly than up to now and thus enhance their competitiveness .
The support proposed for SMEs should compensate for the drawbacks of the centralised authorisation procedure , which do hit them .
As I see it , legislation should focus on patients and their needs .
That means that safety and the effectiveness of medical products must play a key role in the authorisation procedure .
The procedure must be transparent .
Patients , doctors and companies alike must therefore have access to any information not covered by business secrecy protection .
In future , comprehensive information on progress with the authorisation procedure , on clinical tests carried out and on side effects and the prices of medical products will be downloadable at any time from a public database .
In this connection , I regret that the Commission 's information project on asthma , diabetes and AIDS did not receive the support of a majority of the committee .
The Commission proposal was certainly ambiguous and gave rise to fears that advertising for prescription medicines was to be permitted .
However , the committee 's decision meant that an opportunity to improve patient information has been lost .
I feel sure that this ought to be put right over the next few years .
Pharmacovigilance , that is to say monitoring and reporting of side effects , is important to the safety of a medical product .
The obligation to report side effects and submit periodic reports to the authorisation authority ensures continuous comprehensive assessment of any given medical product .
There is a very effective safety net in the field of pharmacovigilance .
This makes it easier to ascertain side effects and makes it possible to act quickly in the event of a crisis .
For these reasons it will be possible to dispense with the procedure for relicensing products every five years .
Another key aspect of reform is the plan to prepare the boards and committees of the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products for their future remits and for the enlargement of the EU .
The structure of the EAEMP is intended to reflect that of the EU Food Safety Authority , with an open application procedure for the Management Board and the Executive Director .
Anyone wishing to become a member of one of the agency 's boards or committees should have a high degree of scientific expertise and must declare any relevant interests .
In addition to the existing scientific committees , there will in future be a committee for herbal medicinal products with the same status .
This will make voluntary central authorisation for herbal medicines possible , giving patients throughout Europe the option of using tried and tested herbal medicines .
In addition to health protection , which is important for patients , there is also the issue of competitiveness and innovation in Europe 's pharmaceutical industry .
The harmonisation of data exclusivity is certainly a step towards increased competitiveness .
Under the present arrangements , data exclusivity in Europe ranges from six to ten years , and this is in urgent need of harmonisation .
The 10-year-rule gives a signal to pharmaceutical companies to intensify research and market truly innovative products .
However , it also gives a signal to generic drug manufacturers to use the Bolar provisions .
As I see it , the Commission proposal is a successful attempt to strike a balance between the justifiable desire of pharmaceutical companies to protect their data and the need of public health systems to improve access to cost-effective generic drugs .
All in all , the legislation before us will make an important contribution to improving health protection in Europe , which will be of lasting benefit to patients .
Mr President , Commissioner , the subject that we are discussing today is one of the most important themes of our parliamentary term , since it ultimately concerns every European citizen .
Allow me , first of all , to thank all my fellow Members from all the political groups for the discussions that we have had and the work that they have performed via the 800 amendments .
In my opinion , there are rather too many amendments , which may be very detrimental to the quality and coherence of our work .
The main objective of the proposals is to ensure a high level of health protection for each citizen , particularly by providing rapid access to innovative and safe products , by developing a preventative and on-going system of pharmacovigilance , as well as by improving the competitiveness of the pharmaceutical industry within the framework of its search for new treatments .
We must not forget the essential boost which must be given to the generic medicinal products industry .
A medicinal product is a product unlike any other .
It is not purchased or consumed like an ordinary , everyday consumer item .
Its use is unique and everyone expects a medicinal product to be safe and to work effectively .
Safety , quality and efficacy are the three essential pillars of the European medicinal products market .
Before being made available to patients , medicinal products must pass through specific and restricted phases in order to obtain a marketing authorisation .
At present , there are two procedures for registering medicinal products : the centralised procedure , managed by the European Agency , under which authorisations valid for all EU Member States are issued , and the mutual recognition procedure , for which the Member States have jurisdiction .
It is not our intention to alter the existing dual structure ; the main task is to optimise the way it works .
In reality , the question raised concerns new , active substances .
We all agree that there is a difference between new active substances , which number almost 20 per year , and the new drugs , which amount to between 200 and 300 each year .
Therefore , the Commission is proposing to introduce the registration , by means of a centralised procedure , of new molecules , so as to ensure that everyone has access to the most innovative therapies .
Some Members wanted to question the principle .
I would like to say to them that we are faced with a critical choice .
You will choose between either health or the market .
By adopting the amendment which calls the scope into question , we must respond to the following : how do we explain to those who are ill that their European neighbours will be able to benefit from an innovative and effective treatment , but that they will have to wait a few years until the authorisation is granted to their country ?
Faced with this perspective , let us take an extreme case involving enlargement : citizens from Slovenia and Portugal could , for example , be treated with a new therapy , but a German or Cypriot citizen could not have access to it .
What do we do , in this case , as regards equality in the area of health ?
Some Members will say that the centralised procedure is costly for SMEs , but in the case of enlargement , the cost of 25 applications for market authorisation using the decentralised procedure will be much higher .
We are all mindful of the recent examples of medicinal products withdrawn from the market on public health grounds .
We know that the issuing of an authorisation for a medicinal product does not , however , mean that checks are no longer needed on its efficacy and safety .
It is thus essential to step up pharmacovigilance requirements , in order to offer patients the best possible guarantees , in other words with ad-hoc inspections at the source of manufacturing , using purely public funding , which is indispensable if independence is to be guaranteed and , lastly , by means of a rapid system for exchanging data collated by all the partners , which will make it possible to achieve coherence in pharmacovigilance systems between Member States .
In order to manufacture a medicinal product , the applicant first needs to carry out extensive research in order to discover new molecules .
We all know that innovation comes at a price .
Industry therefore needs to guarantee the protection of this data .
It is our duty to encourage research to ensure that science moves forward , hence the interest in retaining our best researchers .
We also need to ensure patient safety , but equally to prevent Europe 's industries from falling too far behind other countries , from the United States and Asia .
Of course , the usefulness of generic drugs has already been demonstrated .
They illustrate the success of our European health systems .
The introduction of adequate measures , therefore , particularly by means of the Bolar system will speed up their launch on to the market .
We must also remember that generic products are only developed due to innovation .
I am also expecting all the Member States to run an information campaign for the general public , in order to explain what a generic product is , whilst stressing it is the therapeutic equivalent of the reference medicinal product .
With regard , more specifically , to veterinary medicinal products , the main challenge is to contend with the problem of the availability of these medicinal products .
A balance has been sought between making some provisions more flexible , such as the ' cascade provisions ' and maintaining the highest level of safety for the consumer , in the case of food-producing animals .
When there is no medicinal product available for a condition or a given animal , the cascade system allows the use of medicinal products designed for other species , for other conditions or even the use of medicinal products for human use .
This system was improved and broadened for optimal effectiveness and safety .
The Commission is proposing to extend the compulsory prescription to all medicinal products designed for food-producing animals , which poses a problem for some Member States , including Ireland and the United Kingdom .
A compromise amendment , adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy makes this measure consistent with the national provisions .
Lastly , we cannot speak about the revision of European pharmaceutical legislation without addressing the issue of information and the Commission proposal , which seeks to provide authorisation , on an experimental basis , over five years . We must also address the communication , by industry , of information relating to specific medicinal products for the following conditions : asthma , AIDS and diabetes .
The medicinal products market is unique and our objective must not be to encourage maximum sales .
It is vital to maintain a very clear distinction between information and advertising and to place a strict ban on the latter .
There is no better information than that given by a doctor or a pharmacist .
Information systems , however , particularly via the Internet , have been widely developed and it appears quite unfair that only those who have access to the Internet and can speak English are able to gather this data , and not other people .
We must avoid , however , any move leading to the development of deceptive and misleading information that seeks to promote the prescription , sale or taking of a specific medicinal product .
The Committee on the Environment rejected the Commission proposal by a huge majority , as it was deemed to be overly ambiguous .
This unmitigated rejection poses a problem , however .
I hoped that the concepts of information and advertising would be better defined , and I proposed a system for the prior validation of the information by neutral scientific organisations .
This proposal could pave the way for the foundation of an exhaustive new study , which we are awaiting from the Commission .
On the other hand , there is an essential source of information . I am referring to package leaflets .
All the amendments tabled on this issue seek to improve the way they are written , to make them clearer and easier to understand .
This is a very positive point .
To sum up , I must stress the importance of enlargement .
We cannot deny the fact that the revision which will be adopted will apply to the incoming countries .
That is why I proposed , in particular , what I shall refer to as the ' euro-generic ' product .
Within some of the candidate countries and for historical or economic reasons , reference medicinal products have never been registered .
The updating of generic authorisations in accordance with European legal requirements in the candidate countries therefore requires the possibility of referring to a reference product .
The absence of such a product could pave the way for an obligation to withdraw generic medicinal products from the market , which nonetheless conform to the requirements of quality , security and effectiveness .
This is a situation which causes problems of access to generic medicinal products .
It therefore seems important that a reference medicinal product present in another Member State be able to serve as a reference .
Each new candidate country has an important role to play as a fully committed player in the integration and development of this ' Europe of health ' that we are all hoping and praying will be realised .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as permanent rapporteur for agencies in the Committee on Budgets , I have been following these reports , which regulate the operation of the London-based medical products agency , that is the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur and to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for having taken our suggestions on board in their reports .
There is , however , one thing I would to make very clear to this House , and this also applies of course to the Commission and the Member States .
If we are to give an agency new remits , then we also need to consider where the money for carrying out those tasks is to come from .
We cannot just keep increasing the size of an agency .
We have a General Budget that only provides us with a certain amount , and Parliament cannot top it up - we can only restructure it .
So if we wish to allocate financial means to an agency in future , we have to take those means away from another agency .
I know that I am not making myself popular by making these statements , but I am not here to be popular .
We need to bear in mind in future that an agency can only carry out the tasks assigned to it with the money at its disposal , and that it cannot act as it likes beyond that .
That is not possible , because we do not have the money for that .
Mr President , I should like to offer my congratulations to the two rapporteurs on an enormously complicated and difficult task .
They have highlighted - as will I - the importance of this industry a major employer of this industrial research base .
It is so important to keep in the European Union , both for the European Union and , above all , for consumers who want safe , effective and affordable medicines .
Added to that are the complex needs of the sectors in the industry , of which there are at least three : the in-patent sector , the generic sector and the over-the-counter sector .
Many of the amendments are seeking to strike the correct balance between them .
We have to encourage the in-patent sector to develop new medicines but the generic sector also provides affordable medicines .
If you add to this the whole question of access and affordability on a global scale , you can see just how complex an area this is .
I want to draw attention to just three points .
One is the authorisation procedure .
I am urging colleagues to accept duality , at least in the immediate future .
Mrs Grossetête perhaps needs to re-examine the whole question of the centralised procedure and access .
The fact that medicines are authorised does not mean that they are automatically placed on the market .
This applies particularly to veterinary medicines .
In their case I really believe that duality should continue .
On the question of advertising and consumer information , I urge Parliament to accept the amendment that asks the Commission to look again at this issue .
The Commission is right - information is available to some , but not to all .
That is almost beyond our control .
On data exclusivity , the balance that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has come up with is the right one .
I hope that Parliament will look at it sensibly .
We are going to have an important second reading and possibly a conciliation , so we still have time to try and get this even more right that we have done so far .
. ( IT ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Müller and Mrs Grossetête for their work and for the goodwill they have displayed in working on reports on subjects which are certainly difficult and complex for all but the experts .
The primary objective of all the institutions - Parliament , the Commission and the Member States - should be to introduce , at last , new legislation which is better than the previous legislation and which will provide all patients , including those suffering from serious , terminal illnesses , with as rapid access as possible to new medicinal products which are more powerful and easier to tolerate than existing medicinal products , to alleviate their suffering and extend and improve their quality of life .
In the short space of time available to me , I will focus on just a few points .
As regards the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products , I am completely opposed to the proposal regarding the membership of the management board .
A management board such as that proposed by the Commission , and by the rapporteur , Mrs Müller , too , would certainly be doomed to failure .
The presence on the management board of members representing the institutions and , in addition , of members with conflicting interests - such as industry , patients and insurance companies - would only lead to confusion , wasted time and major disputes .
The second point I would like to make concerns the centralised procedure , where evaluation is carried out by the European Agency .
The concept of ' new medicinal product ' needs to be better defined , Commissioner .
What is meant by the term ' new medicinal product ' ?
Does it refer to a medicinal product which has the same structure as existing medicinal products but with a very small change , or does it actually refer to medicinal products with a new chemical structure ?
I hope that you and the Council will think again on this matter .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs .
I would add my great thanks to Mrs Grossetête with whom I have worked extremely closely on this particular issue .
I am only here to represent the Committee on Agriculture on the veterinary medicines side .
It would be remiss of me if I did not say at the outset that one of the problems facing agriculture is that it is going through the worst time it has ever had - I will not mention the problems facing British beef today .
Any legislation that this Parliament adopts and pushes through the Commission could have a detrimental effect on industry if it is not put through correctly .
Mrs Grossetête has worked extremely well with me and other members on the veterinary medicines bill and , therefore , we will totally support all the legislation in that bill .
I would like to raise three issues .
Mrs Read briefly covered one .
I totally endorse what she says about what is termed ' duality ' .
One of the problems we have in the European Union is that animals in the very far north , for example , are not necessarily the same as animals in the south .
I use the term ' the reindeer syndrome ' , which many colleagues will have heard me say before .
Duality is something that will help to promote the proper use of medicines for species that are not found across the European Union .
It may be difficult to get someone to spend the money to test these products for one particular species .
Therefore , we have retabled Amendment No 137 , which I hope the Commission and Mrs Grossetête will consider .
I hope this House will consider supporting it .
As I have mentioned , this would help those species that are not widespread .
Mrs Grossetête mentioned the way that medicines are dispensed in certain countries .
I am delighted that she has taken this on board .
I fully support the compromise amendment , which is something I worked particularly hard in the Committee on Agriculture to get through .
We are in a situation where Member States differ , firstly , in their definition of what a veterinary surgeon is and what it means and , secondly , in the dispensing of these drugs .
In many instances in the United Kingdom , Ireland and one or two other countries , qualified people dispense minor medicines - in particular , products such as worming pills and flea powders .
The real worry is not particularly with food-chain animals .
But , if this option is removed , we are in a situation where the pets in the animal world will suffer because people will not be able to afford to go to a veterinary surgeon , for example , to get a worming pill for a cat .
Therefore , it is important that we have flexibility .
I am delighted that both rapporteurs have taken this on board and am totally in favour of it .
The final point concerns the use of medicines for equine species .
Again , if we are not careful , we are going to inflict hardship on animals that do not deserve it .
For example , horses are not eaten in the United Kingdom .
It may be that horsemeat is accepted in other countries .
If the medicines available to us are restricted , then again it is the animal that suffers .
Therefore , it is vitally important that the new Amendment No 65 for equine species is adopted .
I shall leave it there , as I have covered the agricultural scene totally .
I thank the two rapporteurs for taking on board the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and look forward to a worthwhile result .
I hope the Commission will also follow my opinion .
Mr President , I should like to thank the two rapporteurs for the exceptional reports they have tabled here for debate , especially Mrs Grossetête , with whom we had an excellent and highly productive working relationship .
As regards the proposal to revise pharmaceutical legislation in order to maintain high standards of public health and complete the single market and , in the field of medicinal products , to meet the challenges of enlargement , apply a more functional and simplified procedure for authorising and supervising medicinal products - by which we mean medicinal products at affordable prices - and , finally , guarantee transparency and access to information on medical products for patients , I should like to comment briefly on the following points .
Innovation : we depend on scientific research and innovation for new combinations of substances and new drugs to fight and cure disease .
But this sort of research needs bold investment by the pharmaceutical industry and this is only feasible if we provide a framework of financial incentives .
Incentives : these are based mainly on exclusivity , by which we mean protecting industrial property rights and inventions .
As a result , the cost of developing a medicinal product is borne by the market and social security systems which , because of the ageing population , are now under tremendous pressure .
So we need to strike a balance here between patented exclusivity , the price of medicinal products and the period of protection .
This is a hard balance to strike .
However , I think that the arrangements achieved in the regulation and now being proposed do strike a balance between exclusivity on the one hand and a reasonable period of protection on the other .
Safety of medicinal products : this is also a serious requirement and the elements of quality and vigilance are also taken into account in this excellent report .
Authorisation : I am in favour of a centralised procedure with a degree of decentralisation to the Member States .
Finally , subsidiarity : this is a very important factor because it is the Member States that foot the bill and provide medical and medicinal care .
Yesterday President Bush made a move precisely because the Member States are under huge financial pressure in this sector .
Mr President , in its proposal , the Commission has tried to reform the pharmaceutical industry , or at least has tried to make a start on it .
In the pharmaceutical industry , Europe is losing out to the United States .
It is not for nothing that an increasing number of companies have decided to carry out their practical research and development in the United States .
European legislation is too opaque , which dampens the companies ' motivation to carry out their activities in Europe , and in order to counter this , better European coordination in this field is therefore necessary as a matter of priority .
I am greatly in favour of opening up this fossilised market .
We must therefore strive for more competition within the European market , and one of the ways of achieving this is , for example , by making generic medicines available sooner , something on which a sound compromise has been reached within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Furthermore , I would insist on the centralised procedure , which is carried out by the Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in London , being reinforced so as to guarantee the equal treatment of all pharmaceutical companies and to give patients throughout Europe access to the same medicines .
This centralised method also promotes all the objectives pursued by the Commission , such as a high level of health care , completion of the internal market , more transparency , improvement of competition and preparation for enlargement .
I also set great store by the provision of information .
It remains a mystery to me why the pharmaceutical industry is not allowed to inform patients about its products .
I have said it before , but I should like to repeat it here : the European Union has thus been taken over by events and is discriminating against patients .
At the moment , information of this kind is only available to people with a command of English and with access to the Internet , as this information is available in the United States .
Patients who have no access to these resources are kept in the dark by Europe , and it is for this reason too that I think that the Commission 's proposal to come up with a trial project is sound and is in any case a good first step .
I do believe that by only making information on asthma , AIDS and diabetes available , patients suffering from other diseases are discriminated against , and I would call for this list to be extended .
Finally , I should like to remark that the reinforcement of the role of patient organisations in this context is of course important at European level as well , including with a view to enlargement and to this centralised procedure .
The Group of the Greens has tabled amendments to this effect , which I should like to endorse .
Mr President , medicinal products are something quite ordinary and everyday .
Virtually all of us have used them and come into contact with them .
In other words , Parliament 's power of co-decision in this area is important as a tangible example of the way European Parliament decisions can affect people 's lives .
Indeed , as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I have come to expect representations from many organisations across the board .
On this occasion , I have been contacted by farming organisations , veterinary groups , agricultural co-operatives , pharmaceutical interests , health stores and numerous individual constituents .
Each group has its own particular concerns , but one common theme emerges : the proposed legislation does not take sufficient account of the different situations in the Member States .
This is surely a lesson for the Commission .
In an ideal situation , the legislation proposed would take account of such diversity .
We in Ireland breed horses primarily for sporting purposes and meat does not end up at the end of the food chain .
Consequently , the same safeguards are not required for medicines given to horses .
I could cite many more instances and I have tabled a number of amendments for my group to deal with some of the difficulties .
I would say to the Commission that if we are to guarantee the democratic legitimacy of decision-making , we must reassure our citizens that their specific concerns have been taken into consideration .
If we proceed with ' one size fits all ' legislation which ignores the particularities of individual countries or regions , we risk alienating our citizens .
In conclusion , we have just concluded a long referendum campaign in Ireland , with a successful outcome for the Nice Treaty , and one of the major issues throughout the campaign was the sense of powerlessness and distance .
We , as legislators , have a responsibility to ensure that we bring the people with us and keep in touch with their everyday concerns
Finally , I should like to congratulate both rapporteurs .
Mr President , every human life is unique and valuable because it is a gift from God .
Accordingly , every life deserves the best possible protection and care from the cradle to the grave .
A smoothly running European medicines market fits in well with this ambition .
Our group believes it to be of major importance that Europe does not present any obstacles which could frustrate the operation of the medicines market .
We are therefore of the view that manufacturers of medicines must continue to have the choice between the centralised and decentralised registration of medicines .
Compulsory centralised registration would hamper the necessary flexibility which regional products enjoy , it would lead to a brain drain from the national registration authorities and it could present too great a financial obstacle for SMEs , preventing them from introducing certain products onto the market .
In addition , we are in favour of more research into the effects of medicines on children .
To date , a large proportion of medicines administered to children has only been tested on adults , even though it is surely obvious that children are different from adults in terms of their metabolism , the necessary dosage and the administration method .
Finally , we are against allowing medicines to be advertised , because this could lead to an unnecessary increase in the use of medicines .
We are , however , in favour of providing patients with extensive information .
We therefore await with interest the outcome of the trial proposed by the European Commission in which patients are actively provided with information .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us today a wide-ranging revision of the law on medicinal products in Europe .
This will have an impact on the competitiveness of companies of all sizes in this sector and accordingly on a great many jobs .
However , it also of course affects the entire trade , pharmacists and , last but not least , the patient .
This mammoth document is , amongst other things , the result of a new strategy that the Commission has already been pursuing for several years .
The volume of Community law , which currently stands at over 80 000 pages , is to be simplified and tightened up .
In the case of this particular revision , a single legislative act is to be adopted , taking account of the various substantive changes required and codifying the remaining provisions .
The many amendments tabled in committee and now once again in the plenary are just one indication of how difficult this undertaking is .
I have enormous respect for the massive amount of work put in by the Commission and by our two rapporteurs , Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Müller , but I am genuinely concerned that we may to some extent have lost track of the overall picture , so that some apparently less important issues have not perhaps been attended to .
That is why I would like to draw your attention to homeopathic medicines , not just for humans but also for animals , and I urge you to support these amendments too .
The European Parliament is a co-legislator here and we need to make sure that we do our work carefully .
At first reading , we still have a lot of opportunities , but we should also leave the way open for the second reading .
That is why I am asking for your support , but I am also calling on the Legal Service and on our rapporteurs to check whether the final outcome is coherent .
Only the future can tell whether this pharmaceutical legislation will be easier for the Member States and other stakeholders to apply because of its reduced linguistic complexity .
I would like to thank everyone involved and hope that this magnum opus will be a success .
Mr President , in this brief time I would like to make two points , both in relation to veterinary medicines .
In a way , they have been the poor relation in these debates because of the immense complexity of the situation with regard to human medicinal substances .
Firstly , I would like to warn against the Commission 's proposals under Article 67 that all veterinary medicines intended for food-producing animals should be available on prescription only .
Some Member States , including my own , have a well-established distribution system that allows medicines for which veterinary involvement is not considered necessary for safe and effective use to be obtained without a veterinary certificate .
I can see why some professional organisations in some other Member States would be opposed to that , but it has worked effectively for very many years in Ireland as well as the UK .
When we now look at the enlargement of the Union , all kinds of problems will arise if we allow ourselves now to move towards a centralised system which allows only by prescription use of such medicines as are currently administered by qualified persons in countries like the UK .
I therefore commend Amendment No 43 to the House .
My second and last point is that on the mandatory centralised procedures proposed by the Commission , the committee decided to move to a more flexible system for human medicines , but did not follow that same route in terms of animal medicines .
We should rectify that and we can do so through Amendment No 171 .
Finally , I would make the point that it is a mistake for the Commission to propose that we remove the five-year renewal requirement for marketing authorisation .
That is a safety precaution we should retain .
Commissioner and rapporteurs , I would like to thank our rapporteurs for their excellent work on a quite impenetrable matter .
I normally do not thank the rapporteurs , but there is good reason to do so in this case , as it is extremely difficult to attempt to master the whole of this large area .
Ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the costs of medicines in many EU countries constitute the fastest growing element of healthcare costs .
In many countries , the shortfall in funding specifically for medicines is quite large .
I therefore believe it was important that the Health Ministers were involved in this issue before the Council was restructured to increase efficiency .
I hope that the Health Ministers will also be involved in the future .
I usually also remain highly sceptical when Parliament asks the Commission for more reports .
This time , I believe , however , that it would be important for the Commission to follow up trends in medicine prices , taking into account differences in different countries .
This may provide us with very valuable information on various restrictions .
I support what my colleague Mr Maaten said on access to information and what the Commissioner said regarding the fact that the issue is not advertising but access to information .
We have many examples of information and other support being given to doctors in an unacceptable manner .
Monitoring information would allow us to keep better track of how much money is being used in this sector .
I see this as important .
I believe one of the major problems , which many of the amendments also seize upon , is that we have what has been referred to as paid research .
Many respected newspapers have also given their pages over to this .
Finally , I , like Mr Rod , stress that I am glad that the effect of medicines on the environment will also be taken into account .
It is not that we wish to set up obstacles to medicines but that the positive effects must be evaluated in relation to other effects .
Mr President , the centralised procedure is our preferred choice .
Medicines should be accessible to all Europeans , particularly following enlargement .
The fact that we have 500 amendments is to do with the different lobbies and , above all , with the conflict between new and generic medicines .
I welcome the compromise that has been reached , which offers protection that lasts eight years .
I can just about endorse the ten-year market protection for new medicines within the EU .
However , it should be possible for manufacturers of generic medicines to sell their products in countries outside of Europe .
Those countries are invariably poorer and would benefit from these cheaper medicines .
My group is delighted that the Commission 's proposal to authorise advertising for prescription medicines for AIDS , asthma and diabetes has suffered a crushing defeat in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Despite this , the Liberal Group has re-tabled this absurd proposal .
In the USA , advertising for prescription medicines has been decontrolled for the past five years .
Sales have increased by 80 % , admittedly not only thanks to advertising , but even so .
The American population has not become any healthier as a result .
The pharmaceutical industry 's profits , on the other hand , have soared .
Patients are in great need of more information , but only if they ask for it .
At the moment , they have to make do with American websites .
Via the Internet and telephone helplines , it should be possible for patients to obtain information about medicines in their own language .
The five-yearly re-evaluation of medicines has now become a formality .
My group would prefer to see an improved re-evaluation procedure put in place , a re-evaluation with substance .
Does a medicine have value-added ?
The pharmaceutical industry is decidedly against this .
I should , however , like to repeat that it is not commercial interests but health care that should come first .
Many medicines are toxic substances .
When they leave the body , they are often still toxic , also to the environment .
This is why my group is very pleased that consideration will now also be given to the environment in the assessment of new medicines .
The European Commission has dropped a major clanger in this respect .
Is that because the Directorate-General of Industry is responsible ?
Mr President , this is an area in which we have had considerable experience over the years , especially in respect of organophosphate pesticides , which are used as sheep dips and for a variety of other purposes .
It is our experience that the licensing system in toto provides a false guarantee of safety , in that no predictive testing could accurately ascertain the full extent of toxicity and the potential health threat to humans or animals .
Thus the key to safety is an effective post-licensing surveillance system , sensitive enough to identify adverse reactions speedily and to enable swift and effective action to be taken .
This requires effective administrative and medical systems , including diagnostic systems , in each Member State .
Again , our experience is that these systems are far from adequate .
We therefore believe that it would be better to focus on this area , rather than extend an already over-complex code .
Mr President , the problem of the great discrepancies in medicines policy in our Member States cannot be solved today .
We are , however , taking a step in the right direction as far as greater harmonisation in registration is concerned and also with regard to the conditions for placing medicines , particularly generic medicines , on the market .
Admittance to Member State markets , however , remains at the discretion of the individual Member States .
One of today 's important areas of discussion is the relationship between the original medicine and the generic product that is introduced onto the market once the patent and data protection have lapsed .
A fragile compromise has been tabled , in respect of which I have tabled a better worded amendment .
I would ask my fellow MEPs for their support , but I do endorse the compromise .
In fact , I should also like to take this opportunity to issue a warning that speeding up the launch of a generic product will not automatically lead to lower costs .
In the Netherlands , I have noticed that the price of a generic product there is higher than the price of the original medicine in a large number of Member States .
I should also like to comment on pricing policy .
Although we are once again bringing transparency to your attention , it is frustrating - and I am also addressing this comment to the rapporteurs of 1989 - that the directive on transparency is not being fleshed out .
There are large discrepancies , and we will not solve them today .
It is too ridiculous for words that medicines from the Netherlands , where the price paid by consumers for generic medicines is so high , are exported to other Member States in parallel .
We should put a stop to this .
Finally , I am not in favour of advertising .
I am in favour of making self-regulating information accessible on the web .
Whether this information originates from national agencies or the industry itself is irrelevant , as long as it is self-regulating .
In my view , articulate consumers should not have to resort to websites in America but should also be able to access this information in Europe .
I should ask you to carefully reconsider my amendments on this score .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the pharmaceutical industry is doing well , boasting high profits over a long period of time .
Health budgets , on the other hand , are not in such good shape , unfortunately .
Spending on medicines is increasing in most Member States .
The development of medicines is not going well either .
There is little real innovation in Europe and , what is worse , the development of medicines to fight the worldwide health crisis , is seriously lagging behind .
Although this is a wholly unsatisfactory situation , we can use the review of pharmaceutical legislation to take steps in the right direction .
We should first of all adopt a sound price policy .
The price of medicines is determined at national level , and currently differs widely across the various European Member States .
For new medicines , the Commission should lay down a guideline on the basis of the development costs involved .
Many countries would like to cut down on public health spending by raising the patients ' own contributions for medicines .
This is unacceptable .
Savings should , in fact , be sought in joint and improved negotiations with the industry instead of by increasing patients ' own contributions .
Secondly , legislation should not hamper , but rather promote , innovation .
Industry wants to do this by extending the data protection period , but this is no guarantee for innovation .
Quite the opposite , in fact ; there is more innovation happening in the United States , which has a shorter period of protection .
We must stimulate innovation by emphasising the therapeutic value-added and , above all , by displaying public leadership and by raising questions in the area of research ourselves .
Agreements can be reached about the research agenda during the price negotiations .
Good prices in exchange for investments in medicines for which there is a worldwide need are a step in the right direction .
Thirdly , we must put provisions in place which enable the production of generic versions of essential medicines that are still patented but that are unaffordable in developing countries .
This should only apply to medicines for countries that do not yet have the production capacity available themselves .
Major steps were taken in Doha to make medicines more affordable in developing countries .
All that remains for us to do is to make a small , yet important , step .
Finally , we must single-mindedly uphold the ban on advertising medicines .
Providing direct information or advertising that is aimed at patients is not the right way forward .
The pharmaceutical industry is already spending huge amounts of money on marketing .
Even more marketing will hike up the price of medicines unnecessarily .
At least as important is the argument that we must prevent the industry from talking healthy people into illnesses .
There are other ways of ensuring that good information is available to patients .
I should like to finish off with a word of thanks to Mrs Grossetête and , above all , Mrs Müller for all her intricate work .
All her efforts to make medicines more suitable for children and women receive my wholehearted support , as does her plea for a European approach , for which I should also like to express thanks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know from our own experience that there is really no such thing as an internal market in pharmaceutical products in the European Union .
There are price differences of as much as 400 % between Belgium and Germany , and you cannot simply explain that away by different VAT rates !
I am afraid that these reports concentrate too much on approval .
I hope , however , that the transparency that we have flagged up here and that we are calling for will in future make it easier for consumers to understand why there are such great price differences between individual Member States .
It is not acceptable for Europe 's internal market so obviously not to include the pharmaceutical industry .
I hope that by achieving transparency the links between public research and industrial research will also become clearer , and that databases will also make it easier to see who has been involved in given clinical tests and to what extent public research receives external funding .
I too am pleased that we managed to leave advertising out of the equation , because that would have simply raised expectations on the part of patients that could not be met .
We are talking about better and more favourable prices , not about more advertising .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much appreciate the fact that my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , has repeatedly highlighted considerations of public health and safety in her amendments .
These are areas which , from the outset , medicinal products were intended to safeguard .
These brief comments are not unnecessary .
If , after all , medicinal products have , in many hands , become an end in themselves , and have gone against their original aim , Mrs Grossetête 's approach is a welcome restoration of discipline .
I genuinely hope that spirit will remain in this directive up until we have finally achieved a result .
Furthermore , Amendment No 16 concerning the identification of the ingredients of generic drugs is in order , as that will promote a more judicious use of them , that is to say , generic substitution .
It is a question of using medicinal products rationally and exploiting the price potential of medicines in official drug substitution systems after medicinal product patents expire .
Patients ' contributions also go down when they are put on medicines that are similar to , but cheaper than , the original ones .
Promoting the use of generic drugs fully meets with the European Union 's objectives in the areas of policy on medicinal products and public health .
These objectives on the other hand include ensuring the supply of medicines that are new and regarded as important in terms of their therapeutic value to the patients that need them .
These medicinal products are patent protected and in general expensive .
Experience in my country , Finland , and in many others has shown that practice with regard to prescribing medicines does not move sufficiently in the direction of cheaper alternative medicinal products or alternative imported products unless there is guidance in the shape of government action , in other words , legislation .
Such guidance comes in the form of inter alia reference price systems , doctors ' own budgets for medicinal products , and generic substitution .
In addition , I should like to thank those of my colleagues responsible for tabling Amendment Nos 95 , which obliges manufacturers to guarantee an adequate supply of medicinal products to wholesalers .
Restrictions on supplies , as practised by some manufacturers of pharmaceuticals , cause problems for wholesalers of medicinal products and , ultimately , the patient .
Mr President , I have admiration for the accomplishment of scientific research in developing medicines which have proved of great benefit .
Yet I also have a healthy scepticism towards both the pharmaceutical industry and our exaggerated confidence in some of its products , many of which cause a great deal more harm than the illegal recreational drugs which attract the bulk of public attention .
For that reason , it would be wrong to place more unnecessary burdens and regulations upon food supplements and the health-food shops that sell them .
Many believe these products to be beneficial , and at least they do not cause harm .
I regard homeopathic medicines in the same way .
Today we have more patients who are better informed than ever before - that is a good thing .
I want people to have access to objective information about medicines and treatment .
However , that is quite different from opening the door to the direct advertising of medicines .
The result , I fear , will not be better public information , but greater public confusion , stimulated by the marketing techniques of a used-car salesman .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to compliment both rapporteurs on their excellent work .
I believe that these proposals provide a good basis for ensuring that the internal market in medical products operates properly for medicines for both human and veterinary use .
As far as I am concerned the hallmark of an internal market is not price stability , but comparable prices , which is something altogether different and really has nothing to do with the internal market .
These proposals will also give a continuing boost to research , making research worthwhile again and also enabling manufacturers of generic drugs to make a living .
I also believe that these proposals will make it possible to take advantage of all the options for maintaining public health .
Harmonising data exclusivity in the European Union will particularly promote research , and at the same time make the task of generic drug manufacturers easier .
I fully support this and those affected should not need to make any further demands .
However , as I see it , extending the centralised authorisation procedure for medicinal products , as advocated by the Commission in committee , is not in accordance with the principles that have been mentioned .
The present twofold authorisation procedure fully meets the requirements of the internal market and guarantees a greater variety of medicinal products , and with lower charges .
The new plan to impose use of the centralised procedure for products with new active substances will undermine competition between the authorisation procedures .
We can include as many processing deadlines as we like in the regulation , but without any competition these figures are meaningless .
I know a great many SMEs that carry out research and in particular companies that are doing research and development in the field of ' orphan drugs ' or veterinary medicines .
That is where active substances of this kind are developed .
Authorisation for these would have to be applied for in London , and I believe that these companies cannot afford that , nor can they put it into practice .
So what we will end up achieving is to halt this kind of research , which really is not acceptable .
We should therefore refuse to support the change proposed here .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs for their work .
As many colleagues have said , pharmaceutical products are like no other .
We must guarantee that these products are all safe and effective .
Therefore , on the debate on the centralised procedure , I believe we must have flexibility .
We should not restrict choice but allow for choice and support flexibility between the two routes .
On the renewal of authorisation , I oppose the Commission 's proposal to remove five-year renewal of marketing authorisation and rely on enhanced pharmaco-vigilance to ensure product safety and , indeed , exclusivity .
I think the compromise which has been reached is a fair one .
I am delighted that the Committee on the Environment has rejected direct consumer advertising .
We must be very clear that we all want patients to be informed .
We all want patients to make informed decisions - no one can argue with this .
But we cannot have what happens in the US , where the ten most advertised drugs are the ten best selling drugs .
This is where the amendments adopted in committee requesting a report and the question of how information to patients is used and enhanced are so important .
Information to patients from the industry varies from excellent approaches and partnership with patients to situations where some patient organisations are being accused of being mere fronts for the industry .
We must get the balance right .
We have an opportunity in the review to do this , to improve research , to secure jobs , to improve availability of products to patients and improve information given to patients .
It is an exciting time , and I look forward to the review returning for second reading .
Mr President , I agree with those who have said that public health protection is the most important objective , but that research also needs to be promoted .
By means of the research incentives envisaged we will not only be making industry more competitive and thus safeguarding around 500 000 jobs in Europe , we will also be promoting the development of new medicinal products .
The proposal for a regulation and the two directives before us do , however , at the same time demand that the pharmaceutical industry , in view of the almost ideal framework conditions - data exclusivity standards are nowhere else as high as in Europe - should demonstrate its capacity for innovation .
Patients need innovative new medical products and not analogous products that burden our health systems without providing any extra benefit for patients .
I believe that as the consultation procedure moves forward , Parliament should not lose sight of the triple objective of improving health protection , enhancing productivity and safeguarding jobs .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will focus once again on a number of what I feel to be key points .
The Commission 's proposal to allow a data protection period of ten years must , in my opinion , remain a solid , immovable pillar .
This position is well-balanced and will provide European industry with new incentives and impetus to continue to invest new resources in the development of more effective , safer medicinal products and make them competitive at international level at last .
I feel it is important to have a sufficiently long period of data protection for well-known medicinal products too , wherever there are new therapeutic indications .
As I said before , I do not support the line taken regarding the membership of the management board , which I believe should be made up solely of institutional representatives .
I therefore call upon you , Commissioner , and the Council to come up with a balanced model for a management board which can work calmly , free from dispute or conflict .
I am amazed , reading Amendments Nos 153 and 154 , for example , to see that the directive still mentions ' traditional herbal medicinal products ' .
I am the rapporteur of another report on traditional herbal medicinal products , and so I do not support Amendments Nos 153 and 154 .
However , Mr President , I am in favour of removing the requirement to re-license products every five years . This is an excessively bureaucratic burden .
I hope that we will , at last , have a system of active pharmacovigilance operating throughout the territory which will allow us to introduce continuous monitoring carried out by highly qualified experts - Europe is teeming with clinical pharmacologists - to ensure that any toxic side effects are made known as soon as they occur .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like thank Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Müller for their very full reports .
Tomorrow we will be voting on the most important revision package to date as regards legislation on medicinal products in the European Union .
The key objectives here are as follows : first , achieving a high level of health protection and giving patients rapid access to innovative products ; second , the quality , safety and effectiveness of medicinal products in Europe ; and , third , further dismantling existing barriers to trade within the internal market .
Medicinal products need to be used appropriately and correctly .
That is why it is vital for the law to make a clear distinction between information and advertising .
All product information should be scientifically checked before it is published .
Provisions relating to medicinal products should only apply to products that have a therapeutic benefit and are used therapeutically .
Any overlap with food law should be avoided in order to obviate legal uncertainty .
For this reason a clear definition of medicinal products and food is urgently needed , as provided for in Amendments Nos 11 and 18 .
The achievements of industrial research as regards innovative therapeutic uses should be recognised by means of appropriate data exclusivity for what are termed ' original products ' .
I am , however , also supporting Amendment No 40 , which grants existing medicinal products an additional three years ' data exclusivity in the event of a new indication .
Generic drugs , which must of course meet all requirements as regards quality , safety and effectiveness , should also be established in the European market and it should be possible to market them as soon as the period of protection for the original drug has expired .
The authorisation procedure is to retain the option of choice between the centralised and decentralised procedures , which has existed since 1995 .
It has resulted in a marked increase in the efficiency of the authorisation procedures and has not led to the polarisation that some feared .
It is essential that mutual recognition should continue for the sake of Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises .
We need to create a system that promotes innovation in the interests of all patients .
Mr President , these reports deal with very important issues , and I compliment both rapporteurs .
The whole debate on pharmaco-vigilance versus the compulsory five-year review , and the question of whether to centralise the registration procedure or keep the centralised , national and mutual recognition procedures is critical .
With certain necessary changes , we have almost got it right .
It is very important that all citizens have equal access to state-of-the-art drugs , regardless of where they live in Europe .
It is either a single market or it is not .
The same applies to Irish cattle .
It is very important that they should have access to the same veterinary medicines as UK cattle , but at the moment they do not .
We need to get the balance right with access to generic medicines and innovation and research and the needs of the pharmaceutical companies .
This also applies to the Commission proposal on POM , prescription only medicines .
I would ask the Commissioner to take on board the compromise suggested by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which gets the balance right in this area , because the Commission proposal has caused major problems in many countries , particularly the UK and Ireland .
The MRL regulation of 1990 came into force in 1992 , and there was a derogation for many countries until 1 January 2000 .
This resulted in hundreds of veterinary medicine products being removed from the market and huge welfare problems in Europe for minor animal species - including horses - for many years .
Industry needs to be allowed to place on the market equine veterinary products that do not have MRLs , to be used according to the cascade principle , with a record of treatment and exclusion from the food chain .
Amendment No 65 is necessary , as it ties this principle , which was endorsed by the Committee on the Environment 's Amendment No 10 , to the passport decision 2000 / 68 / EEC , which amends Decision 93 / 623 / EEC .
I would ask Commissioner Liikanen to look particularly at the passport decision 2000 / 68 / EEC .
We must be consistent here .
As well as listening to the able people in the DG , please listen to the veterinary experts in the field and in research .
No consumer wants to inflict unnecessary pain and suffering on animals for the sake of the food chain , or make criminals of our vets .
We have made mistakes here before .
Please be careful .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I basically support the Commission proposal and the reports by Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Müller .
However , there are a few points on which I differ .
One point was not mentioned in the debate at all , although I believe it to be very important : the Commission has proposed that prescriptions would also be required for medicinal products under the decentralised procedure .
I believe that this is a step in the right direction , but we should not throw out the baby with the bathwater .
I think we need to be careful about ending up in a situation where all medical products that are at present available over the counter require prescriptions , because that would certainly create problems for consumers and would impose unreasonable costs on the health system .
I therefore urge you to support Amendment No 151 , which I have tabled jointly with several of my colleagues .
The second important point has already been mentioned many times , but we cannot consider it often enough .
We need to come to an arrangement that is acceptable for small and medium-sized pharmaceutical companies .
We cannot adopt legislation that , ultimately , only global players like Pfizer can comply with .
We need rules that are appropriate for SMEs .
In this connection there are a number of important issues , such as the amendment tabled by Mr Nisticò .
Three years ' data exclusivity in the event of a new indication is something that SMEs are perhaps in a better position to implement than data exclusivity for a totally new substance .
In committee , I spoke against the pilot project on information and advertising , as I simply cannot understand why the information provided should be extended for three special indications but with far tighter rules in other areas .
We need information for all indications and all diseases , and advertising for prescription medicines should be totally ruled out .
That is why I agree with the conclusion reached by the committee .
However , the committee overshot the mark on a couple of points , so that information that the pharmaceutical industry is allowed to provide now would in future no longer be permissible .
We need to sort that out in tomorrow 's vote .
In conclusion I wish to call on the Commission to bring forward a proposal on medical product safety for children as soon as possible .
I know that the Commission officials here today and the Commissioner himself regard this as a very important subject , but we have already been waiting too long for a definite legislative proposal .
I urge you to present one before the year is out .
Mr President , today 's debate has been very instructive and shows the great commitment of many honourable Members of this House to these issues .
A number of interesting issues have been raised .
I want to tackle those raised by Members who are still here in the Chamber .
It is unfortunate that often Members have disappeared when it is time for me to reply - I hope this is not an improper comment .
I will comment on six groups of amendments .
Firstly , on the extension of the scope of the centralised procedure .
Mrs Grossetête put the whole case very well .
The whole idea behind this procedure is to guarantee that goods are delivered quickly , equitably and in the interest of all patients in Europe .
If we do not have a centralised procedure by the time the ten new Member States join , there will be enormous inequality .
We take the comment on the SMEs very seriously and , for that reason , we are ready to seek concrete measures that would alleviate the burden on SMEs , for instance , a reduction in fees , direct scientific advice from the agency in London or administrative support .
The Commission is also convinced that extended scope for the centralised procedure for human and veterinary medicine would benefit European citizens and businesses alike .
For that reason , the Commission cannot accept amendments which reduce the scope of the centralised procedure .
The second question is the balance between innovation and competition from generics .
That is a very sensitive issue .
I would be happy to discuss that in depth .
In regard to the American system , as Mrs Corbey mentioned , we must remember that we cannot take just one point of comparison .
In America , the drugs market is totally deregulated and there is direct consumer advertising .
We are not proposing that .
It is through data protection that we are trying to strike a balance .
We are proposing something that the Commission refused to propose for years - namely the Bola system for generics which , of course , means more competition in the sector after the expiry of a patent and , at the same time , lower prices and lost revenue for those who originated the medicine .
It is clearly better for the consumer .
It is extremely important that we stick to that .
Secondly , at the same time , to counterbalance it , we want to propose a solution for exclusivity involving a ten-year period and , if there are indications needing to be researched into later , ten plus one .
I do not believe that European industries have been losing market share , that there are less innovative medicines and research in this field , and that this is in the interests of European patients .
I just do not believe it .
I am sure that we must try to accept that there are two or three public goods we can defend at the same time .
Public health takes top priority but we must also support research innovation in Europe .
If we do not support it we are going to be in permanent decline in all sectors .
Research-intensive areas are those which create jobs , development and wealth and make it possible to assume our global responsibilities .
So both are issues we must try to tackle at the same time .
The balance is not always easy .
We have done this after very careful consideration .
There are a few amendments seeking to change this and we will oppose them .
For instance , Amendment No 34 wants to go further in favour of generics and weaken the position of innovation .
To keep the balance , we cannot support it .
On the other hand , Amendments Nos 40 and 92 call for additional data protection of three years in two situations .
Firstly , when a new indication is developed for an old medicine , and secondly , when a company submits documentation for switching a product from prescription to non-prescription status .
These amendments must be seen in the whole context of the data-protection scheme .
As regards the additional data protection on switching , we agree that this request is not unjustified .
This could increase the availability of over-the-counter medicines .
We can therefore accept Amendment No 92 in principle , but we still retain our right to look at the duration of that additional protection .
As far as the additional data protection for old products is concerned , this entails a proposal that could extend data protection far beyond ten years - up to 14 years , to be precise .
That is why we cannot support Amendment No 40 .
The third issue concerns improving information for patients .
I feel a little uncomfortable with this debate because I am also against the proposal that many Members oppose , namely the American model .
For instance , one Member said that in America the ten most used pharmaceuticals are the ones that are the most advertised .
Among the five most advertised medicines at least , no one would have a right to take part in even the pilot project .
A pilot project does not mean direct advertising .
It is only information validated by the competent authorities which can be given at the request of the patient or patients ' organisations .
It is right that people are against the American direct-to-consumer advertising .
That is not what we are proposing .
We have a situation where abundant information is available on the web , which is not validated and makes the consumer extremely unsure , which concentrates on products which are not on the market and which confuses many citizens when they visit their doctors .
Because we cannot stop it , we want to offer the possibility of access to information validated by clear guidelines , accepted by the Community and monitored , observed and controlled by the Medicines Evaluation agency .
I understand that people are against the American system , but we have never proposed it .
That is why we cannot support Amendment No 101 and others aiming at the same objective .
The fourth issue concerns relative effectiveness .
Some amendments relate to relative effectiveness .
They suggest that the added therapeutic value should be considered as a criterion for the authorisation of a medicinal product - alongside quality , safety and efficacy .
The Commission agrees that the issue of relative effectiveness is of great importance because it can help the kind of innovation that brings important benefits to patients .
An authorisation depends on a positive benefit / risk ratio , on the quality , safety and efficacy of the medicine itself , on its own merit .
Relative effectiveness is not a reason to deny access to the market .
The Commission can support the idea that relative effectiveness should be considered at EU level , and can accept in principle some related amendments , like Amendments Nos 4 and 100 .
The Commission cannot , however , accept amendments that establish relative effectiveness as a fourth hurdle for marketing authorisation .
The fifth group of amendments concerns legal status .
The Commission proposes that the conditions of supply - over-the-counter or prescription-only - should be determined under the mutual recognition procedure .
This would obviously lead to a harmonised EU legal status for all products authorised accordingly .
The Commission continues to believe that it is appropriate to include legal status in the mutual recognition procedure .
But the Commission understands the concerns that this might lead to a situation where too many products are classified as prescription-only medicines because of a ' lowest common denominator ' effect among the Member States .
Finally , on the European Medicines Evaluation Agency , our proposal follows the lines which were provided for the European Food Safety Authority at the time of our proposal .
Amendment No 16 aligns the EMEA Management Board with the model finally adopted for the Food Safety Authority , and the Commission can support this amendment .
Finally , let me just briefly reiterate that Parliament is provided in writing with a full list of the Commission 's positions on each of the amendments
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
WRITTEN STATEMENT ( RULE 120 )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0327 / 2002 ) by Mrs Evans , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the animal-health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals .
Mr President , the aim of this regulation is to ensure consistency in the rules for travelling with pet animals , commonly known as the pet passport scheme .
It is a very welcome development and very important to the lives of many EU citizens who have , in the past , been prevented from travelling because they could not take their pet animals with them .
The fact that the Commission has been able to bring forward such a proposal reflects the incredible success of the steps taken over recent years to control rabies .
It is worth repeating the figures : cases among cats and dogs have fallen from nearly 500 in 1991 to just 5 in 1998 .
As the Member States started to adopt their own rules for the increased movement of pet animals , it became clear that a European system was needed to make it easier for pet owners and avoid confusion .
I am pleased that Parliament 's amendments , adopted in the common position , called for detailed information for consumers so that they can make the necessary preparations before travelling .
I would like to draw attention to some of the key issues .
First , the legal base .
Members will recall that this was one of the main issues at first reading .
The Commission proposed a double legal base , whereas Parliament 's view was that , since the main aim of this regulation was to protect public health , a single legal base should apply .
However , following the receipt of the common position , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , has accepted the double legal base .
Secondly , trade .
Once the Council has included measures on trade within the regulation , as requested by Parliament , the distinction between commercial and non-commercial movement is still not defined clearly enough .
Under the Council proposal , the maximum number of five animals that can be moved under this regulation is fine .
But if the purpose of the regulation is primarily to protect public health , then the number of animals being transported is not relevant .
We have therefore tabled amendments deleting the maximum number .
Thirdly , identification .
Parliament previously called for ISO standard transponders to be used and for the owner 's name and address to be included .
The Commission and the Council proposals allowed for other types of transponders to be used , as long as the owner carried the means to read the information .
As ISO chips are not available in all countries , the Committee on the Environment has agreed to remove the requirement for ISO standard equipment , but still wants the owner 's details to be included .
This would help combat trafficking in pet animals .
We strongly believe that electronic identification is more effective , humane and reliable than tattoos and that , after the transitional eight-year period , only microchips would be acceptable .
The fourth point relates to young animals .
The Committee has re-tabled the amendments preventing the movement of animals under three months old without the requirements of this scheme .
This would not be applicable to the United Kingdom , Ireland or Sweden , but it would apply to the other Member States .
I do not believe that it is possible for the authorities to carry out proper checks on young animals , for instance ensuring that they have remained at the place of birth or have not had any contact with wild animals .
This therefore leaves a loophole for trade in puppies and kittens particularly .
The fifth point concerns the involvement of Parliament .
Several of our amendments relate to Parliament 's involvement in decisions such as the extension of the transitional measures for the three sensitive Member States and to comitology -retaining Parliament 's right to be consulted .
Finally , the OIE International Animal Health Code .
The committee has retained the requirement to take into account the OIE Code when deciding on the health status of third countries in the scheme .
This has been a subject of some debate .
I am aware that the Council felt that the OIE Code would exclude large parts of the EU from free movement of animals , especially after enlargement .
I also know that countries such as the United Kingdom are moving away from rabies-free status because it would exclude , for example , Canada and the USA , but the committee has decided to adopt a cautious approach .
I believe that each of these issues can be resolved without too much difficulty and I ask Parliament to support the position of the Committee on the Environment .
I must say that I am disappointed that , despite my best efforts , an agreement could not be reached with the Council before the second reading and I am very grateful to the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups , the representatives of the presidency and the Commission for their cooperation in our discussions over the past three weeks .
I believe that Parliament has taken a very constructive approach and we will continue to do so in order to reach agreement as soon as possible .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Evans , and the Committee on the Environment , for the report on the Council 's common position .
I am satisfied that the report reflects a general agreement on the safety of the technical provisions relating to the management of the rabies risk , even if a few points of disagreement remain and may need some further clarification .
The main differences between the original proposal submitted to Parliament at first reading and the common position we have before us today fall into three categories .
First , we have the provision facilitating movements of young animals between Member States of equivalent status .
Second , the provisions for reassessment within a period of five years of the specific conditions for movements to Ireland , the United Kingdom and Sweden .
Third , provisions amending the conditions applying to trade to align them with the conditions applying to non-commercial movements - to accommodate the wish expressed by Parliament at first reading .
Allow me now to address in detail the amendments proposed in the report .
They can be split into two categories - technical amendments and institutional amendments .
I will begin with the nine technical amendments .
Amendments Nos 1 and 6 may be the result of a misunderstanding .
The setting of a maximum number of animals aims only to distinguish commercial movements from other non-commercial movements .
It is not intended to be a dividing line between two different types of rules - the same rules would apply to commercial and non-commercial movements .
So it would be incorrect to say that setting a maximum of , say , five would be any threat to public health .
In effect , it means that once you go above five , the commercial rules apply but below five the rules set out in this draft legislation apply .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 would result in a prohibition of movements of young animals under the age of vaccination between Member States other than the United Kingdom , Ireland and Sweden , for which specific provisions exist .
The conclusion of the discussion with the Council was that those movements of young animals have always been allowed , that they represent a negligible risk and that this flexibility must be maintained .
Otherwise , the movement of these animals would be seriously undermined .
Therefore , Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 and 6 cannot be accepted .
Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 suggest the adoption of import conditions equivalent to those that apply to movements inside the Community for third countries free of rabies as defined in the OIE Code .
As already stated at first reading , this is not in line with the risk analysis approach that we need to adopt , so these amendments cannot be accepted .
In fact , this would not be consistent with the conditions applicable to movements inside the Union , as some Member States are not ' rabies free ' under the OIE Code definition , even if rabies in domestic animals is under control on their territory , as Ms Evans mentioned .
We therefore need to take a similar approach to third countries with similar circumstances .
Finally , on the technical amendments , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 and 13 .
Almost all Member States consider microchipping to be a reliable method of identification , and I look favourably on automatic harmonisation after a transitional period of eight years .
Let me now turn to the seven institutional amendments .
In a spirit of compromise , the Commission could consider favourably Amendment No 5 , which aims to introduce a codecision procedure for the extension of specific provisions applicable to the UK , Ireland and Sweden .
The Commission could also have accepted Amendment No 16 as an alternative to Amendment No 12 , and I regret therefore that Amendment No 16 has been withdrawn .
Amendment No 12 unreasonably deprives the Commission of any possibility to propose temporary measures , whereas Amendment No 16 would have allowed this in a reasonable way .
I cannot therefore accept Amendment No 12 .
Nor can I accept the other four amendments .
Amendments Nos 10 and 11 would limit the executive competence of the Commission to ' technical ' aspects .
This wording would very likely give rise to legal arguments on the interpretation of the word ' technical ' , which is not defined in the legislation .
This would jeopardise the sound management and efficient implementation of the regulation .
Amendments Nos 14 and 15 cannot be accepted because they go beyond the institutional agreement .
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that they are not consistent with the dual legal base of the regulation .
I hope I have adequately explained the reasoning behind the positions I have taken on the amendments .
Mr President , provisions for animal health when transporting pets are particularly important for Member States which are currently entirely free of rabies .
In spite of this , I believe that it is vital for moves and travel across borders within the EU to be made easier for families and individuals who are travelling with a pet .
I am pleased that the Council 's proposal has taken into account the views put forward in Parliament 's first consideration of the matter .
I find it incomprehensible that there are currently different provisions relating to animal health when transporting pets for commercial purposes in the EU .
The risk of rabies infection cannot be significantly different simply because the purpose of the pet 's journey is different .
Therefore , it is necessary to adapt the health rules for transporting pets for commercial purposes to this directive .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Evans for her excellent work on this issue .
Mr President , this measure is of great significance in those countries - the United Kingdom , Ireland and Sweden - which are now bringing their rules on the movement of pet animals into line with practices elsewhere in the Community .
Like the rapporteur , I believe it is a pity that we could not reach agreement before the conciliation stage , but I understand the differences .
Some of those differences will be reflected in this debate , and I still have some minor differences with the rapporteur , which she has already acknowledged .
For those countries which have prevented the entry of animals that may be at risk of rabies without a long period of quarantine , this is , in a way , an act of faith .
It is made possible by the fact that we now have effective vaccination methods which can be indicated by the transponder chip .
We have recently had representations from some members of the veterinary profession arguing for an extension of the tattooing principle and claiming that the transponder chip can be surgically removed or otherwise nullified .
I cannot accept those arguments .
There is broad agreement between the Commission and all Members of this House that we should move toward alignment .
I share the rapporteur 's concern that the movement of young animals , which must present at least some element of risk , should be subject to the same constraints as that of other categories .
I have not been able to follow the arguments against that , other than that it may , somewhere along the line , affect the trade in animals .
But , as the Commissioner well knows , trade in animals , if it is not effectively handled , has led to the perpetuation of some serious abuses in the Community in recent years .
I do not believe this is a persuasive argument .
I agree , however , with the Commission and not the rapporteur on Amendments Nos 7 , 8 , and 9 .
It is counterproductive to introduce amendments which will effectively constrain the movement of animals between some existing Member States , as well as extending the scheme - as the United Kingdom and other countries with the current constraints would like - to countries that are not rabies-free .
For the United States and Canada , for example , we see no reason why there should be the further impediments set out in Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 .
We agree with the rapporteur , however , on the question of comitology .
I welcome the Commissioner 's assurance that a suitable amendment allowing for reference to Parliament at any process of review will be introduced .
In conclusion , although this is a small measure to many and will not mean much to those countries where animals routinely cross internal EU borders , for those who cherish pets as lifelong companions it is a measure that will be greatly welcomed .
I am happy to inform you that a delegation from the Senate of Puerto Rico have taken their seats in the visitors ' gallery .
The delegation is headed by Mr Antonio Fas Alzamora , the President of the Senate of Puerto Rico , and is made up of three members of the Senate .
President Fas Alzamora , I would like to extend a very warm welcome to you and your delegation .
I have been informed that you are going to have a number of important meetings with Members of Parliament here in Strasbourg .
On behalf of the entire Parliament , I wish you a very enjoyable visit .
Thank you for coming to visit Parliament .
President .
Voting time is now suspended .
It will be resumed after the formal sitting .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.56 a.m. and resumed at 12.36 a.m. )

We had no objection to voting in favour of the report ( which concerns Portugal ) , but would like to take this opportunity of pointing out that Greece has been outrageously wronged in the distribution of milk quotas and the Commission should quickly table a proposal righting that wrong by doubling Greece 's quota for cow 's milk .
The production quota of around 700 000 tonnes set for Greece does not even meet domestic demand , which totals over 1 100 000 tonnes and , when it is exceeded , it costs livestock farmers a fortune in co-responsibility levies .
At the same time , certain dairy companies are known to have made a killing by raking in huge profits at the expense of livestock farmers - who are forced to supply their milk at ever lower prices - and increasing the price of products to the consumer .
Livestock farming in Greece is on death row and Greek consumers are forced to buy imported long-life products because it takes too long to get fresh milk to Greece from the Member States of the EU ; and yet Greece has the potential to increase its output to meet the demand for fresh milk .
We are calling for a fair distribution of quotas based on population figures , consumer demand and production potential .
The Fiori Report has not received my support .
I have abstained for two reasons .
First of all , it is unwise to reduce the excise duty on biofuels before we have a complete picture of the environmental impact of the introduction of these fuels on road transportation .
Moreover , several statements have been made about tax policy , an outstanding example of a policy that should take shape close to the people , that is to say in the Member States .
A European initiative can only be justified in the event of demonstrable harmful competitive distortion .
Secondly , I object to LPG being classified as an alternative fuel .
It is , after all , a petroleum product .
Although fewer polluting substances are released as a whole during combustion , there is no doubt that harmful substances are emitted .
An alternative fuel is fundamentally different from the so-called traditional fuels because it is both a renewable and emission-free source of energy .
As such , LPG certainly cannot be labelled an alternative fuel .
In conclusion , these two elements have prevented me from supporting the report .
I certainly welcome a shift to fuels that are less environmentally harmful , but not in the way proposed in the report .
At the Johannesburg Summit a 15 % increase in the production of alternative energy sources by 2010 was proposed .
Increasing the productivity of renewables is the only long-term alternative to traditional energy sources .
Research and development need to be stepped up with a view to achieving this .
The positive effects flowing from this are self-evident .
Research creates jobs ; increased use of biofuels provides an additional product alternative for the agricultural sector ; and , last but not least , negative environmental impacts are reduced .
For all these reasons we have voted for the Fiori Report .
Mr President , Mrs Evans ' document concerns the movement of pet animals .
The report appears to represent progress for the free movement of pet animals in Europe too .
Indeed , the report lists dogs , cats , ornamental tropical fish , amphibia , reptiles , birds and mammals .
Yes , you did hear me say ornamental tropical fish , amongst other things . As you know , Mr President , I have a direct line to the fish .
The sardines in the sea complained : ' We too have free movement , but only to end up in restaurant kitchens , to be thrown straight into the frying pan , while ornamental tropical fish can just enjoy themselves swimming round tanks thanks to your directive .
Why is it that you at the European Parliament do not do something to allow us too to become pensioner fish at last rather than persisting in wanting to fry us for your dinner ? '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to speak not about fish and frying pans , like Mr Fatuzzo , but about a very serious issue in connection with the Lambert Report .
The SPD Members of this Parliament have voted for this report although we can understand the difficulty that a number of our fellow Members had in supporting it .
I would like to mention one key point that persuaded us to give this report our support , although we would have liked it to be structured differently .
I have in mind here the fact that Mrs Lambert 's directive makes no legal distinction between refugees , that is people who are victims of political persecution , and people who require the European Union to offer them temporary protection .
When the question is what care and benefits these groups of persons should receive in the EU Member States , this is quite justifiable .
Indeed , we do not want people who have fled from a country to be treated differently .
What is , however , at stake here is that a qualifying distinction needs to be drawn between someone who is a victim of political persecution , such as a member of a resistance movement against a dictatorship who goes into exile and needs protection , and on the other hand people fleeing from a temporary situation such as , for example , a civil war , who therefore only need temporary protection , or , as defined in the Geneva convention on refugees , subsidiary protection .
Mrs Lambert 's directive covers all these groups of persons .
Our view is that a distinction ought to have been made .
We also make this distinction in German constitutional law as a matter of principle , because Article 16 of the German constitution defines a legally obtainable right to protection against political persecution , but not a legally obtainable right to subsidiary protection .
We German Social Democrats have therefore voted in favour of this report despite all these misgivings , partly because it would not have got through otherwise and this House cannot fail to deliver an opinion when consulted by the Council .
Mr President , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I voted for this proposal for a directive because , like many of the Members , I feel that our States have a duty to receive refugees and to do so properly .
I would stress , Mr President , that , as I see it , it is important to address the issue of where the refugees should be received and which States should pay for this when - as , I am afraid to say , sometimes happens - large numbers of citizens of other States flee to our European States .
The burden of receiving refugees should be spread equally among all our States of Europe .
The Moderate Party delegation to the European Parliament has today voted in favour of the Council directive on minimum standards for when citizens of third countries and stateless persons will be considered refugees or as persons who , for other reasons , require international protection and on the legal status of these persons .
However , we have voted against Parliament 's amended proposal .
We believe in the clear right of refugees to find sanctuary from persecution and other oppression by entering the EU .
Establishing minimum standards is an important first step on the road towards a common asylum policy in the EU .
However , it is important to emphasise that , over and above the minimum standards proposed by the EU , it should be possible for Member States to provide people with protection for other reasons .
Transparency must lie at the heart of creating a common stance within the EU on immigration and migration .
Designing an immigration policy , in other words rules for being able to move to a country , is always a balancing act .
Open borders could easily lead to us closing the door on dynamism and improvements .
Immigration is an asset .
The opportunity for foreign citizens who are not refugees to immigrate to Europe as migrant workers should be expanded .
- ( DA ) We have today voted in favour of Mrs Lambert 's report because , in many areas , it improves upon the minimum standards that , under the auspices of the EU , an attempt is now unfortunately being made to establish when it comes to refugees and persons with subsidiary refugee status .
The report seeks to broaden the range of people to whom the standards would apply and to improve conditions and rights .
For example , the Commission 's proposal relates exclusively to third country nationals and stateless persons , while EU citizens are not covered by it .
The report attempts to correct this state of affairs , for it would be an odd and dangerous signal to send to the international community that the EU countries , which have each individually signed the Geneva Convention , are able to decide mutually to exempt themselves from the scope of the international agreement , believing as they do that the Convention cannot be applied to their own citizens .
Moreover , the Commission proposes that persons with refugee status must have more extensive rights .
That is naturally a good thing , but it should also apply to persons with subsidiary refugee status , as recommended by the rapporteur .
The June Movement is in favour of a humane refugee policy . We support every human being 's right to a life of dignity , but we believe as a matter of principle that this aim is not best served by developing a common European refugee policy based on the supranational first pillar of which the proposal in the report is a part .
I wish to place on the record the fact that I did not participate in the vote on the Lambert report ( A5-0333 / 02 ) .
My non-participation should not be seen as opposition to the principle of the proposed directive but rather to the inclusion of certain elements in the report which I feel are inappropriate and would lead to a diminution of the underlying beliefs in the protection of those most in need of our support .
The following are some of the different elements with which I disagree .
The definition of the family goes far beyond the accepted norm in most Member States and other countries ; this issue should have been addressed more sensitively and the report fails badly in this respect .
The deadlines set under various articles are too short .
The reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights is used inappropriately in the report .
Extending the scope of the directive beyond those who are suffering persecution will ultimately reduce the legitimate opportunity for protecting those in greatest need .
For these and other reasons I felt it inappropriate to participate in the vote .
British Labour members of the PES have voted in support of the Lambert report .
We are convinced that the way forward for the European Union is to move towards a common EU policy on asylum .
This report on minimum standards is one important part of the evolution of this common policy .
We reject the hard right-wing view of those conservatives in the EPP who seek to restrict the right to asylum and protection .
As socialists , we believe that it is essential to be compassionate and sympathetic in our approach .
In working towards a common policy for fifteen countries and ultimately twenty-five , there will always be some variations in detail .
We believe these differences should not be used to divide us in our efforts to find compromises , instead we should be proud enough to build on the common ground that unites us .
Therefore , whilst there are some aspects of the Lambert report which we as Labour MEPs might question , the overall direction of the report is undoubtedly sound , hence our vote in favour .
Europe is one of the world 's most prosperous , democratic and stable continents .
It therefore comes as no surprise that many people who are persecuted , threatened or harassed in other countries seek refuge over here .
With them come others who are not being persecuted but who are attracted by the level of prosperity in Europe .
If these people have been trained in a specialist field in which there is a shortage of manpower over here , they are even actively recruited , often at the expense of facilities in their countries of origin .
Real refugees , on the other hand , are increasingly less welcome .
Some EU Member State governments are now considering nothing but the numbers .
Restricting the number of refugees , therefore , is seen as preferable to a sound assessment of the reasons why people flee and the extent to which they are in danger .
It is time we stopped this practice and took the need of the refugees themselves as a guiding principle .
We should stop extraditing people to states that are unsafe for them , refusing to reunite families or refusing to recognise persecution on the basis of intolerance or sex discrimination .
On 24 September , the Evans Report on asylum and security was a step in the right direction , even though my group took the view that these proposals did not go far enough .
These proposals , however , ultimately attracted more no-votes than yes-votes .
The European Parliament 's contribution would be very useful and positive , if , whilst maintaining the scope and the limits of the proposals for a directive , it contributed to the legal clarification of concepts that could raise doubts or controversy in the transposition of the future directive and in its implementation .
Unfortunately , however , the rapporteur and the majority of the specialised Parliamentary committee have not given this clarification and have instead taken the matter , in a way that is inexplicable in the context of a minimum common status for all Member States , along a route of successive extensions to the legislative provision , which , in a counterproductive way , can only create more difficulties and new obstacles that are unnecessary for its adoption .
Hence our votes on the specific issues and in the final vote : most of the amendments tabled have not been useful and , on the contrary , frequently go beyond what is necessary and reasonable when it comes to setting minimum standards for all Member States .
Nevertheless , I am in favour of the original initiative received in Parliament , because , in line with the Tampere European Council , we advocate the approximation of rules in the field of refugee status , and of other subsidiary measures , with regard to those persons who , although denied the aforementioned refugee status , are in need of identical protection .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mrs Lambert 's report ( A5 - 0333 / 2002 ) .
We agree that the EU should lay down minimum standards for the recognition of third country nationals and stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection .
We are nonetheless aware of the fact that the directive is covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and does not apply to Denmark , cf. the protocol on Denmark 's position .
Mr President , Mrs Cederschiöld 's report , which we have just adopted in this Chamber , concerns a Council framework decision seeking to protect us from what is known as hacking into information systems .
When my friend , Mr Maurizio Infissi from Capriate San Gervasio - a beautiful place near Bergamo - who , although a pensioner , is a computer expert , heard that we were going to discuss this matter , he said : ' You are doing the right thing in protecting yourselves against hacking into information systems , but would it not be a good idea to protect pensioners too against the attacks of governments , Prime Ministers and Budget Ministers , who sometimes carry out violent attacks on our incomes , providing pensions which are all too often miserly and prevent us from living dignified lives ?
When will you adopt measures and hold debates to protect pensioners against attacks by the state ? '
' I am sure it will be soon , ' I replied , and I certainly hope so , Mr President !
. ( PT ) The report voted on in Parliament improves the text proposed by the Commission , by increasing references to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms as well as privacy .
In some aspects , however , it upholds the line taken by the Commission , as well as suggesting the communitarisation of policies .
It should be noted that the Commission proposal falls in line with the approach of taking advantage of the events of 11 September 2001 by restricting certain fundamental rights , which has not led to much protest , specifically rights pertaining to the area of freedom , security and justice .
Furthermore , the Commission proposal betrays an obsession with regulation , an attempt to harmonise criminal law and a suppressive rather than preventive viewpoint , with which we cannot agree .
Hence our vote against the report .
People can become involved in computer hacking for very different reasons .
It is not simply a question of resourceful young people exploring the possibilities technology has to offer , or of ' nerds ' who enjoy wreaking havoc in other people 's work ; it is also about critical investigators who are looking for information that is important to many but that is kept secret unfairly .
The latter group helps reduce opportunities for environmental scandals , corruption , financial fraud , warmongering and dictatorial acts .
In all cases , incidents of computer hacking interfere with the smooth operation of organisations in both the private and public sector , but when these incidents are assessed , what ultimately counts is the positive or negative impact these disruptive activities have .
I fully agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld , that this framework decision and the relevant national implementing measures should not be used to suppress freedom of expression , demonstration and association .
Minor disruptions that are viewed as unimportant in the individual Member States need not be made punishable by the EU .
The application of Article 12 , in which contact points are set up for the mutual exchange of experiences , can also have adverse effects .
I therefore support the proposal to postpone this section .
. ( PT ) I have supported this report because it highlights our awareness of the importance of fighting computer crime and because it demonstrates essential concerns about limiting criminal , preventive and punitive action in a way that respects the freedoms of opinion and of association and the freedom to demonstrate .
I have also supported two other proposals by the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld : the first is her call for the EU to ensure , whenever it addresses issues concerning the transmission of information , that corresponding provisions exist in the field of data protection , in order to deal with the risks associated with their transmission ; the second is her less severe evaluation in the case of the first offence of illegal access by a minor .
In short , I think that Parliament has contributed to improving the proposal for a framework decision intended to provide a response to cybercrime by seeking to approximate the legal provisions of the Member States in order to guarantee that all attacks against information systems become a criminal offence and by promoting police and judicial cooperation .
Lastly , I believe that the creation of a network of contact points that can be consulted around the clock in the fight against crime that uses these highly advanced technologies is extremely important .
Mr President , the report concerns the importance and dynamics of the theatre and the performing arts in an enlarged Europe .
I have had another dream , Mr President : I dreamt I was watching a play in which the enlarged Europe was taking part .
What did I see in this play ? I saw yours truly having lunch in a restaurant in a place called Vercelli in Italy with Mr Mádl , whom we applauded just now , and the President of the Republic of Bulgaria , the former King Simeon II .
We were savouring saffron risotto , mushroom risotto and black risotto with cuttlefish , as is appropriate in a place such as Vercelli where rice is grown .
We were all thoroughly enjoying our meal , but the chef said to us : ' Soon , you will no longer be able to enjoy rice if you Members of the European Parliament do not do something to help agriculture in the reform of the common agricultural policy that is currently being carried out in the European Parliament and the European Community , for the agricultural activities of rice-growing areas such as Vercelli , Novara , Pavia , Milan and other areas of Europe must be safeguarded too . '

Our position on culture depends on the type of policy it promotes and the values , principles and aesthetic standards it puts forward .
The prime question is whether cultural activities function for the benefit of the workers and contribute to social progress or whether they function for the benefit of big business , extending its control and increasing its profits .
The report expresses the need for cultural processes relating to the performing arts to be incorporated - ideologically , politically and socially - into EU policy .
It wants the theatre to serve the ' European ideal ' and to apply policies such as mobility and lifelong learning .
And it targets Mediterranean countries and the Central and Eastern European countries in particular .
What , however , is this ' ideal ' we are being called on to support ?
If it is not clear , how can we be expected to aid and abet contradictory procedures , which resolve a few temporary problems ( intellectual property rights , movement , education ) , but which also expose the fact that these problems were caused by the intervention of big business in each country 's culture ?
Similarly , we disagree with the dominant role of private companies and patrons and with the hazy outline of the nascent ' European cultural identity ' and the methods being developed to impose it .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece abstained from voting .
We have abstained from voting on Mrs Fraisse 's report on the importance and dynamics of the theatre and the performing arts in an enlarged Europe .
We have a positive basic attitude to the European Union .
As Swedish liberals , we see European integration as an opportunity to solve cross-border problems such as the environment , trade , movement across borders , human rights and conflict management .
Here the democracies of Europe have a chance to show the world that cooperation leads to peace and increased prosperity .
We also believe in the principle of subsidiarity , that is that a decision should be taken as close to those whom it concerns as possible .
This is why we actively promote the issue of a constitution for the European Union which makes the division of responsibility clear for everyone .
It must be clear to all citizens that the EU will only tackle issues about which it is most expert , that is cross-border issues .
All other issues should be handled at local , regional or national level .
Theatre and dramatic art are important and we support people 's opportunity for increased freedom of movement .
We wish to make it easier for foreign workers to get visas and residence permits , but we believe that all occupational groups should be allowed to move across borders on the same terms .
The proposals should not just apply to actors and dramatic artists but to all occupational groups .
We also support cultural diversity , aid for artistic creativity , artistic freedom and access to culture for all our citizens , but we do not believe that they should be enshrined in any future European constitution .
We wholeheartedly support several of the ideas presented in Mrs Fraisse 's report at national level .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , which seeks to draw attention to the effective promotion of the conditions needed to ensure that the performing arts have , on the one hand , an increasingly large audience and , on the other , are continually more attractive and accessible , specifically through the promotion and protection of the mobility of artists and their work , of support for translation and subtitling as a tool for harmonisation and mutual cultural comprehension and of incentives for training and for dissemination actions .
The protection of the performing arts is also a prerequisite if we are to ensure the preservation of the values of cultural diversity that characterises the European spirit , and so I agree with the importance that the rapporteur attaches to taking a close look at the performing arts in countries preparing to join the EU - a decisive element in the construction of a Europe based on the sharing of values and whose greatest asset is its diversity .
Lastly , to follow this train of thought , I think that we must attach particular value to private initiatives - because these are the spontaneous expression of the Community 's cultural heartbeat - instead of devoting our energies to direct action by the State or by public authorities .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , let me start by thanking my colleagues , particularly those on the Committee on Budgets , and the Committee on Budgets ' secretariat .
They have done a fantastic job with this budget and I think this is an excellent opportunity to draw attention to the incredibly hard work carried out by staff in this context .
I would also like to thank the Commission and the Council , who through a long line of trialogues , conciliation , working groups and other contacts have helped to ensure that we now have a good draft budget for 2003 to vote on .
I would also like to emphasise that on the vast majority of points we in the Committee on Budgets have reached broad agreement , which is naturally also an enormous strength for Parliament .
I would like to begin with some fundamental reflections on the EU 's budgetary system .
I have to say that after having worked on this budget for approximately ten months , I am of the firm opinion that the EU 's budgetary system is in great need of major reform .
We will gain a number of improvements in the form of the new Financial Regulation .
There will also be a number of improvements in the form of the ABB system , the system of activity-based budgeting .
We have been able to tackle a number of points ourselves by improving the internal work of Parliament itself .
I have put a great deal of effort into obtaining a better dialogue with the committees .
Now , dialogue between , on the one hand , the Committee on Budgets and , on the other hand , the committees and their rapporteurs for the budget takes place as a practically permanent process , beginning with the guidelines in the spring , including the new work carried out this year with special working groups to monitor this year 's budget and extending to the amendments ahead of the first reading .
I therefore believe that we have reduced the traditional conflict where the various committees do not think that the Committee on Budgets is paying sufficient attention to their political priorities and where the Committee on Budgets in turn has often considered that the committees are fighting for unrealistic budgetary demands .
This year we have come further than before , not least when it comes to the traditionally problematic section on what are known as the A30 grants to various European organisations .
This year through close cooperation with the committees and the political groups we have been able to submit a unanimous proposal from the Committee on Budgets .
As you know , we have also reformed the budget debate and have already held the major budget debate at the September sitting .
This was an experiment which I think worked well but there is no doubt that it can be improved further .
Despite these improvements I am still not satisfied .
Here I would like to send a signal to our colleagues in the Convention .
I think that it is unreasonable to make permanent a system involving a long-term budget plan which has such rigid principles for sectoral budget ceilings as those we are living with at the moment .
Now , only halfway through the budget planning period , they are giving rise to an increasing number of ad hoc systems which risk making the budgeting methodology completely confusing .
During this year 's budget process we have already received proposals from the Commission on use of the flexibility instrument in three cases .
In the July conciliation we agreed on more planned use of something which should really be an emergency reserve .
We have solved the Commission 's problem of obtaining sufficient personnel resources ahead of enlargement by means of a complicated model of frontloading , which means that we hunt down unused resources for the current year and use them for costs which would otherwise have fallen in 2003 .
Just today in conciliation with the Council we agreed on another new flexibility instrument , the EU Solidarity Fund , to deal with the effects of natural disasters , etc .
Now , however , we have to ask ourselves how many such flexibility instruments and how many ad hoc solutions we will need before we realise on a wide front that the entire budgeting methodology needs reforming and to become more flexible .
The Committee on Budgets has also chosen which side it is on .
We have chosen to consciously exceed the ceilings within three budget categories , partly to demonstrate the absurdity of the current locked system .
I will return to this when giving more detailed reasons .
Note that I am not looking to abolish the budget ceilings .
I am not arguing that we should abandon the demand for budgetary restrictions .
However , there must be something in between total abandonment and what we are living with at the moment , a rigid planned economy locked for seven years .
I hope that in the future it will also go without saying that the codecision model must apply to the entire budget , including agricultural policy , and that all the EU 's expenses must be included in the budget , including the European Development Fund .
This is an important area which I hope we can continue to discuss in the years ahead .
I would now like to mention a more general problem before going into the various budget headings , namely the implementation of the EU 's budget .
This is becoming a serious problem .
We cannot go back to the citizens , the taxpayers , year after year and tell them that every year we take EUR 15 billion from them unnecessarily , which we then pay back to their grateful ministers of finance .
I believe that major work is needed on this issue if the Union is to gain credibility for its policies and its budget and if we are to be able to live up to all the promises we make through the budget .
We must quite simply simplify the administration of the structural funds , which we can start doing right now in the current period .
We have Commissioner Barnier 's word on this , while of course we can be even more radical ahead of the coming programme period .
I also believe that we must improve the entire process when starting new multi-annual programmes .
Time after time we are told that when multi-annual programmes are starting their third or fourth programme period we are now in the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , the third LIFE programme , etc. a whole year is often needed in order to start up activities at the beginning of a new period .
This is completely preposterous .
It sometimes means having to compress work intended to take five years into four years in practice .
A third area where I think we have to achieve an improvement in implementation and simplification is staff issues .
This year we decided not to use flexibility for new posts in the Commission .
This does not mean that these posts are not needed .
In the long term I believe there will be a demand for more posts , partly to operate the new , more decentralised organisation in the external service , but of course this means that the Commission must thoroughly demonstrate that it is working effectively , that reform of the Commission is being carried out , that more efficient management is having an impact , and that , for example , the second step in what is known as the RELEX reform is really being carried out .
Without these efforts it will be hopeless to argue for more Commission posts , even if we are convinced that they really are necessary in the long term .
I would now briefly like to address some of the actual problems in each budget area .
When it comes to agricultural policy , heading 1 , the committee has for many years argued for a fundamental change , the development of agricultural policy .
As a demonstration we have even decided to exceed the budget ceiling by EUR 20 million for sub-heading 1b , rural development , to indicate our position in this respect .
We consider namely that in the future , money , especially the excess money under heading 1 , should be switched to the more proactive rural development policy .
We also propose that subsidies for the export of live animals should be reduced and accounted for separately .
This will clearly show how much money is actually being spent on live animal exports .
By the way , it will be very interesting to see whether the governments which have criticised animal transport , etc. now really seize the opportunity to follow Parliament 's line .
Everything we are proposing is in line with the Commission 's proposal for a mid-term review , even if in the resolution we have chosen to call it development of agricultural policy rather than reform .
Heading 2 : the Structural Funds .
I have already mentioned the problem with implementation .
Therefore I will now only briefly take up the fisheries question .
I fully understand that in the current situation the Danish Presidency is prioritising enlargement .
This is the most important political question but nevertheless , fisheries policy must also be reformed .
The EU must create sustainable fishing which can survive in the long term .
While awaiting concrete proposals we have chosen to do two things .
Firstly we maintain that last year 's promise of a further EUR 27 million to convert the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets will be met .
At the same time we have chosen not to adopt a position on how this is to be funded in detail , we will return to that at a later date .
When it comes to the budget item for fisheries reform we have chosen to set up such a budget item but not to allocate concrete amounts to it .
It will be a ' memorandum item ' .
In heading 3 , internal policies , I would mainly like to mention information policy .
We do not accept the Council 's and the Commission 's proposal for comprehensive slimming down of information policy .
On the contrary , we think that the union needs better support among its citizens .
Here information is a necessary lubricant .
Despite this , however , we are moving the money and our priority is clear , what matters is enlargement and the future of the EU .
I would also like to point to the external authorities , the agencies .
Here we have taken a more restrictive line .
We have followed the Council 's draft budget in the vast majority of cases .
This is because the Member States are on the boards of these agencies and should therefore reasonably take the consequences of these agencies ' needs into account in the Council 's own budget proposal .
Unfortunately we have to say that this is not always the case .
Therefore I believe that this is a matter we will need to discuss somewhat in the future .
When it comes to pilot projects and preparatory measures , I think we have achieved a very good dialogue with the Commission on their implementation .
We are now launching some new ideas , including an idea for a pilot project for co-operation between small and medium-sized companies in the EU , not only with the candidate countries but also with countries such as Russia , countries in the Balkans and in North Africa , which I believe will be very important .
Finally , I would like to concentrate on heading 4 , external policies .
Ever since I entered Parliament in 1999 we have been forced to fight the same battle in this area every year .
The Council and the Commission propose major new initiatives .
This has concerned the Balkans and Serbia .
This year it is Afghanistan and the Global Health Fund , support to the fight against AIDS and other poverty-related illnesses in the developing world .
No one takes responsibility , however , for allocating the resources needed .
I think this is absurd .
The budget ceiling is simply too low .
Costs have increased every year without any new resources being allocated .
This year we have chosen to exceed the ceiling but to do it openly by means of an asterisk amendment , where we demand EUR 72 million more for heading 4 with direct reference to Afghanistan and the Global Health Fund .
We have built this proposal as far as possible on a combination of priorities from our two committees here , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I believe this is what will be the main point in negotiations with the Council between the first and the second reading .
It must be resolved if we are to achieve an acceptable role for the EU 's external actions .
This also applies to the common foreign and security policy .
It is unacceptable that this work is increasingly sliding over more and more from administrative expenses to operational activities but without the influence on the budget which the European Parliament must have in ordinary external relations .
For this reason we have chosen to set the CFSP grant at the minimum level , 30 million , plus 10 million but we have allocated this through the Cards programme in order to be able to establish the European police task force in Bosnia .
I believe this is an issue which we must discuss very carefully between the first and the second readings .
To conclude , I would like to say that this is the last budget for an EU with 15 Member States .
Therefore , of course , starting to prepare for enlargement has clearly been the utmost priority even in this budget .
I am particularly pleased to be able to say that we have resolved the majority of the problems with enlargement .
We have resolved them in broad agreement .
All the political groups have played their part , as have members from all the national delegations .
I think this feels like possibly the greatest success of this work this year .
Mr President , I would also like to thank those who worked together to help produce the budget for 2003 .
I would like to thank all my fellow members of the Committee on Budgets , the highly competent budget secretariat , the Presidium , above all today 's President and , finally , the Commission , the Council and , especially , a very pragmatic and proactive Danish Presidency .
Throughout this year , the EU 's administrative budget , what we term heading 5 , has been the budget 's major problem .
We started the year with a large predicted deficit in the 2003 budget .
This was said to be in the region of EUR 140 million .
Although this was reduced in various stages during the spring , the Commission in its preliminary draft budget proposed that the flexibility instrument be used to the tune of EUR 66 million , primarily to cover the Commission 's costs in completing the preparations for enlargement .
Both the Council and Parliament opposed such a solution for different reasons .
Firstly , because it is hard to see an administrative budget as the kind of issue where the flexibility instrument should be used .
It can hardly be claimed that it is a case of unforeseen expenses or that enlargement is something that has suddenly come upon us .
The second reason was because , together with other areas where the flexibility instrument has already been earmarked , this would use up half the instrument and thus make it impossible for it to be used in areas where significantly better use could presumably be made of it .
The third reason , which is not least important for politicians who feel a sense of responsibility , is that the budget limits are actually there to be complied with , even if it can be claimed with a certain amount of justification that the EU 's budget is far too rigid .
When we entered into this agreement between the Council and Parliament at a uniquely early point in Brussels on 19 July , we achieved at least three things .
We read the whole budget and respected the given ceiling for heading 5 , we knew how large the Council 's budget was to be and we had limited the European Parliament 's own budget .
Within this framework , the priorities which Parliament had supported even in the guidelines were entirely feasible , these being primarily two things .
The main and obvious priority was enlargement .
In view of the decisions subsequently taken , we know that if the Member States comply with their undertakings on ten new Member States at the Council meeting in Copenhagen in December and if the agreements are signed in March , we will be able to have 147 observers from all these countries here at the European Parliament as early as April next year .
The necessary decisions will be made in terms of property , premises , etc .
The second priority was implementing necessary reforms .
These will be required with or without enlargement , especially when it comes to Parliament .
Here , the issues are primarily those key areas where every parliament , whether national or European , has to be strong .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , the issue is one of reinforcing the budget structure , not only of the Committee on Budgets but also of all the other committees in their important work on the budget .
Furthermore , it is about strengthening Parliament 's legislative function .
In a very short time , this has become a parliament with considerable legislative power .
As such , the conditions under which this power is exercised must also be improved .
Once all this was done , there remained two important issues to resolve within the framework of the 2003 budget .
It was a question of distribution across all the institutions , with approaching enlargement as the main priority in this context too .
It was also a question of finding a solution for the Commission 's unresolved problems regarding financing the preparations for enlargement .
The latter is particularly important as , following conciliation , one party was clearly the loser , namely the Commission .
As early as at the conciliation stage , both the Council and Parliament specifically promised to help attempt to solve the Commission 's problems ahead of enlargement .
This promise has subsequently been repeated on numerous occasions both by me and other representatives of both the Council and Parliament .
It is in this context that the concept of frontloading enters the picture as the instrument we came to use .
The initial step involved obtaining a figure from all the institutions for the amount of money remaining in the annual budget , that is , the budget for 2002 .
It is these funds which we can use in a second step to reduce pressure on the 2003 budget and which can be transferred to the Commission to ensure that we are able to meet the costs of preparations for enlargement .
At a meeting attended by the secretaries-general of all the institutions , we thus produced a total sum of approximately EUR 77 million remaining unused by all the institutions in total .
The maximum amount the Commission can spend on preparing for enlargement amounts to approximately EUR 72 million .
I would like to say a few words on Parliament 's own share of this frontloading .
According to the proposal which both the Committee on Budgets and Parliament 's own Presidium supported last night , this amounted to EUR 43 million for the current year .
This is money which in fact , in line with the far-sighted way of handling money which Parliament has used hitherto , we should have spent on early repayments on Parliament 's own properties .
We will now postpone this by one year .
This also means that we will receive some of this money back one year later .
Of the EUR 43 million which will thus instead be transferred to the Commission , we shall , still in line with the proposal we have to reach an opinion on today , receive EUR 35 million back in 2003 .
In this context , let me mention that the original proposal was for EUR 40 million .
We are thus now proposing that this be changed to EUR 35 million .
This means that Parliament 's share of this frontloading , seen over two budget years , will be EUR 8 million , a figure which I consider to be well balanced .
It is generous but , at the same time , well balanced seen in comparison with all the other institutions .
This shows that this frontloading , as I see it , is developing into a considerable success and could also be used in other contexts in the future .
It creates the opportunity to use a budget over several years to make the best possible use of resources .
Earlier , I mentioned that we promised the Commission that we would contribute to attempting to solve the problems of the costs of preparing for enlargement .
A promise is a promise and , as we know , it must be kept .
We now stand here having implemented frontloading which gives us the opportunity to comply with what we promised .
This is an excellent feeling .
For me , all this is also about a kind of investment in good relations .
Enlargement will only succeed if we realise that it actually is something we must work on together . It is a joint undertaking .
As the rapporteur , I am very grateful for the way in which all the institutions , large and small , have played their part in attempting to resolve this very difficult situation .
Mr President , Mr Färm , Mr Stenmarck , ladies and gentlemen , we have taken a massive step towards the enlargement of the European Union with the positive result of the referendum in Ireland .
It is now up to the Council to agree on a common negotiating position for financing issues at the summit this week in Brussels , that is to say how much in the way of resources can be included in the European Union Budget for the new Member States as from 2004 .
This once again clearly signals that the 2003 Budget will very probably be the last budget for a Union of 15 Member States .
So we are pretty much on the eve of enlargement .
That means that the 2003 financial year will not only present further challenges for the candidate countries , but also for the European institutions that need to make preparations .
There have been some serious differences here between the Council and the Commission , because the Council only approved additional posts for itself for 2003 in the run-up to enlargement , but rejected additional posts for the Commission .
So it is all the more incomprehensible that , in its own preparations for the Brussels Summit , the Council repeatedly highlights its expectations of the Commission for 2003 in terms of preparation for enlargement , for example in relation to the Structural Funds .
But that requires staff too , of course .
So the Commission has all the more reason to appreciate the fact that the European Parliament has taken the initiative to ensure that the Commission 's requests are met .

I would like to express my respect for all the rapporteurs , and in particular Mr Stenmarck and Mr Färm , for the way in which they have not only gained support for frontloading , but have also vehemently fought , every step of the way , for it to be implemented .
I would like to thank you for your comments , Mr Stenmarck .
You made a promise and you have kept it , which we really appreciate .
Once again , I would like to express my very sincere thanks , on behalf of the Commission , to the rapporteurs and to the Committee on Budgets .
This idea will now be implemented by means of an interinstitutional rectifying budget , and the very fact that there is an interinstitutional rectifying budget is an achievement in itself .
So thank you for your support .
Let me turn now to expenditure on the common agricultural policy .
As you know , the Commission has pursued the same line as the European Parliament , that is a restructuring of market-related expenditure and market organisation so as to strengthen support for rural areas .
The Commission made this subject a key element of its mid-term review proposals .
We cannot , however , agree to these proposals being implemented now , as the rules still prevent this and an increase in resources for the rural development programme go beyond the current provision in the Financial Perspective .
You have , however , also proposed another amendment , and you , Mr Färm , stressed this again just now , to the effect that the budget headings for export refunds for animals should be subdivided so that refunds for live animals can be identified separately .
I think that this could be considered , as long as the relevant legal bases allow it .
I share your concern about the need for enhanced animal protection and it is also very much shared by the Commission as a whole .
A third of the Budget will once again be devoted to structural policy next year .
There was a debate in plenary in September about the implementation of the Structural Fund programmes , and Mr Färm has one again spoken very clearly about this .
You very emphatically call for the procedures to be simplified , to allow Member States to draw down funds more quickly and more simply .
My colleague responsible for this , Mr Barnier , held a seminar on this in order to establish what scope there is here .
This was a further indication of the fact that the Commission is very committed to this issue .
However , we also need the Member States ' cooperation , and it simply is not good enough if the Member States ' estimates of the level of Structural Fund appropriations they implement in a year , that is how much they can actually use , are as wide of the mark as they have been in recent years .
As far as this is concerned , I have to say that we have of course to jointly check whether the increased budget appropriations proposed here by Parliament are necessary for the Structural Funds next year .
The Commission is largely able to support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets as regards appropriations for internal policies , for example in the case of measures in favour of immigration and asylum policy , measures in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises , and the proposal in the area of information policy .
As regards the budget for external policies , however , I am not in complete agreement at present . One example here is the Global Health Fund to fight diseases such as AIDS .
Of course there is no denying that the Commission rates the importance of this global fund very highly .
But the issue now is what level of appropriations is needed for 2003 , and also what the source of the funding is to be .
The Commission has once again proposed that half of the appropriations should be financed from the European Development Fund .
I would like to emphasise once again that by far the greatest proportion of appropriations for this global fund has up to now been financed by the European Union , that is to say partly from Community resources and partly from the Member States ' bilateral resources .
One priority area in the budget for external policies is aid for the Balkan states .
A new feature of the 2003 budget is the addition of appropriations for joint police missions to Bosnia .
The Commission has already for this reason added a further EUR 10 million to the Common Foreign and Security Policy budget .
Parliament 's proposal is that this additional sum should be removed again , or rather not inserted in the first place .
I am , however , sure that by the time we get to the second reading of the Budget we will have been able to find a way to finance this important area of external policy .
In relation to the new challenge for the EU Budget of providing appropriate aid for Afghanistan , the Commission welcomes the fact that the Committee on Budgets has agreed to insert a special budget heading .
We also welcome this because the task of providing financial assistance to Afghanistan will of course recur in the budget over the next few years .
It is , however , precisely because of this that we believe this financing should have a regular place in the budget , and should not be provided by calling on the flexibility reserve .
Nevertheless , the Commission believes that there is a continuing need to use the flexibility reserve , not least to find a financial solution in the coming year for the issue of fisheries reform and to provide Portugal and Spain with the remaining resources needed to restructure their fishing fleets .
If Parliament 's proposal is adopted , the 2003 Budget will represent 1.05 % of the combined economic output of all the Member States , that is to say the same level as this year .
I am mentioning this because there are still some very contentious debates going on about the Brussels Summit .
However , if the proposal on the table for the financing of enlargement in 2004 , 2005 and 2006 is adopted , this ratio between the EU budget and European economic output , even with another ten members , will not again reach the level it stood at in the mid-1990s .
If we consider once again the size of the EU Budget and how small the increase currently envisaged is in view of enlargement , then I must say I do not really consider that the debate currently raging is actually justified . If anything , there is a danger that discussions on financing will focus too much on individual issues and perhaps get bogged down in them .
We should , however , bear in mind that the enlargement of the EU is a very good investment in the future , an excellent investment .
In view of this I wish at this point to appeal to the Heads of State and Government to agree on a common position in Brussels so that , following the yes vote in Ireland , we can stick to the timetable for the enlargement of Europe .

Mr President , I wish to join with the others in thanking our redoubtable duo , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , for their excellent work on behalf of Parliament during this budget procedure .
They have both outlined that we are now thinking of a Union which will be extended to at least 25 countries .
For both Parliament and the Commission , enlargement is the main emphasis of this budget .
I would like to express a personal view .
I hope that in future we will avoid too many referenda and too many votes being taken on particular subjects .
It might become contagious in this House and we might adopt a resolution and then consider voting again because we have reached the wrong conclusions .
That said , I should like to refer to Parliament 's and the Commission 's budget .
Our group has strategies for both these budgets , and they have by and large been implemented as we reach the current stage of the budget procedure .
On Parliament 's budget , we would like to emphasise the need for extended provision for freelance translation - because this is going to be an important factor in the years ahead .
We are pleased that early retirement has been extended to the political groups , and thank the Council for that - even if it is absent from this debate this afternoon .
We would like full transparency in the Council in future and for all its legislative discussions to be open to the public .
These are questions which all our group supports .
On the Commission budget , there are four relevant points .
Firstly , on payments and backlog , we would like to see a real effort being made to reduce the EUR 110 billion in commitments .
We are asking , as stated in the resolution , for a report from the Commission as to how it is going to achieve this objective of eliminating outstanding commitments .
Secondly , on internal policies , we are still looking for better value for money and for some of the monies for information policy to be retained in reserve , because we would like to see savings on administration and human resources .
We expect a report from the Commission on this subject by 30 April 2003 .
Thirdly , on external policies , we would like improved accountability .
Therefore , we are supporting the appeal by our rapporteur for more information concerning the interinstitutional agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission on the expenditure of money on foreign and security policy .
We would also like to know what kinds of expenditure the Council is expecting over the next five years , because we also agree with the rapporteur that it is unhealthy to think that the Council is going to be involved in large expenditure of funds which would not be subject to normal accountability and use .
Equally , we are asking the Commission to come forward with some form of thought process .
There seems to be some lethargy on the part of the Commission when it comes to thinking through what kind of priorities we should have for foreign and security policy in the future .
Lastly , my group would like me to say that we want to see this reform process completed and we need to look at how this whole process is being conducted .
We are convinced that progress has been made but we are not yet convinced that this whole programme of reform is going to be implemented .
We would like to know that you are out there selling it to the general public and that these reforms will be completed by the end of next year , as the most recent reform document from the Commission stated .
But , before we approve the new posts , we would very much like to see the reform elements in place and to know you are convinced that this whole reform process will be completed .
If this is not done so by the end of the current term of the Commission and Parliament , we will be in breach of the commitments we made to our electorate to ensure that real institutional reforms are carried out .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I too would of course like to thank our two rapporteurs .
Parliament has had what you might call a Swedish experience , and I think that it has been a good experience . It has been very much geared towards consensus and has been imaginative and flexible in equal measure , and has for once closely examined structural aspects .
I am sure that this Budget procedure also has structural side effects that need to be very carefully examined .
From this perspective , I would also like to make the following comment : we have heard several times that this is the last Budget for just 15 Member States before enlargement .
But I hope that it is also one of the last Budgets before the convention secures full budget rights for this House , in the medium term at least , in relation to all types of expenditure policy and income policy .
That is a request that we have made .
You know that I have repeated this request during every Budget procedure ; it has become a familiar refrain .
I think it is important that we should help to democratise the Budget procedure here .
The hallmark of the Budget as we draw it up at present is that heated debates rage during the budget-setting process around every million , sometimes even every thousand euros , yet during the year we often have to shift funds around and restructure the Budget .
This year alone we will probably draw up six supplementary and amending budgets .
We will have between 70 and 80 carry-overs , which means that a great many appropriations will have to be moved around .
Not only this year , but also in previous years , both during the budget procedure and right at the end of the year we have had to resort to frontloading in order to finance things that strictly speaking fall in the following year .
We also demonstrate by means of this pragmatic approach that we are prepared to finance essential aspects of European policy , and that although we set a Budget at the beginning of the year , there is so much flexibility and room for manoeuvre that at the end of the year the Budget is no longer as reliable as might have been wished and assumed at the outset , when we were discussing certain issues so forcefully .
That means that this form of budget setting at the very least needs reflecting upon .
We should take this into account in the coming weeks , months and years when we are further developing our budget policy .
As the Commissioner has said , the 2003 Budget is a thrifty one .
We will be spending just 1.05 % of GNP to tackle all the tasks facing the European Union .
If you look at the position of those countries that are net contributors , which are so often the subject of debate , you will find that the biggest net contributors pay no more than 0.3 to 0.7 % of their GNP .
That ranges from 0.3 % for my own country and 0.7 % of GNP , to finance this European policy .
0.3 % for Germany !
So much for the heated debates that we are always having about how expensive this is all supposed to be !
In the context of the Budget , we try to husband our resources carefully .
We try to ensure that balances are maintained .
That will be a job for the future - starting with balances in this continent .
We need a financially balanced Europe in the long term .
We need to make sure that our institutions are capable of functioning , not forgetting the prospect of enlargement , and also bearing in mind the maturing process that our institutions and the European Union as a whole are going through .
These are long-term tasks .
We need to ensure that people in Europe who place their trust in us can rely on financial balance and are not taken unawares by short-term changes .
I would like to make this point very specifically in the case of agriculture , but it also applies to regional policy .
We are also interested in seeing reform of our regional policy and in unblocking the backlog of appropriations still to be executed .
I would , however , like to say this , Commissioner : it is not enough for Commissioner Barnier to examine how Structural Fund bureaucracy can be dismantled .
That is something that applies to all the EU support programmes .
I would be pleased if the other Commissioners affected were to behave in the same way .
We therefore need to strike a balance in our continent .
But we as Europeans also need a balance between continents , because we are not just a fortunate island ; we also have to think about relations between the continents .
In the past we have repeatedly used our external policy to help other regions of the world .
This has become ever more difficult , because new tasks have been added to the ones we originally embarked upon : financing , reconstruction , the Balkans , financing reconstruction in Afghanistan , and also the enormous task of improving world health , not least the battle against AIDS .
That is not just an issue in Africa , it affects the whole world and that includes our own continent .
Money needs to be earmarked for that .
There is a lot we could say about financing , Mrs Schreyer , but there is no denying that we have a responsibility here that we need to shoulder .
It is hard to do all this .
Category 4 has caused us major headaches this year , just as in previous years .
We have to be flexible if we want to solve all the world 's problems .
But there is one thing we need to be clear about : Europe 's citizens can rest assured that we will protect their interests in this continent .
However , we are also keen to ensure that our continent occupies an appropriate position in the world as a whole .
We intend to set budgets in conjunction with you in a thrifty and sound way but at the same time with an eye to the future .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the budget , Göran Färm and Per Stenmarck , for their thorough and constructive work .
I should likewise like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Terence Wynn .
I also want to thank Denmark , as the country holding the presidency , for its excellent levels of cooperation , as well as Commissioner Michaele Schreyer .
The draft budget meets most of the demands of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
It is thrifty and rigorous , and the payment appropriations account for just 1.04 % of GNP , while 1.08 % has been provided in the financial perspective for expenditure .
There is therefore a margin of more than EUR 3 billion in the budget .
The draft budget now before us is also available in the form of an activity-based budget .
This has to do with the Commission 's administrative reform .
The Financial Regulation has been undergoing reforms that will come into effect from the start of next year .
This entails a revision of the staff regulations , which Parliament is now debating .
This is a complete package of reforms intended to boost administrative efficiency , promote the downward delegation of authority , and clarify personal accountability .
These are objectives our group wholeheartedly supports .
The undoubted focus of the budget is enlargement .
This budget will probably be the last to be drafted for a Union of 15 Member States .
There is provision in it for some very important appropriations .
The Committee on Budgets is proposing an extra EUR 699 million in pre-accession aid for the candidate countries to make it easier for them to face the challenges of membership .
The problem regarding administrative appropriations is insufficient margin for manoeuvre under heading 5 .
For that reason , the different institutions have started gathering funds out of this year 's budget to be able to pay the costs of accession in advance .
For example , Parliament intends to lend the Commission EUR 43 million and the Council EUR 18 million .
In other words , levels of cooperation have been exemplary , and my sincerest thanks for that go especially to the rapporteur for the budget , Per Stenmarck .
The most serious problem in administering the EU budget is outstanding commitments and unused payment appropriations .
Outstanding commitments now amount to around EUR 107 billion , or more than the EU 's total budget for one year .
The reason for this is the under-utilisation of payment appropriations .
This particularly concerns the Structural Funds and external actions .
Last year EUR 18 billion in payment appropriations remained unspent and the figure for the previous year was EUR 11 billion .
Under-utilisation on this scale seriously undermines the entire administrative process with regard to the EU budget .
In the spring outstanding commitments under the Structural Funds reached EUR 80 billion .
Despite this , though , the Council reduced the amount in payment appropriations that was proposed by the Commission .
That is why the Committee on Budgets increased payments by more than a billion euros .
Our group is calling for a dramatic simplification in the administration of the Structural Funds .
With these comments we are prepared to give the draft budget our support .
Mr President , there are some agreements that are stupid because they are inflexible .
That is the reason why someone in a very authoritative position said the Stability and Growth Pact was stupid .
Some of the representatives from France , Germany and Portugal in our group might agree , as might some Italians also .
Stupid too is the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline , which was concluded in May 1999 .
That was the last job of the previous Parliament carried out for the present one .
It is on account of this stupid agreement that the European Parliament is virtually powerless when it comes to budgetary policy .
All we can do is sit around counting paper clips and spend our time in petty administrative tasks .
Mr Prodi said of the Growth and Stability Pact that the reality that lies behind it is multi-layered and that the institutions should take this into consideration and act flexibly .
The same has to be said about the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline .
Heading 4 , the section that deals with external actions , is especially stupid in terms of its inflexibility .
We all know , everyone in this House knows , that the budget is in that respect ' quasi-rigid ' .
A ceiling was fixed in the Interinstitutional Agreement , regarding which the Council is unwilling to be flexible .
Parliament has had the onerous task of trying to fit new priorities that both Parliament and the Council think important under the 1999 ceiling .
A few million has been discussed , and at the same time there might possibly be a billion in appropriations in heading 4 still not forwarded for payment .
Thus , there is money in this heading which everybody knows is not being spent .
One of the biggest problems with the budgetary procedure is how to include as an extension to the unpaid appropriations in this heading the new appropriations we want to pay , and which we need to pay , in order to fulfil the wishes of the budgetary authorities .
As the Interinstitutional Agreement is terrorising the drafting of the budget , it must come as no surprise to anyone that if EUR 10 billion remains unused from this budget it will go back to the Member States .
I call the Interinstitutional Agreement stupid because of its inflexibility , and the same goes for the Council that is perpetuating this inflexibility .
I cannot , however , agree with the President of the European Commission , Romano Prodi , regarding the stupidity of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Well done , Sweden !
The Swedish rapporteurs have done an excellent job .
Not being given the floor until after the GUE / NGL Group has spoken still requires a psychological adjustment on my part , but I am afraid I will have to get used to it .
Mr President , it is customary for us MEPs to initially react a little critically to the Council 's absence from our plenary .
However , during our previous budgetary debate , the Council made a huge effort to sit here for four hours solidly , so I do not think we will take offence on this occasion .
I should , however , like to make a suggestion to the Council .
This morning , a video conference conciliation meeting took place with the Council for the first time , and we managed to reach agreement on the Solidarity Fund live on screen .
Next time there is a debate in the plenary that coincides with its own meetings , the Council could perhaps follow it on screen , and it could submit its comments virtually .
In fact , the Dutch Government could easily have done the honours .
Since the Dutch Government has resigned and parliament still has not adopted a position on enlargement , it has been agreed that the Dutch Foreign Affairs Minister will be present in Luxembourg over the next few days but will certainly not be saying anything .
Since this is not a first for us in Parliament , the Dutch minister could have easily kept his mouth shut here in Strasbourg .
But anyway , we are here to discuss the 2003 Budget .
I should first of all like to thank my fellow MEPs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , for the work they have done , which has culminated in the first reading of the Budget that is now before us .
In my view , they have acquitted themselves of their tasks as rapporteurs expertly , and they were , and still are , very approachable for all the groups .
They are really not to blame , therefore , but I should nevertheless like to share with you the fact that I cannot muster any real enthusiasm for this budgetary debate or for the 2003 Budget that is before us .
When I explain to people why I have chosen to sit on the Committee on Budgets , then I always use the argument that the EU 's Budget covers all areas .
As such , it pertains to structural funds , agriculture , environmental policy , research , social exclusion measures and the reconstruction of war-torn areas , and we are not talking peanuts , but about an amount in the region of EUR 100 billion .
Of course , what I am saying is true , but it is only half the story .
After all , the political battle we are fighting here today in the plenary is really not about shifting billions or about the overall picture , but about millions and about shifting the accents .
This is due to both the rigid financial perspectives and the various pieces of legislation that have already been laid down and as a result of which our hands are tied .
Take agricultural policy , for example .
When my group suggests bringing up the export subsidies for discussion because many farmers in developing countries are seriously hampered in their economic potential , then the argument of administrative assurance is used .
The export subsidies form part of existing policy , and we in Parliament cannot simply change this in a budgetary debate .
Which is right , of course .
It is , however , also important for us to send out a political signal .
We are a political forum , after all .
As it happens , no substantive arguments have been put forward against our proposal to scrap export subsidies .
Instead , that three billion has simply been approved , as have the enormous amounts for the production of European tobacco , which we happen to think is extremely harmful to public health .
My group is also very critical about the amounts set aside for the Trans-European Networks .
After eight years , most of the projects are still in their infancy .
Yet still nobody dares say in public that the EU subsidies may , to some extent , be money down the drain .
We simply carry on undeterred , not always taking the best projects forward .
The Member States themselves grant priority to national projects , while the value-added of European funding is surely the fact that they must be cross-border projects .
The Commission is now having to come up with all kinds of emergency measures to support the real cross-border projects , although this is , of course , a somewhat bizarre situation .
Similarly , with regards to structural funding , Member States pursue double and often conflicting priorities , which partly explain the enormous delays in implementation .
On the one hand , they are all out for getting as much out of the Brussels money coffers as possible , but at the same time they struggle to find national co-financing because those projects are not always a national priority .
My conclusion is therefore that the Member States feel less responsible for European money or for the fact that it should be spent carefully and fairly , than they do for national funds .
This is quite remarkable when you think that it is all money originating from the same tax payer .
Another area of doubt concerning correct spending is of a wholly different nature .
I hope that Parliament will support me in this .
It concerns the funding for Kedo .
We touched upon this briefly last night .
The European taxpayer is financing a nuclear energy plant in North Korea .
My group is opposed to this as a matter of principle in any case , because we prefer to support sustainable energy .
But anyway , this is the way things are , and I know that a majority in Parliament is in favour of it .
However , it now turns out that North Korea is probably also developing nuclear weapons .
It is clear to me that we should examine this carefully , and it also seems to make sense to me to place this money in the reserve and not to release it until we have clarity about the programmes pertaining to this plant .
I should also like to ask the European Commissioner for her opinion and whether she is already intending to place this money in the reserve at second reading .
These are all examples of money that is being spent but against which I would place question marks as to their judiciousness .
Then there is also a category of credits which I think should be spent , or even more should be spent .
One such example is enlargement .
There is a fine Dutch expression that says ' goedkoop is duurkoop ' [ you get what you pay for ] , and I am leaving it up to the interpreters to find a sound translation for this .
I am not in favour of wasting money , but I do believe in delivering on our promises and seizing historical opportunities .
The situation happens to be different from the one we anticipated in 1999 when the financial perspectives were laid down in Berlin .
Not six , but probably ten countries , will be joining , and not in 2002 , but in 2004 .
The financial plan should therefore be adjusted accordingly .
However , because of their ' accountant ' attitude , the net payers are not interested .
My group will in any event be endorsing the amendments which will enable this to be adjusted , as I am convinced that we will ultimately be paying a hefty price .
The situation in category four has also changed .
Regarding the reconstruction of the Balkans and Afghanistan , it has often been said that it is impossible to deliver on all promises in category four , unless cutbacks are made in various other priorities .
For example , a downward adjustment was made to the multiannual programme for the other western Balkan countries due to the situation in post-Milosevic Serbia .
What will we do if peace is established in the Middle East ?
What programmes will we be offering then ?
I have already listed the areas where I am quite happy to cut back by a few billion , but I should like to see a few million added here .
Another area where an extra few million would not go amiss is category five , administrative expenditure .
It is no secret that I was unhappy with the deal concluded during July 's conciliation .
According to this deal , Parliament and the Council look after each other 's needs , and it was agreed that the Commission would be served via a frontloading operation .
This worked out well .
The 500 additional positions for enlargement will probably be created .
However , the political signal is rather unpleasant , in my view .
The Commission is not a closing entry ; it is necessary for a smooth enlargement process .
Ironically , the people who are most critical of enlargement and of the capacity of the candidate countries to implement the acquis communautaire are often the very people who refuse to allow the Commission to have sufficient staffing levels to implement and monitor the implementation of the acquis communautaire .
In my opinion , the frontloading method is not particularly attractive , nor terribly transparent , as Mr Walter has already stated .
Despite this , I should like to extend warm congratulations to the rapporteurs on the result , because in the final analysis , it is the result that counts .
Mrs Buitenweg , I understand how you feel when you say that you are not used to speaking after the GUE / NGL Group , but it may be of some comfort to know that you were allowed to speak for three times as long .
That too is a fine thing !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this debate on the first reading of the budget for the financial year 2003 , I do not wish to focus on the technical aspects .
Indeed , I have taken the floor on several occasions in recent months to condemn what I consider to be the shortcomings and historic inconsistencies of the Community budget such as the RALs or the financing of internal policies and external actions , and also to draw your attention to the specific problems which have only come to light in recent months such as , for example , the ceiling for the administrative expenditure heading , which is too low , and , more generally , the inadequacy of the Financial Perspective agreed in Berlin in 1999 .
Today , I want to try and address the situation from a political perspective - if it can be described as such - rather than a technical perspective .
At a historic time such as that we are currently experiencing , when the international system is continually changing , on the one hand , and with enlargement and the debate on the future of Europe taking place , on the other , I feel that we too , who are experts in financial matters , should start to think about the role we want the European Parliament to play .
The question is as follows : should we agree to be mere implementors of rules , rules for the most part written by others , or do we want to be able to change things ?
For example , how do we feel about the fact that the Council was able to obtain a legal basis from the Commission regarding the issue of natural disasters , for instance , which is an extremely important matter ? Would we not also like to be in a position where we can contribute to the Commission 's work ?
Ladies and gentlemen , very often , we hide - and I am talking about us as a whole political class , of course - behind respect for rules and procedures without even attempting to make genuine changes to them or to the way they are applied . Changes that would be for the better , of course .
This is the message I want to be conveyed as an addendum to this debate .
The 2003 budget is proving to be a good one , and I congratulate the rapporteurs on their commitment , all the effort they have put in and the results achieved , thanks , not least , to Commissioner Schreyer , the entire Commission structure , the secretariat and the draftsmen , but I can only emphasise that this is a technical budget in which our role has been primarily that of making the figures add up , lacking as we do the strength , the courage and the will to introduce genuine political measures .
It may be that we younger Members want to change the world sometimes , but , this time , I would be content just to change a few tiny elements of our European budget .
Mr President , we would like to add three comments concerning the Budget at this reading .
First of all , at the Commission 's proposal , Parliament decided to set up a Solidarity Fund within the budget lines B2-400 and B7-090 during the previous sitting .
I expressed our doubts surrounding this fund at the time , and I shall now confine myself to the budgetary aspects .
This fund is , to all intents and purposes , virtual , for it is still empty .
When a major disaster does strike , we will need to find resources in the Budget for this Fund retrospectively .
This strikes us as highly improbable .
Furthermore , if more than one disaster strikes in any one calendar year , the Fund 's upper limit ( EUR 1 billion ) may also create a problem .
Imagine that a major disaster strikes in the spring , to which the Commission assigns EUR 700 million from this Fund .
What would happen if another disaster on a similar scale were to strike in the autumn ?
There is the risk that the resources allocated for the following year would be released prematurely .
This could be the thin end of the wedge .
Given the uncertain origin of the Fund 's resources , we are faced with the undesirable situation whereby there is a Fund for which no provisions have been made in the 2003 Budget .
This means that after a number of years , considerable pressure could be brought to bear on the Member States to make additional contributions .
Given the current economic situation and the freedom in budgetary policy that some Member States allow themselves , I can foresee major problems .
I should now like to make a critical comment on the Budget for the Sixth Framework Programme on research and development .
The funding of research from the EU budget brings with it ethical dilemmas , as is the case , for example , in research on embryos .
In the fanatical fight to fund research of this kind , the entire framework programme will soon be in the balance because at second reading Parliament refused to make any more guideline statements about the funding of controversial areas .
Moreover , the Council would have been better to start the debate on ethics sooner and postpone the ethical guidelines until after the programme had been accepted .
This controversy demonstrates that the framework programme should have been restricted to facilitating cross-border cooperation .
Active financial support is undesirable and superfluous .
Why should we co-finance research that is likely to take place anyway ?
My third and final comment concerns fisheries .
The Commission and Parliament devote much attention to the Spanish and Portuguese fishermen who , together with their regions , are let down by the lack of an agreement with Morocco .
Millions of euros have been spent on compensation , reducing the numbers of fishermen and re-training them in those regions .
Other fishing regions are also starting to feel the pinch now .
Apparently , biologists are now advising the Commission to ban cod fishing and to reduce other quotas .
This would have a major financial impact in the Netherlands , among others .
Would it not make sense , therefore , to shift the budget 's attention to fishing regions that have been self-sufficient to date ?
Financial support for those regions in the form of socio-economic programmes is desirable .
This aspect , however , is still missing from this budget which spends millions on fisheries agreements with third countries , from which only a minority of countries and shipowners benefit .
Speaking of solidarity , it would not hurt for the EU to devote more attention financially to a fishing industry that has not been able to make use of subsidies for the renovation and building of ships for years .
This has caused unfair competition for many years .
A fisheries sector that keeps to the quotas should be able to expect more from Brussels .
Mr President , much has already been said by previous speakers .
We distribute some of our funds indiscriminately , we set too few priorities , and we also finance ineffective actions , if you consider that we still allow ourselves the luxury of two parliamentary places of work and are therefore also paying for very questionable tourism for Members as well as a Convention that is costing millions .
Europe needs new impetus .
We need an offensive on the economy , including measures to make cheap capital - I mean venture capital - available above all to small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is precisely here that effective initiatives are lacking in the 2003 Budget .
There is an urgent need for action when it comes to introducing the Basle II provisions , above all when we consider that 45 % of European small and medium-sized enterprises have little or no own resources .
As well as changing the way in which aid is allocated in agriculture , in the future we will also have to change the distribution criteria in the Structural Funds .
The standard of living in a region should not be used to assess the situation or be a factor in the amount of aid allocated .
Companies or sectors that need support should all receive these funds , regardless of whether the company is located in the north , south or east .
We must use the funds entrusted to us more efficiently and more carefully , if we also wish to co-finance enlargement .

Mr President , after 15 minutes from Mr Färm and 10 minutes from Mr Stenmarck and all the other contributions , there is not much left to say .
I was giving evidence recently to one of the subcommittees of the Convention , chaired by Mr Amato , on simplification .
I made the point that the language of the budget is probably the twelfth language in this institution .
Listening to this debate , where the words ' ramassage ' and ' frontloading ' are being used so often , it seems as though they have become part of the everyday lexicon of our budget language .
I also said that we need only one reading of the budget , and that would simplify the whole process .
Had that system applied today , I am sure we would not have voted for the budget that we now have .
I say that because a lot of people are concerned about the way in which this budget will be voted on Thursday .
I do not just mean the Commission and the Council , but colleagues from a variety of parliamentary committees .
I want to make one point absolutely clear to anyone who shares these worries : this is , after all , a first reading to show we have political priorities and to put some pressure on the Council , it is not the end of the story .
These concerns have arisen because of what the committee adopted .
We exceeded the ceilings in three categories - in category 1b we will have to see how Parliament votes on Thursday .
On category 2 , we are duty-bound to find a solution with the Council .
On category 4 , we also need to find a solution together with the Council .
That is why the decisions have been taken in category 4 , to try to ensure that there will be real dialogue with the Council to solve some of the political problems in that area .
As others have said , the ceiling on category 4 has been a problem ever since we concluded the interinstitutional agreement .
Every year since then we have had to use the flexibility instrument .
Some may agree with Mr Seppänen that the agreement is stupid .
I am one of those who voted for it .
That might make me stupid , but the reality is that this Parliament agreed it , and we have to live with it and within its restrictions .
I hope that when it comes to the next interinstitutional agreement we will have learnt lessons from this one , especially in category 4 .
However , this time the needs in category 4 - especially in the areas of Afghanistan and the Global Health Fund - have to be sorted out .
On the Global Health Fund , there are certainly big differences of opinion between the Commission , the Council and ourselves .
To make it worse , at least one Member State is asking us to find the extra EUR 65 million , which complicates matters when we know what the Council 's position is already .
When I say it has to be sorted out , I mean we have to find a real solution with the Council , not going into a conciliation or trialogues and playing the usual games .
We have serious problems in these areas and we need a real sense of cooperation .
It must be said that we have had a good working relationship with the Danish presidency .
We should not condemn the Danish presidency for not being here .
They have apologised to me and explained that they have other commitments .
The fact that the President-in-Office sat for 4 ½ hours at our last meeting showed his commitment .
They have been quite good in the way they have worked with Parliament .
They have respected Parliament and Parliament 's will .
The Danish presidency has been good to work with .
As Mrs Buitenweg said , the presidency has also been good today , even in the videoconference on the European Solidarity Fund .
But let us hope that those good relationships can continue as we go into the next conciliation , prior to the second reading by the Council .
I also made the point at the Convention that , in contrast to the American War of Independence , where the cry was ' no taxation without representation ' , we in this Parliament have the luxury of having representation without taxation .
That makes the Council often think that we are profligate with taxpayers ' money .
The message we need to give to the Council is that the budgets we vote here are serious and prudent , but they have political priorities .
I hope that , in December , we will have achieved some of those political priorities .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs , the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets and the Commissioner .
As we have already stated , the Group of the Liberal Democrat and Reform Party is fairly satisfied with this budget , which would appear to be rigorous and transparent throughout .
This is part of our tradition . I would , however , immediately add that , in my view , it is also an excessively technical budget with only a very limited political dimension .
We can accept the basic lines , particularly those relating to reform and enlargement , of course , which I feel is the greatest challenge facing us .
However , precisely because it is a challenge , we must take more decisive , political action , action which is , above all , more visible to all the European citizens .
I too , like the Committee Chairman , who spoke just now , feel that it is imperative that the procedure is reformed .
The technical elements of the procedure need to be revised , it needs to be simplified and , in particular , its cultural and political dimensions need to be developed , with the Council 's powers defined in such a way that they are maximised , not reduced , to achieve a more effective , more focused and , above all , more topical debate .
There needs to be a basic philosophy underlying the European budget , a basic philosophy of shared , not concentrated , administrative responsibility - and I stress , shared : this is extremely important - and Parliament needs to have a greater political role , for it must discharge its mandate as effectively as possible .
Parliament , like the Union as a whole , must be a visibly political institution and make political responses .
I will focus on just two technical aspects .
The first concerns the issue of category 4 , which my colleague has already touched on . I would add something further .
It may be that we pay little or rather too little attention to the Mediterranean question , it may be that we pay too little attention to the issue of the Middle East .
We go so far as to debate reconstruction , Afghanistan and issues concerning very distant countries , but there is a matter nearer to home which we will soon , all too soon , have to address more thoroughly and much more decisively .
I will mention one more issue : culture .
The funds committed for young people , training and information are utterly inadequate .
Mr President , in March 2002 the European Parliament adopted a resolution on guidelines for the 2003 Budget .
A series of issues were mentioned that are of the utmost significance for the future viability of our policies on agriculture and rural development .
These include the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 , consumer protection and enlargement .
I hope that the Commission is sufficiently courageous and competent also to take account of these long-term objectives when it is implementing the budget and that it will not be distracted by more immediate political concerns .
I hope that sources of conflict , such as shortcomings in accounting procedures , fiddling and cooking of the books , are eliminated and that instead transparency and strict discipline are the order of the day when the budget is implemented .
Both nationally and internationally , interested members of the public are presented with a confused and contradictory picture of agricultural policy .
As they currently stand , Commissioner Fischler 's proposals have not met with the approval of a majority .
More work therefore needs to be done on them .
Despite the fact that the applicant countries have made huge economic and social adjustments , the Berlin decisions provide that the funds to be transferred to the accession countries , in the form of pre-accession aid , and expenditure on enlargement are to be maintained as laid down and made public .
Several discussions in which I have participated have reinforced my view , in favour of the applicant countries , that the 25 % rule for direct payments is politically unacceptable ; in addition the applicant countries fear high losses and are demanding an accession rebate and a change in their quotas .
This will have a major impact on the funding of the agricultural policy and the current financial perspective will have to be revised .
How much will enlargement cost ?
That is the question .
How we are to respond to this in the 2003 Budget remains unknown .
A vital question for the agricultural sector is 1.05 % + X and for as long as it remains unanswered the implementation of the 2003 Budget will remain a dangerous business as far as agriculture is concerned .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck on their excellent work on the 2003 budget .
It is important to remember that the budget is there to support policy decisions taken either by the Council or by the Council and Parliament jointly .
It is inappropriate to seek to use budgetary procedure as a means of shaping that policy .
I am referring in particular to certain recommendations relating to agricultural and structural funds .
The proposal to reduce export subsidies is both misplaced and ill judged , especially since it is aimed at forcing a policy decision , mainly a reduction in the transport of live animals .
The budget is not the appropriate instrument for such policy decisions , regardless of how one might feel about the issue .
As far as the substance is concerned , we should remember that we live in a global economy , with strong competitors for agricultural trade .
In the current climate of depressed prices and policy uncertainty , we are going to place our farmers at a further disadvantage .
Let me assure you that , if the EU decided to ban live animal exports today , the Australians would step in and take over our markets straight away .
This is an important commercial consideration that must be borne in mind .
Staying with agriculture , I share the concern of many colleagues over the proposed across-the-board reduction of EUR 275 million in agricultural spending .
Clearly this proposal is out of touch with current agricultural realities .
My own group has tabled a number of amendments which seek to undo some of the potential damage .
Likewise , the proposed quota of EUR 525 million in structural fund payment appropriations .
As a representative of an Objective 1 region in the north and west of Ireland , I am very conscious of the benefit of every single euro invested in an effort to redress the economic and socio-economic imbalance in the Union .
In conclusion , I would welcome any improvements that could be made to the implementation rates for structural-funded programmes and projects .
We must tackle this by improved forecasting of payment requirements , but I firmly reject any notion that global amounts could in any way be reduced .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say firstly that I find it very regrettable that the other half of the budgetary authority is not present today .
It would certainly be right and proper for the Council to attend these debates .
Even though we had a debate on the general principles of the Budget at our last plenary part-session , it would certainly be fitting for them also to be present when we get down to brass tacks - and at Parliament 's first reading we really do get down to brass tacks .
In this respect I am very pleased that we have tabled an amendment which , at least initially , places the funds for the increase in Council staff in the reserve and asks a few more questions .
I hope that this amendment will also be supported by a sufficient majority .
It is linked to conditions which the Council can fulfil by the end of the year so as not to jeopardise enlargement .
I actually wanted to start by thanking the Council for making this morning 's Solidarity Fund event such a success and for enabling us to reach an agreement .
In this context , however , I hope that the Member States concerned , and in particular the German Government , will now also announce their figures quickly .
We have all made every effort to meet the budgetary conditions .
We have now met both .
We have Budget lines , we have a legal base , and now all we need is money .
If the Commission is still waiting for information in this respect I find it more than shameful .
It is the end of October and it actually ought to be available .
I should like to highlight just a few points , because my fellow group members have already addressed a number of issues .
First , a fundamental comment : it is increasingly clear that the decisions made by the Heads of State and Government in March 1999 on Agenda 2000 and the financial perspective up to 2006 were a wish list of items , which may have been sensible in 1999 but which are no longer relevant to the challenges currently facing the Union .
I should like to illustrate this using just two figures : if we are able , according to the financial perspective , to spend EUR 42 billion on the agricultural policy but can , after considerable effort , only scrape together a final total of EUR 47 million for common activities under the Common Foreign and Security Policy then this shows an imbalance in our political priorities .
Europe 's activities in Category 4 , in particular its support for the peace process in neighbouring countries - an important task whereby we must help to transfer our European legacy of peace to other regions - are on very , very shaky ground .
The decisions that were made in March 1999 do not help us to meet these obligations in the long term .
I hope that something can be done here - we have of course tabled various amendments in an effort to shore up this work - and that we will at last be given a better chance to do justice to this important task which is incumbent on the European Union in the twenty-first century .
Allow me to address a second issue , one on which I also ask for the support of Members from the other groups .
We have tabled an amendment stating that , in the work on the trans-European networks , special attention should be paid to eliminating bottlenecks to the enlargement countries .
I would be delighted if a majority of this House could support this .
We cannot have a situation where enlargement cannot at the end of the day take place in practice .
It will admittedly happen on paper , but without the necessary infrastructure it will not be able to take place in economic terms .
The Community is called on to act here .
We are doing a great deal for those countries wishing to join us , but we must redouble our efforts .
In order to minimise human suffering and enhance our own credibility , we need to introduce one more correction to the external relations budget .
It remains extremely regrettable that we are still more than EUR 3 million short on the landmine issue .
Funds for this cause have already been cut back worldwide .
The European Union should not take part in this trend .
Some 50 people , mainly women and children , are still affected every day .
An enormous amount of money is still required , particularly for the aftercare of the victims and the relatives .
Moreover , we as Parliament must also meet the commitments entered into in 2001 .
We are now incurring payment arrears while the EU has proven that it can make an effective contribution specifically in this field .
This is why the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has re-tabled my amendment .
Our Parliament should recognise that the banning of landmines must also involve non-state players .
Parliament is adopting a consistent stance by endorsing the amendment .
A slight increase in the funds will result in a considerable reduction in the number of people suffering .
Madam President , the exercises in financial engineering required by the current budgetary process demonstrate , once again , the precariousness of the Community financial framework .
We are not , of course , opposed to the priorities that the rapporteur has outlined . As a matter of fact , I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work .
We believe , however , that other approaches could be pursued in order to achieve these priorities , without prejudice to and with total respect for the legitimacy and the competences conferred on us , and particularly which would give us an advantage in achieving these very priorities .
The most important aspect of this situation is the revision of the financial perspective . Or , in the absence of such a revision , the full use of the prerogatives that the Treaties confer on us .
It is , in fact , unacceptable to maintain and sustain a budget that is clearly inadequate for the set of priorities that we are coming up with .
Objectively , the means to achieve the ambitions that are being proclaimed are lacking .
Parliament is constantly losing power and the result is clear to see , especially in heading 4 , in which we are seeing a clear and ongoing pressure on cooperation with the least-developed countries , given the inclusion in this category of pre-accession aid for the candidate countries and sums for the reconstruction , first of the Balkans and now of Afghanistan .
This situation must change .
Having said this , I should like to say something about a particular case : that of East Timor .
I shall start by saying that I agree with the sums decided on by the Committee on Budgets .
I do not agree , however , with eliminating the specific line for that young and much-benighted country .
This would send a damaging and destabilising political message to a population that gained independence only a few weeks ago and which is still facing all manner of shortcomings .
This would be a political message that does not , furthermore , tally with the resolutions that we have adopted , or even with the Sakharov Prize that we awarded .
In addition to which , making funds available under the Asia budget line at a time when the path of future cooperation between East Timor and the European Union has not yet been defined would clearly be an act of rashness .
I therefore believe it is right and crucial that the situation that has been created should be rectified in plenary .
Madam President , this budget has just been described as nostalgic , catastrophic and historic .
I believe it is a sound , well-balanced budget and I would like to thank Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck for their perceptive work .
I would like to draw your attention , ladies and gentlemen , to points which might seem minor but which concern Parliament 's use of its power of initiative .
With due regard for the interinstitutional agreement and the Financial Regulation , the European Parliament is about to vote on new pilot project and preparatory action initiatives , which I believe will be useful for European integration .
The first point concerns preparing small and medium-sized businesses for enlargement .
I feel this will be an important signal to industry which will make that network of small businesses which is so vital for our economies feel more involved .
I am convinced that practical measures would have much more effect than a series of information campaigns .
The second initiative which I would like to mention concerns a programme known as ENEA , dedicated to the elderly , which seeks to repeat the success of the Erasmus and Socrates programmes in the context of the movement of the elderly .
The innovative nature of this programme lies in the fact that it could develop as an interface between culture , social policies and health and that , if Parliament endorses the pilot project , it will be providing the Commission with the opportunity to create a programme which will encourage dialogue between elderly people from 25 different countries .
The last point I would like to mention is the environmental initiative , which , by means of the funding of reforestation measures and the creation of a seed bank , will allow us to promote the mechanism for clean development laid down by the Kyoto Protocol .
This project seeks to promote positive measures at European level to reduce CO2 in the atmosphere , while creating an operative structure for the collection and preservation of seeds and plants , many of which would otherwise be lost as autochthonous species , and the use thereof for the purposes of ecological restoration .
This will also create employment , for the diversification of farming will certainly pose problems and require new goals to be set .
The Commission must , of course , now inform Parliament without delay of the measures it intends to take to comply with the recommendations of the budgetary authority if all this is to be put to the vote on Thursday and again in December .

I would like to thank Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck once again for their work , and I hope that the Commission will continue to seek that close cooperation which we have enjoyed in recent months .
Madam President , I should like to touch upon quite a small part of the budget , namely that relating to the decentralised agencies , as they are called .
Two agencies have the problem of being physically situated in countries where the rate of inflation is higher than the EU average , and this erodes their budgets and , therefore , their ability to carry out their tasks .
One of the agencies is that in Dublin , which is engaged in developing the social dialogue , partly in the candidate countries . The other agency is that in Turin which develops vocational training in the Balkans and within the framework of the MEDA and TACIS programmes .
The Commission 's budgeting does not take account of this problem of inflation , and I believe that more new agencies are at present being established in order to ensure there is the necessary administrative expertise .
The agencies differ greatly from one another in the ways in which they are set up and in the tasks they have , and I therefore hope that , in the future , we can obtain a budget reading that better takes account of the agencies ' different structures and different needs .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we already mentioned some of the priorities of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for the 2003 Budget in our debate two weeks ago .
Today , I should like to concentrate on making a number of comments on the text that we have agreed with the Council on future cooperation in the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
In future negotiations with the Council , the Committee on Budgets is proposing to introduce an institutional mechanism providing for greater parliamentary involvement before the Council makes decisions on foreign policy spending commitments .
As you know , in recent years we have been repeatedly confronted with the problem - particularly because of the crises in the nineties - of the Council making spending pledges and then Parliament having to find emergency funds from somewhere by cutting the amounts allocated to other foreign policy priorities .
That is why we want to have a mechanism whereby the Council involves Parliament at an earlier stage , and here we are proposing firstly that Parliament be consulted when possible joint actions are being examined , if necessary on a confidential basis .
Secondly , we are asking for Parliament to be informed by the chair or representative of the chair of the Political and Security Committee about any mandate and above all about the financial impact of a joint action .
Thirdly , a joint work plan should be drawn up by the Commission and Parliament setting out priorities for the coming period .
This is an offer to the Council and only if the outcome is satisfactory will we authorise the funds for the policing mission in Bosnia at second reading .
Initial indications are very positive and I believe that this is a very important step towards also subjecting the Common Foreign and Security Policy to parliamentary scrutiny in the future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our rapporteurs , Göran Färm und Per Stenmarck , have already produced the broad outlines of our future Budget for 2003 .
Previous speakers have highlighted particular points and added new ones .
I wish to do the same and highlight one small point , one that Mrs Buitenweg has already mentioned .
My particular concern , as incidentally has been the case for some time now , is small and medium-sized enterprises and above all micro-enterprises .
We cannot invent a new priority every financial year , so I am sticking to this one .
That is why I will also repeat what many of you know , but it will not do any harm to remind you of it again : 99 % of all companies in Europe have fewer than 50 employees .
They employ more than half of all workers and are also responsible for around half of the European Union 's entire turnover .
On average each company employs five people .
It is small and medium-sized enterprises that are very innovative and growth-driven .
They therefore play a decisive role in the fight to increase jobs and reduce unemployment .
That , for a social democrat , is what counts !
We are already doing a certain amount at European level to increase the competitiveness of SMEs ; let me remind you of the multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship .
However , we want to do even more .
The project ' SMEs in border regions ' should be replaced by a project on ' SMEs and enlargement ' and - a number of social democrats have in any case spoken strongly in favour of this - we want a project that helps SMEs to implement the concept of ' Corporate Social Responsibility - a business contribution to sustainable development ' .
So far these proposals have tended to be directed more at the large companies .
This comes as no surprise : after all they were involved in drafting them .
We do not consider this to be wrong , far from it , but now we want them to be extended to include guidelines for our small and medium-sized companies .
We want a pilot project on SMEs and social responsibility .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs .
Every year I am shocked at the huge amount of work they have to do .
What are my general comments on the budget ?
It is widely known , also from previous years , that I am a great fan of carrying out what we have agreed as far as possible .
We should thus remain committed to the financial perspectives .
This year too , there are a number of budgetary items which go beyond these financial perspectives .
This is particularly the case in category 4 .
We should , in my opinion , adopt a flexible stance for once .
As far as the necessary expenditure for Afghanistan and the Global Health Fund is concerned , I believe we should use the flexibility instrument and confer with the Council .
Whenever I discuss the budget , I cannot help but mention agricultural spending .
I have once again tabled a host of amendments , and I hope that if they are approved by the plenary , the Council will be prepared to adopt them .
We currently have an FMD investigation committee , which has made a number of recommendations on which you will be able to vote later on this year .
However , a number of things are already clear .
It is unacceptable for us to slaughter animals on a large scale again in the future , as we have done in the past .
This is why I have tabled amendments for developing better vaccines and better testing methods , distinguishing between infected animals and inoculated animals , and so on .
Also , in my opinion - which is incidentally universally endorsed - agricultural production should focus on quality .
The public , however , should know what quality is .
Europe needs to develop its own quality system which is readily recognisable to its customers , and funding has been made available for this purpose , provided the system is effective .
Finally , with regard to the cost of controlling animal diseases , I believe that it is unacceptable for us to earmark a relatively small amount in the budget for this purpose every year , while every year it becomes apparent that if a real epidemic were to break out somewhere , it would cost billions .
In my view , we need to develop European insurance systems .
Finally , I have noticed that cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament has been good to date .
I hope that this will continue to be the case in future .
Madam President , on behalf of the Budgetary Control Committee , I would also like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , who , I know , have done an immense amount of work on their reports .
Also the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Terry Wynn , for the way he expedited the votes in some highly-charged discussions recently .
It is good to get all the work through so rapidly , and I thank him for the way he did that .
My committee was mainly concerned with four areas .
The first was OLAF , Europe 's anti-fraud office .
I believe that we have sorted out the problem all the parties in this House had in finding a suitable wording for an amendment about OLAF 's funding for the coming year .
But we still have concerns about the dialogue between the Commission and OLAF in the budget process .
Realistically , I am particularly worried that it poses questions about OLAF 's independence ; it is part of the Commission in this process and we can amend its budget in that way .
The second area was export refunds , something on which Mr Mulder , the previous speaker , is an expert , as is Mr Casaca from the Socialist benches , and a subject I know very little about .
I understand that they are relatively happy with the outcome of the amendments they tabled in this field .
Thirdly , we were interested in the protection of the euro against counterfeiting , concerned about the valuation of the euro because so much could have been counterfeited .
Perhaps we should have been more worried about the bizarre comments by the President of the Commission and tabled an amendment about that .
Fourthly and more importantly , we were very concerned about the reform agenda within the Commission and that is why I draw the attention of Members across all the parties to the amendments to the Färm Report , especially in relation to Commission reform .
The Commission 's former chief accountant has drawn our attention to a number of concerns about the computer systems and how to ensure that our taxpayers ' money , our national governments ' money , is being spent correctly if the computer systems used do not support each other or provide proper figures .
No doubt we shall come back to this in future debates , but those were the main concerns raised by the Budgetary Control Committee .
Madam President , Commissioner , our wonderful rapporteurs , one of the issues which comes up time and time again in debates on the budget is the proper administration of expenditure .
That was the case and continues to be so where other areas as well as the Structural Funds are concerned .
We have received many comments on this issue , almost all of them expressive of indignation but hardly any of them proactive .
However , a number of solutions have been put forward this , as in past years , including the placing of funds on reserve , and we heard this proposal reiterated just a few minutes ago .
I believe that this particular medicine would do more harm than the illness , and so I feel that the right direction to take would be that of simplification .
It has already been said that Commissioner Barnier has set a major project in motion in this field and involved Parliament .
Proposals have been developed which , if implemented without delay , will make it possible to limit the loss of Structural Funds appropriations by Objective 1 regions .
However , that is not enough : we need to streamline the all too numerous bureaucratic elements and the endless succession of requests for documentation and controls , and we need a consolidation of funds which responds to the current situation through the integration of development measures .
This is crucial for enlargement too .
A stronger Union does not necessarily mean a more ineffective Union - quite the opposite : the simplicity of the rules and the application of the principle of subsidiarity will make the European budget a flexible political and accounting tool which is free from the burden of the RALs , and , most importantly , it will result in a closer , more intimate relationship between the European Union and the citizens .
Madam President , as I mentioned in the previous plenary session , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs largely welcomed the Council 's first reading of the Commission 's draft budget .
It is also true that the committee feels that the EU budget for 2003 is considerably more modest than it has been in recent years .
As we all know , this is due to the fact that the considerable information initiatives financed by the EU budget ahead of the introduction of the single currency are now behind us .
However , I will return to this issue in a moment .
Our committee proposed a very modest number of amendments to the budget and I was greatly disappointed that these were almost entirely rejected by the Committee on Budgets .
As I said , the requirements were very small and should have been acceptable , particularly in the case of the committee 's position and proposal regarding the PRINCE programme and in particular its sub-section B5-3061 : information initiatives relating to the single currency .
There was broad agreement within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs that the information initiatives should be concentrated on those countries which have not yet introduced the single currency and , to a certain extent , also on candidate countries , which will introduce the single currency one day .
The fact that this amendment was rejected becomes even more regrettable when we consider that at least one , and perhaps more , of the current Member States is highly likely to hold a referendum on the single currency next year .
With this in mind , it seems logical that the funds should be earmarked for these countries , rather than being spent on information initiatives of questionable benefit in the countries which have already been highly successful in introducing the single currency .
It is difficult for me to see what use information measures may have in these countries where the euro is already a reality and part of everyday life .
As Wim Duisenberg , chairman of the European Central Bank , says , the Central Bank has never had any problem selling its product .
I share this view and believe that these measures can be taken by each country which has introduced the euro without any contribution from the EU budget .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like firstly to express warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Stenmarck .
He has managed to enshrine our desire for a WTO parliamentary assembly in the budget .
This is , I believe , a historic act .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy is deeply proud that this has been achieved , at least in this reading .

Secondly , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I should also like to thank Mr Färm very much for his understanding of the problems facing small and medium-sized enterprises , particularly in border regions , where I believe that this initiative will be very well received and to which it will offer huge benefits for the future , particularly with a view to enlargement .
I see a further problem .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy adopted the sixth framework programme of research unanimously .
Since this was agreed with the Commission and the Council , however , a new problem has arisen .
On the one hand , we have a development on Basle II that poses a serious threat to the creditworthiness of small and medium-sized enterprises , and at the same time enlargement is imminent and the economy is currently in a very poor state .
Mr Walter has already said , quite rightly , that we need to strike a balance and that at present things are out of balance .
We are losing revenue .
So , what do we need to do to improve tax revenue ?
We need to prevent even more companies from going bankrupt because bankruptcies threaten to cause a huge increase in unemployment .
This trend could be exacerbated if we do not prepare for the introduction of Basel II in good time .
I myself am an economist , but I believe that the sixth framework programme really does need a Basle II-related research priority - creditworthiness for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I would strongly urge Mr Färm to support us on this important matter , because we need new instruments so as to continue to guarantee the stability of Europe , and what we need is a stability pact for SMEs .
Madam President , as draftsman for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I am broadly happy with the position the Committee on Budgets has taken on our amendments .
I should like to thank Mr Färm for his help and support .
I am particularly glad that we have maintained my amendments on the security of our EU delegations .
I believe that is of tremendous importance .
I am also glad that we have managed to restore the cuts on the human rights and democracy line .
I understand the strategy of the rapporteur in relation to Afghanistan .
I would just like to make sure it is clear that nothing is going to undermine our commitment to reconstruction in Afghanistan .
I am disappointed , however , that my amendment on landmines was not accepted - the EUR 3.15 million - because that would take us up to the amount to which we had originally committed ourselves .
The line on landmines was very much a European Parliament measure .
I would hope that we can , in our voting , consider restoring that figure because it would take us up to what we originally proposed .
I am disappointed at the amendments whereby EUR 15 million for Palestine is put on reserve under some interesting conditions .
I would hope that we could put all the money for Palestine above the line .
On behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I too should like to thank the rapporteurs who have worked so hard , within all the confines , to bring this budget to a successful end .
Incidentally , we held a very extensive debate yesterday on the issue of the three percent , and Mr Prodi should , in my view , simply advise all countries to adopt the EU 's budgetary system , for if they were to do this , they would never suffer any shortages again and always have surpluses .
This is the problem we are facing : the system is such that surpluses always arise .
Countries can easily adopt this system , but the only problem is , of course , that certain wishes cannot be met .
The system is ruthless and we have to live with it .
In my view , we have come up with a number of sound solutions to make the system more workable than it has been in the past .
After all , we can protest loudly at a lack of funding , but if you consider what is returned to the Member States , then this always strikes me as a little strange .
We should do something about this .
This has also been laid down in the interinstitutional agreement , and this should also be taken into consideration .
We must simply be able to manage the funding we have at the moment better and not commit everything without giving it a moment 's consideration .
We are reasonably pleased with the outcome of , and particularly with the project on , mobility for the elderly which was included in this budget at the instigation of Mr Podestà .
I am unhappy about one point , namely the way in which foundations - and I am mainly referring to the foundation in Dublin - are being treated .
If the costs in one country rise faster than in the rest of the EU , there is a certain rule in the Community that provides for this .
This is the way it is .
It is impossible for the Committee on Budgets , and especially the person responsible in the Committee on Budgets , to say in such cases : ' Oh no , this does not concern us at all ; we simply do not give this money ; they will have to draw on their own reserves ' .
These reserves do not exist , which is just as well .
This is only a minor point and I do not want to spend too much time talking about it , but it is still important that we do something about it .
Madam President , once again this year we have been struggling with the strict ceiling on category 4 , given ever-increasing demands arising from growing international instability and a consequent diminution of the poverty focus of EU aid to developing countries around the world .
But the whole Parliament - not just the Committee on Development and Cooperation - has been clear that development is a political priority overall in this year 's EU budget , with support for the global fund against AIDS , TB and malaria .
The Council in its May resolution says it is committed .
The Commission says it wants to retain its board seat .
Yet the EUR 120 million contribution last year is reduced to a proposal of just EUR 35 million for next .
No , Parliament does not want the European Union to provide the minimum possible .
It recognises that AIDS / HIV is the most serious challenge to humankind today ; that the United Nations has declared at least 7 billion is needed worldwide ; and that proposals amounting to 5 billion have already been tabled .
The global fund represents a bold new approach - fast-moving , participatory and accountable .
The European Union must demonstrate that it can achieve the same vision , imagination and commitment by significantly raising its own financial contribution and offering real European leadership in tackling the most devastating global challenge of our times .
Mr President , I am pleased that the Committee on Budgets has endorsed so many of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , in particular budget line B7-524 - assistance in the nuclear sector .
We call for an appropriate sum for cancer equipment in the Republic of Belarus , which is still significantly affected by the consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident in adjacent Ukraine .
Up to 23 % of its territory was contaminated ; about 2 million people - including 500 000 children - live in the radioactively contaminated areas .
The sickness rate in the contaminated areas has grown dramatically .
For instance , the number of children under the age of 18 suffering from thyroid cancer is 50 times higher now than before the accident .
Among the adult population , the growth of the number of thyroid-gland cases has increased fivefold .
The most effective method of controlling these tumours is high-dose-rate brachytherapy , which minimises exposure to radiation of healthy organs and tissues during radiation treatment of malignant growth .
High-dose-rate brachytherapy requires high-tech equipment and , due to the high acquisition and maintenance costs of this equipment , Belarus needs assistance .
We should not let our very real concerns over democracy and human rights in Belarus prevent us from helping its children .
Madam President , I wish to speak about regional policy and transport issues , but first let me congratulate the rapporteurs and the committee chairman on their work .
Unfortunately , my news is not good news .
The trans-European networks , despite the commitments made by the Essen Council , are progressing at a snail 's pace .
Priority works are at a standstill and the Council 's response is further cuts .
This being so , we in the Committee on Regional Policy and Transport wish to give our unconditional support to the amendments , also backed by the Committee on Budgets , which are designed to rectify this situation somewhat . Secondly , I also wish to express our serious concern about the disbursement of funds from the Structural Funds .
We got off to a very slow start in 2000 , for which the Member States were mainly to blame and the same applied in 2001 .
We know that the Commission is trying to do something about this and that Commissioner Barnier has tried to do something about this , especially with his recent communication and the meetings he has been holding with Ministers from the Member States .
However , the Member States must do what they can .
Someone commented , and I entirely agree , that the situation is worse in the rich Member States than in the poor .
So they must do what they can to ensure funds are disbursed quickly and , of course , the Commission must monitor developments closely so that we can put a stop to this problem because , if things go on as they are , I am afraid that , in the end , a big chunk of Structural Fund resources will go to waste .
Madam President , the vast majority of the amendments put forward by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , for which I am rapporteur , have been taken into account in the 2003 budgetary procedure .
Regrettably , three of the committee 's amendments that I consider to be important were rejected or altered .
They are being put to the vote again in the plenary .
They concern firstly cooperation with third countries on migration .
Here we want the commitments to be increased by a further EUR 5 million .
I am convinced that the only way to improve the situation is to step up cooperation and that means more funds from the European Union .
Secondly , they concern the European Refugee Fund .
I do not think that I need to dwell on this as the issues are actually already well known .
The third point is the Celex budget .
Although the situation has changed immeasurably since the attacks on the USA , we have done a great deal without demanding a dramatic increase in expenditure .
I therefore think that all of our demands - these three points - are justified and would ask you to bear this in mind when you vote .
Madam President , if you want to find out what is really important for a person , do not ask them .
Just ask to look through the stubs on their chequebook or the entries on their credit card account and you will find out .
This afternoon we are actually looking through the stubs of the Commission 's chequebook and what do we discover ? EUR 2.4 billion spent on olives but EUR 240 million on the Socrates Education Programme for the European Union .
As budget rapporteur for the Committee on Culture , I cannot but help notice that we spend one tenth of the money on education that we spend on olives .
On information for enlargement , the Commission proposed EUR 14 million in the budget - a good sum you might think , until you see that the subsidy proposed for bee keeping was EUR 16.5 million .
I am not criticising support for bee-keeping , but I think that this Parliament was right to increase the amount that the Commission wanted for information on enlargement from EUR 14 million to EUR 21 million .
If people in the candidate countries and the existing countries do not understand enlargement , then we shall only have repeats of the problems that we experienced in Ireland .
On that EUR 21 million , the Budgets Committee accepted the proposal from the Committee on Culture that EUR 1 million should be set aside for training future MEPs from the candidate countries .
We had the President of Hungary here this morning , which shows that clearly politicians from the candidate countries are looking forward to joining this Parliament and they need training to be able to do that properly .
I am also pleased that we have been able , if this budget is now passed , to reinstate the amount of money for e-learning , namely EUR 17 million as opposed to the Commission 's proposal of EUR 9 million .
It is not just that our budgetary priorities are wrong , the system is also wrong .
I will pay tribute to the support we have had from the budget rapporteur this year and from the Commission , but the Council is absent this afternoon .
It has been absent from discussions with the committees looking at the proposed budget .
It really should be ashamed of its position in this respect .
I agree with Mr Perry and the other speakers who , over the afternoon , have pointed out that the Council needs to be present at this debate .
I would like to stress this on behalf of Parliament .
It is important that the Council takes part in our debates and gets to hear our views .
Madam President , I would like to devote my two minutes to expressing my satisfaction at the fact that the proposal which has been put forward allows increased work on trying to prevent the spread of poverty-related diseases , primarily HIV , malaria and tuberculosis .
We know that these diseases create enormous difficulties and problems for millions of people and that years of development work are quickly eroded due to these diseases causing so much sickness and death .
As long ago as in the 1990s it was possible to make forecasts , particularly regarding the spread of HIV , suggesting that in certain cases up to 25 % of the adult population in some countries would be infected .
These forecasts were dismissed .
I must say that both the international community , including donor countries and individual countries in the South , took these problems far too lightly .
Until very recently , the Commission has also done very little within the framework of its aid .
As we now have a new directive on how these issues are to be handled , and particularly as we are increasing the budget , there is now an opportunity for us take on much greater responsibility on this issue .
I would particularly like to stress the importance of us ensuring that the global fund which has just been set up has enough money so that the EU and Europe are able to have a proper and stable influence on this work .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to start by thanking both rapporteurs of the Committee on Budgets and the members of the Committee on Budgets for the fact that - and this is a first - the lion 's share of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities have been adopted by the Committee on Budgets in the same or altered form .
These amendments , Commissioner , pertained to three areas .
The first group of amendments related to violence against women , including genital mutilation , rape , the stoning of women etc . , in a large number of countries worldwide .
We have for the first time included a clause in the budget that stipulates that the aid we provide to a number of countries can be suspended if they fail to respect women 's rights .
I welcome this and thank the Committee on Budgets .
This is the first area that has been adopted .
A second area is about women and decision-making .
In many Member States , a great deal of progress has been made in the field of political decision-making by women .
Trade unions and employers , however , have done very little to promote the presence of women in their organisations .
This is nonetheless necessary , for trade unions and employers have more or less acquired the status of legislator in a large number of Member States : agreements concluded by them have the force of law .
They have thus acquired a great deal of power but have not made as much effort to bring women to the fore as our national parliaments and our national political parties have .
This amendment has also been adopted , for which I thank the Committee on Budgets .
An amendment that has not been adopted - and I will call on the Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou in this connection - is the amendment on more flexible standards for the financing of projects intended for women .
The standards are very high at the moment . Many women 's organisations are unable to comply with them .
This is the only amendment that has not been adopted .
I should nevertheless like to express my thanks on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Thank you for this contribution .
As a woman , I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you for your work over so many years on women 's issues .
This work has clearly produced results this time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.40 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )
Question No 38 by Raimon Obiols i Germà ( H-0645 / 02 ) :
Subject : Food crisis in the Tindouf refugee camps
As a result of statements made by Radhouane Nouicer , UNHCR operations manager for North Africa and the Middle East , we learned in early September of the food crisis affecting the 155 000 Saharawi refugees in the Tindouf refugee camps .
The WFP reports that if no new food aid is received , refugees will only get 11 per cent of their daily food requirements - about 231 kilocalories per person - in October , compared with the standard ration of flour , pulses , beans , vegetable oil and other products , providing a daily total of 2 100 kilocalories .
The children are in an especially serious position , since according to UNHCR data 35 % of them are suffering from chronic malnutrition and 13 % from rickets .
We are aware that the Commission has limited resources at its disposal , but is it able to make an immediate contribution in order to alleviate this impending food crisis ?
What mechanisms could the Commission use to encourage the Member States to make fresh contributions to the WFP ?
A major part of ECHO 's strategy is dealing with forgotten crises , and this is quite important .
This is also why we are providing continued assistance to the Saharawi refugees .
ECHO is the largest source of aid to these refugees . Over the last three years , ECHO has more or less doubled its assistance to the Saharawi refugees from about EUR 7.5 million in 1999 to EUR 14.34 million this year .
While the World Food Programme is responsible for the basic foodstuffs ECHO is concentrating its assistance on supplementary food products in order to ensure a more varied diet .
However , in view of the problems the World Food Programme has had in finding the donors it needs to meet its commitments ECHO decided , in 2001 , to set up a three-month buffer stock of basic products such as cereals , pulses , oil and sugar , which the WFP can use in case its supplies arrive too late for distribution to the refugees , the condition being that the World Food Programme should undertake to replenish these buffer stocks .
This arrangement has been invaluable , with 13 such loans totalling a volume of 12 153 tonnes in the period until the end of October 2002 .
The problem is that so far only 5 589 tonnes have been replenished , leaving the buffer stocks very low , at a level of 17.24 % of the full amount .
It was against this background that , at the beginning of September 2002 , the World Food Programme and the UNHCR issued a joint appeal for further international assistance to satisfy the needs for basic food items .
While it may be correct that the WFP could cover only 11 % of needs in October , it must be said that this figure relates only to deliveries from WFP and does not take account of deliveries from other donors .
ECHO financed 300 tonnes of rice , delivered in October , and the use of the ECHO buffer stock I mentioned has made an important contribution , enabling us to satisfy the total needs for basic food products in October .
So it is not the case that in October they only received 11 % .
As I have explained , the situation is much better .
Let me say a few words about the ECHO global plan for these refugees , which was adopted by the Commission this year .
This plan , involving an amount of EUR 14.34 million , should reduce the full impact of the crisis .
Over 80 % of the ECHO 2002 global plan consists of food products .
Under this plan , a further 5 000 + tonnes of basic foodstuffs are due to arrive in the coming weeks .
In addition , over 3 000 tonnes of ECHO-financed supplementary food products will be supplied in the next few months .
The WFP has also announced that it is sending over 4 000 tonnes of basic foodstuffs .
This is the good news .
Nevertheless , there is still cause for concern , particularly as regards the January and February distributions , owing to the possible lack of foodstuffs to satisfy total needs in that period .
There is some donor fatigue . This is the background .
I agree with the question in this respect . This is also why ECHO is involved in different ways in raising donor awareness about this conflict and these people .
I have just one supplementary remark .
Tomorrow , in Copenhagen , there is a conference on Forgotten Humanitarian Crises .
This reflects a very deliberate and systematic effort by the Commission , through the humanitarian office ECHO , to work out a methodology to identify what could be called ' forgotten crises ' - ones where the CNN factor does not draw attention to the people in need .
This falls into that category , so I definitely welcome the question and the opportunity to answer it and to highlight problems .
That makes the dialogue with Parliament meaningful and useful .
Question No 39 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0630 / 02 ) :
Subject : Allegations concerning use of EU aid to finance terrorist activities in Palestine
Allegations have been made on a number of occasions in recent years that EU aid to the Palestinian Authority has been used to finance terrorist activities .
In May this year , the Israeli Government handed over a report to the Commission which it claimed proved that the Palestinian Authority had enabled part of the EU aid received to go to terrorists or even terrorist activities by , for example , inflating the cost of the civil service .
What possibilities does the Commission actually have of monitoring how the aid is used ?
In what way has the Commission made use of the information provided by the Israeli Government ?
There have been several allegations about alleged misuse of European Union monies by the Palestinian Authority .
Some time ago , part of the Israeli Government prepared a dossier claiming to show that President Arafat and the Palestinian Authority used funds provided by the European Union , along with Norway and some other countries , to finance supporters of terrorism or even directly underwrite acts of terrorism .
These are most serious allegations .
They have been carefully examined by the Commission . I should stress , as I have already done before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Budgets , on 19 June , that , on the basis of all the documents made available by the Israeli Government , the Commission has not found evidence of European Union funds being used for purposes other than those agreed between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority .
The Commission provides EUR 10 million a month to the Palestinian Authority in budgetary support .
This constitutes 10 % of their overall budget .
European Union support has helped prevent the total collapse of Palestinian institutions and , therefore , preserved one of the interlocutors in the peace process .
At the same time , it has provided the necessary pressure and guidance for serious reform , particularly in public finances .
Let me remind the House that , ultimately , the European Union provides budgetary support to mitigate the effects of the freeze of revenue transfers totalling over USD 680 million by the Government of Israel over the last couple of years .
Budgetary assistance is subject to a number of conditions relating to administrative and judicial reform , financial control and so on , which are reviewed and strengthened on a regular basis .
Disbursement of budgetary support is monitored on the ground by the Commission and the International Monetary Fund , which reports on a monthly basis on economic and fiscal developments and provides information covering revenue developments , evolution of employment , wage bill and non-wage current outlays , developments of capital expenditure and so on .
The merits of our budgetary assistance have been widely recognised , not only by the Council of Ministers , but also by the international community .
The United States and the other members of the quartet - the UN and the Russian Federation - have recognised the progress which has been made in the management of the Palestinian Authority 's financial affairs , thanks to our aid .
Achievements in reform , which have been made largely thanks to our budgetary support , include the establishment of a single treasury account , the consolidation of all the Authority 's public finances and progress towards a modern system of financial control .
Next comes the imposition of an austerity budget , then the containment of arrears and , finally and very importantly , the adoption or entry into force of key legal acts , such as the judicial independence law and the basic law .
It is also worth remembering that , in recent weeks , Israel has paid over USD 45 million to the Palestinian Authority Ministry of Finance , which is a small but still positive step .
This money has been transferred into the same treasury account as the EU budgetary support and is subject to the same European Union and IMF monitoring mechanisms I have just described .
I hope some Members will reflect on that sentence .
Israel has therefore recognised that progress has been made in the financial domain , and that is in no small part due to our policy-based financial assistance and budgetary support .
Ultimately , Israel should resume regular transfers and in that respect I welcome the constructive discussions held recently between Prime Minister Sharon and President Bush .
Finally , it is our firm view that financial support should be continued .
Withdrawal of budgetary support will lead to collapse of the Palestinian Authority , further chaos and a more desperate humanitarian crisis .
The Commission will continue to monitor the use of budgetary support and compliance with all the conditions attached to it .
We will , as always , investigate all allegations of the misuse of funds as a matter of the utmost priority .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten for his response and for his involvement in this issue .
When the Israeli Government publishes these details , we as members of the European Parliament naturally wish to get to the bottom of the matter .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner the following questions :
Do you feel that relations with the Israeli Government are good and that the Israeli Government believes that the report submitted to the Commission and to the European Parliament can be removed from the agenda ?
Or do the Israelis maintain the accusations contained in the report ?
I also wonder whether you believe that the aid which the EU is giving to the Middle East is sufficiently well controlled in general rather than just in this case .
I am afraid that , unusually , the honourable Member 's information is slightly out of date .
I am not aware of the Israeli Government insisting that the facts they presented before are accurate and , indeed , were they to do so , I cannot quite understand why they should have resumed transfers to the Palestinian Authority using exactly the same mechanisms that we ourselves use .
It would be a very curious thing for them to do .
This is a story that keeps coming back , whatever facts are produced to refute it .
However , it is not irrelevant to note that the other members of the quartet - that includes , as I said , the United States and the United Nations - not only support what we are doing but believe that we have been in the lead in promoting reform , not least of the Palestinian Authority 's finances .
Commissioner , I have listened to you answer this question on a number of occasions .
I have known you for some 20 years now and I know you to be a man of honour who has always been opposed to terrorism .
Let me ask you two questions : do you not get frustrated that , when you give such a clear and unequivocal answer , Members do not accept your word ?
Secondly , would you not also agree that our aid to Palestine in fact contributes to eliminating the sort of conditions in which terrorism thrives ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for what he said initially .
Who would not be ? He knows that I am a man of legendary generosity of spirit , so perhaps I just have to take it as a fact of political life that however much you tell some people the truth , they prefer to ignore it .
It would be helpful if some of those who keep making these accusations would sometimes turn up in the Chamber or at the committee meetings where I have been refuting the allegations .
It might also help if they would occasionally read the newspapers and see what is being said and done about the reform of the Palestinian Authority .
But I suspect that one or two of them have their own games to play , games that owe very little to fact but a good deal to prejudice and malevolent whimsy .
Secondly , with regard to the impact on conditions on the ground , the situation on the ground - and this is not easy to dispute - is appalling .
We have recently had the report by the UN Secretary-General 's special envoy , Catherine Bertini , followed up by a further study .
The private remarks of the British Ambassador in Tel Aviv have been reported in the Israeli media .
I do not believe for one moment that impoverishment , degradation or hunger - all of which have existed in some form in Palestine - are conducive to Israel 's long-term security .
Are you more or less likely to encourage lack of moderation or extremism in the conditions that exist in the West Bank and Gaza ?

I hope that the points that Mr Pérez made to us during the EU-Israel Association Council yesterday about the humanitarian situation on the ground will lead to some improvement . I hope that the increase in our assistance to UNWRA will help improve the situation and I hope that the Israeli Government will listen to some of the things we are saying , for instance about the blocking of 500 containers of World Food Programme assistance in Ashdod Port at the moment .
What does that have to do with the security of Israel ?
So , I totally sympathise with the argument that Israel should have assurances about its security , but I do not think that making life intolerable for Palestinians is the right way of achieving that .
I would remind you that two questions can be asked and I give the floor in chronological order ; Mr Tannock has the floor .

If Commissioner Patten or his office take this view , then why have they so strongly resisted the initiative by myself and Members from other political groups to raise signatures in this House to request that Parliament set up a committee of inquiry into these very grave allegations ?
If what he says is correct , surely such a body would vindicate his position , clear the air and reject these ongoing allegations of funding of terrorist activities by the PLO , but also , perhaps more insidiously , the funding of race hatred and the brainwashing of young Palestinians in their schools , which furthers long-term animosity and potentially creates future suicide bombers ?
The honourable Member has added to the first part of his question allegations about Palestinian textbooks being funded by the European Union .
Again and again , in this Chamber and in committees , we have pointed out that these allegations are totally without foundation .
We have made available to Members of this House the report by heads of mission in Jerusalem , which again exposes the extent to which this is a simple , straightforward fabrication .
So when the honourable Member asks me : why do I not welcome a committee of inquiry into a previous set of fabrications ? What on earth does he think I will say ?
Setting up such an inquiry - and I do not for one moment think that this House would vote for it - would make it look as though there were some legitimacy in these allegations .
Furthermore , if you set up an inquiry like this , just think of the impact on everybody in my services who ever has to sign a cheque for UNWRA or for anything to do with the Palestinian Authority .
It would have the effect of drying up assistance to the Palestinian Authority and to UN and humanitarian organisations because of the psychological effect , and this at a moment when we are preparing for the ad hoc liaison committee donors ' meeting in early December , when the European Union - and my thanks to the budgetary authority and my colleague , the Commissioner for the budget - will be expected to take a lead in providing more humanitarian assistance for the Palestinians .
Who will expect us to do that ?
The Americans will , the UN will and the Israelis will - not to mention the rest of the international community .
So I say to the honourable Member , and I am sure that his question is not prompted by any malign motives , that the notion that this proposal to set up an inquiry is somehow helpful to me and to the cause of humanitarian relief in Palestine and to finding a political accommodation to save us from this blood feud , is about as far from reality as it is possible to go .
I would like a committee of inquiry on these issues like a ' hole in the head ' !
Question No 40 by José María Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado ( H-0688 / 02 ) :
Subject : Russian Federation - expulsion of Catholic priests
It is well known that in the Soviet era many Catholics were displaced from the Baltic States , Poland and Germany into the Russian heartland .
The pastoral care of these people is being frustrated by recent expulsions of five Catholic priests .
Are these expulsions by the Russian authorities compatible with the international obligations of the Russian Federation in respect of human rights and freedom of religion ?
The Commission actively promotes the principle of religious freedom as part of our dialogue on human rights with the Russian authorities .
We fully share the concern of the honourable Member over recent expulsions of Catholic priests and , as the honourable Member will know , other Christian denominations have been affected recently as well .
This practice is not compatible with Russian commitments on human rights .
In particular , the joint statement of the last European Union-Russia Summit in Moscow states our common aim of strengthening society , based on respect for democratic principles and human rights .
The Commission will continue to impress the message upon the Russian authorities that the effective partnership that the Union and Russia are trying to establish necessarily has to be based on a series of fundamental core values , among which is full respect for human rights , including freedom of religion .
Within the framework of our intensive political dialogue with Russia , the European Union has repeatedly raised its concerns regarding freedom of religion in Russia .
The Commission continues to raise these and other related human rights issues with the Russian authorities .
In parallel , the promotion of human rights in Russia will continue to be a priority in the framework of the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
As Parliament will know , Russia is a core country under this programme .
I repeat to the honourable Member my personal concern about this issue and my determination that we should raise it whenever we need to with the Russian authorities .
As the honourable Member and I have both noted , other churches have been involved .
For example , there was the case of a Swedish Protestant pastor .
A number of Protestant missionaries were similarly expelled , and last year the Moscow branch of the Salvation Army was disbanded .
So this is an issue of general concern .
Whenever Christian pastors or missionaries are treated in this way , it should be a matter of considerable concern .
Having spent Good Friday this year in Shanghai Cathedral where the Veneration of the Cross was celebrated by the Bishop of Shanghai , who spent about 20 years of his life in solitary confinement in prison , I am aware - as are we all - of the remarkable sacrifices made by Christian missionaries , priests and bishops in countries where , alas , freedom of religion is not enjoyed as it is by and large in the European Union .
This reply from Commissioner Patten concludes the first part of Questions to the Commission .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Schreyer
Question No 41 by Erik Meijer ( H-0707 / 02 ) :
Subject : Preparing , buying and using a special bookkeeping system by the European Commission
With regard to the matter referred to in written questions E-2557 / 02 , E-2558 / 02 and E-2559 / 02 :
Can the Commission confirm that around 1995 the Commission had planned to use 4000 licences from the German software enterprise SAP , specially developed for its purposes ?
Can the Commission confirm that it finally bought 700 licences from SAP and that only 300 or 400 of these licences were really used ?
What is the number of licences currently in use ?
How are those licences actually used ?
Mr President , as you know , the SAP R / 3 accounting system is used both by the financial control services and by the accounting , or bookkeeping , department .
I would , however , be quite happy to answer your question in more detail in writing .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for answering the question .
I would be interested to know how the system has actually been prepared for the enlargement of the European Union .
This will of course present particular challenges in terms of bookkeeping .
We are also aware of the accusations that have appeared in the media .
What precautions will you take in the future to ensure that the existing system will guarantee , even after enlargement , that financial management is tailored to future requirements and that the European taxpayer is protected ?
Mr Rübig , the accounting system that we have does not only consist of the SAP R / 3 software that has just been mentioned ; the SINCOM 2 system is also available for services that manage funds .
All of the Commission 's services and all offices that manage funds are linked up to this .
As far as enlargement is concerned , the number of services linked up will not actually be increased immediately now .
Pre-accession aid is also managed using this system .
Preparations for enlargement obviously require the candidate countries and new Member States to take certain measures .
Accounts for the Commission will of course have to be opened in the central banks or national treasuries .
Very intensive preparatory discussions are underway between the Budget Directorate-General and the individual accession countries about the whole business of collecting own resources and using the national treasuries .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Questions to Commissioner Vitorino
Question No 42 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0654 / 02 ) :
Subject : Discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation in the granting of visas
On 27 July 2002 the Spanish-Argentinian couple Juan Carlos Manteca Cendrero and Carlos Daniel Bettio submitted an application for a residence visa on the grounds of family reunification to the Spanish Consulate-General in Buenos Aires ( Argentina ) so that Daniel Bettio , an Argentinian citizen , would be able to reside legally in Spain .
They attached the required documents , having been informed by the Consulate that visas had been granted in the past to people in the same situation , i.e. same-sex couples .
On 13 August 2002 they received notification that the visa had been refused ' because they did not meet the conditions laid down in RD 864 / 2001 ' .
The section where an indication must be made as to which specific condition has not been fulfilled states ' negative report of the government or labour authority ' .
Taking account of the specific circumstances of this case and the widely-held suspicion that same-sex couples are being refused visas , which would be a violation of equal rights , and bearing in mind that this would also be in breach of rights enshrined in the Spanish Constitution and EU law , in particular the Treaty of Amsterdam , which lays down that everyone enjoys equal rights regardless of their sex or sexual orientation , can the Commission say whether it might be proposed that the burden of proof be reversed in view of such incidences of sexual discrimination ( refusal to grant a visa to Carlos Daniel Bettio ) ?
Is it aware that this type of discrimination in the granting of visas is occurring in the EU ?
What steps can be taken to prevent it ?
What measures are available to us to avert or take action in such cases
Question No 43 by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ( H-0659 / 02 ) :
Subject : Combating paedophilia
The lenient sentences recently given to people charged with taking part in a major paedophile network in France frustrated public opinion .
In view of the fact that none of the existing programmes on combating organised crime or on police and judicial cooperation is directly concerned with paedophilia , will the Commission take practical steps to draw up a proposal for the harmonisation of Member States ' legislation in regard to the definition of the offence , penalties , the age of the victims and their care , and draw up a programme to combat the phenomenon ?
Does the Commission have comparative data on the legislative and judicial means of combating this tragic phenomenon in the various Member States ?
Does the Commission believe that Europol and Eurojust have the appropriate infrastructure to track down and crack down on such networks ?
As Parliament knows , in December 2000 the Commission proposed the framework decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
I am very happy to tell you that , on 14 October , the Justice and Home Affairs Council reached political agreement on the Commission 's proposal .
This framework decision is one of the most far-reaching instruments so far when it comes to the approximation of criminal law .
It addresses various forms of sexual exploitation of children , such as coercing a child into prostitution , pornographic performances and abuse of a recognised position of trust .
Child pornography , both on- and offline , is also covered .
As regards penalties , the Council has taken steps to establish a general approach to the approximation of penalties .
This is also the main reason why the Council took so long to adopt this framework decision .
Now , the framework decision stipulates levels of penalties ranging from between one and three years for basic offences to between five and ten years in circumstances that aggravate the offence .
The framework decision does not approximate the age of sexual consent .
The Commission believes that this is an issue for the Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
The age of sexual consent , as defined by national law , is , however , used as a dividing line for different levels of penalties .
The idea is to reflect the principle that the younger the victim the worse the offence .
In terms of final assistance , the STOP programme is a very valuable tool in combating paedophilia .
The DAPHNE programme also specifically refers to paedophilia .
The Commission will continue to support projects in this field through the new AGIS programme for law enforcement and judicial cooperation .
Turning to the final part of the question , the Commission can confirm that it has comparative information on the legislative and judicial means to combat this tragic phenomenon .
Europol has produced a report on this subject , demonstrating that it is very active in combating child pornography .
Europol has recently been involved in several successful large-scale operations .
The Commission is convinced that once Eurojust is fully operational , it will encourage and improve cooperation between the Member States in the fight against the sexual exploitation of children , by facilitating mutual legal assistance and the implementation of extradition requests .
I share your view that we need to give priority to actions of this kind as far as candidate countries are concerned .
I guarantee that the commitment of candidate countries has already been taken into consideration in the latest generation of Daphne and STOP programmes , and they are already being involved in concrete action .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the framework decision just adopted by the Council will be part of the acquis .
That means that candidate countries will have to incorporate this new framework decision into their own national criminal law by1 January 2004 .
The Commissioner will be interested to know that I had the honour of chairing a meeting last week on the issue of child pornography , organised by the International Centre for Missing and Exploited Children .
We had an excellent presentation from the officer from Europol , Mr Morgan , and I also had the pleasure of announcing the agreement that I think had just been published in the papers that day .
But I would like to ask how you think extradition requests will work when , for instance , material originates in third countries , where perhaps the same kind of basic legislation does not exist ?
Secondly , what should be our approach to this kind of material arriving from outside the Community ?
This is clearly going to be the route taken in future to circumvent legislation both here and in the United States .
There are specific provisions in these proposals to deal with the problem of paedophilia on line on the Internet .
We need to guarantee that judicial cooperation , above all mutual legal assistance with third countries , takes into consideration the need to consolidate the evidence needed for adequate criminal prosecution .
We can only seize the material at the last station in the territory of the Member States .
For instance , in the case of material that comes from third countries , we need to use the common cooperation agreements on mutual legal assistance to request the authorities of those Member States to act against those who produce such material .
I would like to add also that , in this general framework , we must make the best possible use of the Council of Europe convention on cybercrime throughout the Internet .
It is quite clear that producing illicit material concerning paedophile pornography is a criminal activity .
Therefore , the Council of Europe convention would be fully applicable .
Question No 44 by Ioannis Marinos ( H-0664 / 02 ) :
Subject : Designation of terrorists as ' political prisoners '
Following the recent arrest of terrorists in Greece , most of those arrested have admitted belonging to the terrorist organisation ' November 17 ' .
However , over the last few days the Greek press has reported - on the basis of information from the above persons or their lawyers - that ' some of them intend to alter their confessions with the aim of securing their release in 10-12 years ' time 'and have invoked the status of ' political prisoner ' on the basis of ' similar instances in other European countries ' , as press publications and TV analyses have reported .
Is the Commission aware of the existence of any legal arrangements governing political prisoners in the democracies of the European Union , given that after the recent changes in Community legislation terrorists face tougher treatment , even if it is assumed that the murders and robberies they commit are inspired by ' noble ' ideological motives ?
The European Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law , principles which are common to the Member States .
They have been recognised by Article 6 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union and reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission is therefore unaware of any legal arrangements governing political prisoners in the democracies of the European Union , since the mere notion of political prisoners , that is , people who have been in prison or prosecuted only for political reasons or opinions , would be against those founding principles of the Union .
As regards extradition between Member States , therefore , mutual confidence in the national judicial systems has resulted in revision of the political offence derogation in relation to terrorist crimes .
Article 5 ( 1 ) of the 1996 Convention relating to extradition between the Member States of the European Union , which supplements the European Convention on Extradition of 13 December 1957 thus states : ' For the purposes of applying this Convention , no offence may be regarded by the requested Member State as a political offence , as an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives . '
This statement covers the terrorist offences referred to in the first and second articles of the 1977 European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism , to which all Member States of the Union are party .
The Council framework decision of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest warrant , which will soon replace the previous extradition system , includes terrorism among the offences that will give rise to surrender , pursuant to a European arrest warrant , provided the offence is punishable in the issuing Member State by a custodial sentence or detention order for a maximum period of at least three years .
The political nature of the offence cannot be put forward as grounds for non-execution .
Finally , the Council framework decision of 13 June 2002 on combating terrorism establishes a common definition of terrorist offences . It lists serious crimes deemed to be terrorist offences , when committed with the aim of seriously intimidating a population and unduly compelling a government or international organisation to perform or abstain from performing any act , or seriously destabilising or destroying the fundamental political , constitutional , economic or social structures of a country or an international organisation .
In this definition , reference to ideological motives is therefore irrelevant , both for defining a terrorist offence or avoiding considering it as such .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I shall inform my honourable friend , who is unable to be here today to discuss this with you , that there can be no remission of sin for any crime committed , as he points out , on the grounds of ideological motive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fighting terrorism is surely the most important objective in the world today .
That is why I would be interested to know what initiatives the Commission plans to take on judicial matters in the light of the most recent developments .
First of all , I think that we need to pursue our important achievements since 11 September 2001 , mainly the transposition into the national legal systems of the framework decision on the definition of terrorism , and the transposition into national law of the framework decision concerning the European arrest warrant .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the role of police cooperation and the exchange of information between intelligence services on terrorist activities , based in particular on Europol 's anti-terrorist unit and the special team of anti-terrorist magistrates in Eurojust .
New initiatives relate , in particular , to ongoing negotiations with the United States on a mutual legal assistance agreement , including extradition , and the conclusion of the agreement on exchanges of information between Europol and the law enforcement agencies of the United States .
Finally , as regards legislative initiatives for the year 2003 , we are giving priority to the financing of terrorism , but it is still a little too soon to disclose the concrete initiatives that we will be putting forward to Parliament and Council next year .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
We will take each question in order until 7.30 p.m.
Questions to Commissioner Byrne
Question No 45 by Richard Corbett ( H-0613 / 02 ) :
Subject : Livestock markets
In the light of increasing public concerns about the treatment of animals at livestock markets and at slaughter houses , is the Commission now willing to consider proposing a Directive laying down minimum standards for the protection of animals at such markets ?
As rightly pointed out by the honourable Member , there are increasing concerns about the treatment of animals at livestock markets .
It is the Commission 's intention to cover this area when proposing new legislation on the protection of animals during transport before the end of this year .
Practical experience and scientific knowledge are today available to help the Commission in doing this .
In particular , the Commission 's objective is to ensure that Member States ensure that animal welfare considerations are an integral part of the operation of livestock markets .
Acts of cruelty or negligence observed in some markets are the result of operators ' ignorance and insufficient supervision by the competent authorities .
Therefore , the Commission believes that it is necessary to increase the training of personnel handling animals at markets .
The Commission also considers that market operators should be primarily responsible for securing respect of welfare rules .
They should be accountable for welfare rules as they already are for animal health rules .
However , it should be remembered that day-to-day enforcement is the responsibility of the Member States .
Substantial improvements can already be achieved under the current national provisions .
It is not the role of the Commission to supervise livestock market operations but to ensure that Member States respect the EU provisions in this regard .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for that answer and to encourage him , when preparing that draft legislation , to examine whether or not there is a case for phasing out livestock markets entirely .
I believe that in certain countries they have virtually ceased to exist .
After all , it is not just a question of animal welfare , it is also a question of the spread of disease .
Perhaps in the modern age such markets are no longer the best way of dealing with the trade in animals .
If the Commission concludes that they must remain , then they should be properly regulated .
I welcome what the Commissioner has just said , but does he agree that it should apply not just to the transport of animals that fall to some degree under the existing directive but to the protection of all animals that pass through such livestock markets ?
Concerning the first part of your supplementary question as to whether it might be appropriate to phase out the livestock markets altogether , the position is that for some farm species this is a necessary marketing tool .
There are long traditions in relation to the sale and marketing of animals in this way .
Their use derives from historic and socio-economic reasons that cannot be ignored by a simple ban .
However , I agree that in addressing this issue in the context of Community legislation , we are looking at it in connection with the animal transport legislation we are working on at the moment .
I fully agree that this issue is not just relevant to animals under transport , but to all animals .
Nonetheless , it is in the context of that legislation that we are looking at the issue .
As I indicated a moment ago , it is important to ensure that there is proper training of staff who handle animals , not only in the context of transport but generally .
This is one of the objectives that will be contained in the legislation currently being drafted .
Question No 46 by Philip Bushill-Matthews ( H-0633 / 02 ) :
Subject : Food safety
Would the Commission reveal what immediate action it proposes to take , and how such action will be effective , in dealing with recurrent problems of the non-removal of spinal cord in meat processed by abattoirs in Germany and France ?
The Commission attaches great importance to the correct removal of specified risk material , since it is one of the most important ways of protecting the health of consumers against the related risk of BSE .
In addition to being an unacceptable threat to health , these incidents also serve to undermine consumer confidence in the effectiveness of the Community measures relating to BSE .
According to Regulation 999 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2001 , laying down rules for the prevention , control and eradication of certain BSEs , specified risk material must be removed at the slaughterhouse or , in case of the vertebral column of bovine animals , at the cutting plant .
Carcasses , half-carcasses and quarter-carcasses containing no specified risk material other than the vertebral column may be dispatched to another Member State .
In the latter case , the removal of the vertebral column should take place at the cutting plant in the Member State of destination .
Shortcomings in the proper implementation of the removal of specified risk material , in particular spinal cord , have been reported in carcasses produced in different Member States : Germany , Spain , France , the UK , Netherlands , Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Ireland and Italy .
The Commission has on several occasions reminded the Member States of the importance of properly implementing the removal of specified risk material .
In the case of recurrence , the Commission has requested strong action , such as suspending the licences of the plants responsible or introducing corrective measures .
The Commission has requested that it be informed of the corrective measures taken .
In subsequent inspections carried out by the Food and Veterinary Office on BSE and BSE-related matters in the Member States , the removal of SRMs has been found to be reasonably satisfactory , with minor deficiencies relating mainly to technical and operational difficulties .
The Commission is also funding a research project to find alternative and more effective ways to remove the spinal cord .
This project is nearly finished .
The Commission is closely following the situation and will , if necessary , remind all the Member States of the obligation to remove the spinal cord of bovine animals aged over 12 months .
Implementation of the corrective measures notified by the Member States to remedy the situation will be further assessed by the Food and Veterinary Office .
Finally , it should be borne in mind that the vertebral column is currently defined as specified risk material in carcasses from bovine animals aged over 12 months in all Member States except Portugal and the United Kingdom .
Any remnants of spinal cord in the vertebral column should therefore already have been automatically removed as specified risk material at the place of destination before sale to the consumer .
I note your remarks with interest , Commissioner , and am delighted to hear that the Commission takes this issue seriously , but your role as I see it seems to be confined to reminding Member States , requesting strong action and then requesting to be informed .
With respect , do you feel that is satisfactory or do you feel that the public will find that satisfactory , because these are problems that are recurring ?
Since I tabled this question , literally in the last couple of weeks , we have had an example in the UK of Germany once again breaking the rules by sending no less than its 13th consignment of meat containing banned spinal cord to the UK .
Has the Commission no powers to do anything more than request or remind ?
If it does not , should it not have such powers ?
How much longer will it go on requesting and reminding before some action is taken by somebody ?
This issue has been closely monitored and , based on the preliminary results in 2002 , the actions taken by the Member States have resulted in a decrease in the number of infractions concerning remnants of spinal cord .
Of course , the Commission will continue to monitor the situation closely , and if the problems recur , will place the matter on the agenda of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health to emphasise the importance of the proper removal of specified waste material , in other words , spinal cord , at slaughterhouse level , and to require strong corrective actions .
I have spoken directly to the competent ministers in a number of Member States about this , with the result that licences for slaughter plants have been suspended in two particular Member States for a period of time .
These are strong sanctions which can be requested by the Commission and which have been implemented .
To that extent , I believe that the strength of such sanctions , when imposed on food processors , is that they tend to improve standards .
Ultimately , there is always the option of bringing infringement proceedings , but in these circumstances , given the passage of time necessary to get such proceedings into court , it does not seem to me to be the most effective method of seeking compliance .
Finally , as you probably are aware , I am currently working on a piece of legislation on feed and food controls , which envisages imposing financial sanctions for failure to comply with this kind of legislation .
That will hopefully be brought to the Commission in the very near future and , if adopted , will be made public and come to Parliament in due course for further discussion .
Question No 47 by Mary Elizabeth Banotti ( H-0639 / 02 ) :
Subject : Diabetes
It is estimated that by 2010 there will be thirty million people in the EU with diabetes .
What is the Commission doing to address this catastrophic rise in diabetes and is the Commission proposing any research action or information campaigns to address this issue ?
The Commission recognises that diabetes is a chronic disease that poses a major public health challenge to the Community .
Its causes are closely linked to the health determinants of diet , obesity and physical activity .
These determinants are clearly linked , and a separate approach to each is not likely to be successful .
The Treaty limits the competence of the Community in the field of public health by stating that Community action must fully respect the responsibilities of the Member States for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care .
As regards diabetes , the work of the Commission has therefore concentrated on encouraging cooperation between Member States through public health programmes .
Through these programmes the Commission has encouraged policy development and measures related to the determinants of type 2 diabetes , namely nutrition , obesity and exercise .
In the new public health programme entering into force on 1 January 2003 , attention is given to improving data collection on key health indicators such as nutrition-related mortality and morbidity .
Emphasis is also placed on developing common strategies on health determinants such as nutrition .
The existing health promotion , health monitoring and cancer programmes have provided concrete support to a variety of initiatives on diet , nutrition , obesity and physical activity . For example , the support given to conferences such as those held under the French and Danish Council presidencies on the issues of nutrition and obesity .
The Eurodiet report on nutrition is now published and available on the Commission website , making it available to a wide international audience .
The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer ( EPIC ) , financed by the cancer programme and carried out by the International Agency for Cancer Research in Lyon , is another major initiative on the links between diet and disease .
The project , supported by the health promotion programme sli na sláinte , is an initiative to promote physical activity as part of a prevention strategy .
All of these activities will have had an impact on the prevention of diabetes .
A status report on the place of nutrition in all Commission policy areas , not only public health , will shortly be finalised and published .
Taking account of the limits set out in Article 152 of the Treaty , the Commission does not intend to set up a specific priority plan related to diabetes .
Instead , the approach followed by the new public health programme is designed to ensure a complementary and horizontal approach to prevention , rather than the old approach of looking at diseases by means of separate and individual programmes .
The new programme is policy-driven and aims to promote policy and activities on health determinants that will have an impact on key challenges such as type 2 diabetes .
Through its framework research programmes the Commission has supported diabetes research in the past .
Significant financial support has been made available for this type of research .
In the Fifth Framework Programme , diabetes research was covered under the quality of life and management of living resources programme .
The total funding has been more than EUR 18 million .
Diabetes research continues to be a priority in the upcoming Sixth Framework Programme under the first priority thematic area ' Life sciences , genomics and biotechnology for health ' .
Research funds will be distributed on a competitive basis following calls for proposals , and information will be made widely available , for example on the research website .
In addition to support for research projects , the Sixth Framework Programme will provide funds for fellowships as well as for networking of national diabetes research activities under the chapter ' Strengthening the foundations of the European research area ' .
That aspect is considered particularly important in order to contribute to the creation of a European research area .
Finally , it should also be mentioned that foods presented as designed to satisfy the particular nutritional requirements of people with diabetes should currently comply with the requirements of Council Directive 89 / 398 on foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses .
The Commission intends to present a report to Parliament and the Council on the desirability of special nutritional provisions for people with diabetes .
May I take this opportunity to wish every success to World Diabetes Day on 14 November .
I hope to be able to join with those who are promoting this when the diabetes testing and awareness campaign is launched here in Strasbourg on 19 November .
Commissioner , that was a very long , quite technical answer .
I would like to raise a couple of issues with you .
Firstly , all the best thinking on diabetes is that special food should not be targeted at diabetics .
The best diet for people with diabetes or those at risk of developing diabetes is good , plain , fresh food , not processed foods .
It was only with great difficulty that diabetes was mentioned in the Sixth Framework Programme .
I hope that when you are considering it , the provision of a chair for diabetes nurses in one of the Community universities will be one of the priorities for support .
The cost to the health services within the Community of a condition which , as I mentioned in my question , will affect approximately 30 million people by the year 2010 , has to some extent to be taken into consideration .
In the light of what is coming down the line , I would be interested to know whether the Commission proposes to take a more proactive approach to this .
It is certainly true that the costs related to any health care are increasing day by day and year by year in the Member States .
The fact of the matter is that public health professionals and , indeed , some governments are now giving more attention to investing more in health promotion and disease prevention .
The emphasis in the past has all too often been on spending large sums of money on health care .
If this change takes place , as your question implies , that will greatly affect the issue of diabetes , on which you focus particularly in in your question , but also other diseases .
I firmly believe that , when the public health programme is up and running under the three-stranded approach from January 2003 , valuable information and data will be gathered under the first strand .
Then , under the strand of health determinants , we will be able to promote the healthy lifestyle and balanced food intake that you mentioned in your supplementary question .
I am looking into the correlation between , for instance , diseases like obesity and food , and I hope to report the results between now and the end of the year .
As the parent of a diabetic daughter , can I support the honourable Member in her plea for Commission action and particularly congratulate her on the initiative that she and Mr Bovis are taking to bring this to the attention of Parliament .

Because of the rise in the number of sufferers from this disease , there is often conflicting advice about the various treatments .
Yet we hear almost daily of new research developments , both palliative and surgical .
Does the Commissioner not agree with me that we need to to be able to offer the citizens of the European Union clear guidance about the progress of research ?
The Commission and the European Union could play a significant part in ensuring that the rise of this disease is matched only by the information about how to treat it and how to avoid it in the first place ?
Once again , I refer you to the first strand of the public health programme that will be in operation from 1 January 2003 .
The information that will be gathered and the data that will be made available will assist considerably in coming up with solutions and in the dissemination of valuable information , not only in the Commission and the other institutions of the European Union but also , obviously , in the Member States .
In addition to what I said earlier about the various programmes and the work and investment that has been undertaken already in this area , I forgot to mention that a project , supported by the health promotion programme , to create a masters degree course in nutrition is on the way .
That answers the earlier question by Mrs Banotti which I forgot to reply to .
I can only refer to the answer to the earlier questions , that a great deal of work has already been undertaken on this and much more is in the pipeline .
I mentioned earlier the work that I am currently undertaking on the connection between nutrition and , for instance , obesity and the question of good health generally .
I think that the major leap forward will take place when the public health programme is up and running .
I have high hopes for that programme .
There are high expectations in Member States , and I also believe that there is a substantial degree of support from Member States ' health ministers .
I would just like to tell the Commissioner that I was not referring to a masters degree in nutrition .
I was referring to the chair for specialist nurses in diabetes , for which there is an application before the Commission .
I just want to clarify that .
I am concerned about the frequent incidence of salmonella in meat preparations imported into Sweden and about your worry that this could affect the salmonella status of Sweden .
As you are aware , Finland and Sweden were granted additional salmonella guarantees in the context of their accession to the European Union .
These additional guarantees cover the trade of certain live animals , eggs , fresh fish and mincemeat to Finland and Sweden .
You propose that the Commission should extend the additional salmonella guarantees to meat preparations .
The only way to do so would be to amend the Community legislation on meat preparations .
However , the directive on mincemeat and meat preparations already lays down a salmonella criterion for meat preparations .
Any meat preparation produced within the Community must meet that criterion .
It is good that the Commissioner is concerned over the high incidence of salmonella in meat preparations imported into Sweden .
We now know that there was an oversight in our accession negotiations .
What we are now discussing is not related to heat-treated products .
We know that salmonella disappears in such products and only new contamination will reintroduce salmonella into them .
In this case , it is about the fact that anyone can put a chicken in a bag with a few grams of salt and claim that it is a preparation .
That is the main problem .
It is slightly absurd that I am Parliament 's rapporteur in the case of a directive aimed at creating salmonella controls across the whole of the EU which look very much like the Scandinavian controls .
As such , it is a little odd that a quick decision cannot be taken on having a salmonella guarantee for preparations which are not heat treated .
If we are to achieve salmonella control across the whole of Europe , we need salmonella-free areas , wherever they may be , to be able to protect themselves while others catch up .
The extension of the additional salmonella guarantees to cover mincemeat was not proposed by the Commission .
The reason why the additional guarantees should not cover meat preparations , the existence of the salmonella criterion , applies also to mincemeat .
However , it has to be noted that it is probably easier to control salmonella in meat preparations than in mincemeat .
Therefore the salmonella criteria are more effective for meat preparations than for mincemeat and this can be used to justify the application of additional guarantees to mincemeat and not to meat preparations .
I am sure that Mrs Paulsen is aware of the legislation that is going through the Council at the moment which was discussed at the last meeting of the Agriculture Council .
It ran into the buffers to some extent and now has been put back for discussion at the next Agriculture Council . This issue will be discussed on that occasion .
Meat preparations in general are being looked at , but not just for Sweden and Finland .
We want to improve standards for the EU as a whole and that is reflected in this legislation , which I hope will get through the Agriculture Council in December .
As I said earlier , the Commission is well aware of the dangers of salmonella .
In fact , approximately 200 people a year die in the European Union from contracting the disease of salmonella .
In this context , it is my intention to propose improved sampling rules and a stricter limit for salmonella in meat preparations .
This should contribute to decreasing the salmonella contamination in meat preparations throughout the whole Community .
In addition , the ongoing revisions of Community legislation on food hygiene and , as I said earlier , on zoonosis , will strengthen the controls on salmonella along the whole food chain , from farm to table .
This will obviously have a positive impact on the situation as regards salmonella in foodstuffs throughout the entire European Union and not just in individual Member States .
Question No 50 by Joachim Wuermeling ( H-0673 / 02 ) :
Subject : Export ban on cigarettes - WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Last year the European Parliament and the Council adopted Directive 2001 / 37 / EC
The Intergovernmental Negotiating Body for the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is at the moment holding its fifth meeting in Geneva .
Concerning the regulation of contents of tobacco products , the text released by the chair for further discussion does not set harmonised standards but provides for each party to adopt and implement standards as recommended by the Conference of the Parties , including standards and best practices for testing and measuring the content and emissions of such products .
The final text of the Convention is expected to be ready in March 2003 .
Should this provision become a part of the final text of the Framework Convention , and considering the timetable foreseen for the establishment of the Conference of the Parties , it is indeed possible that such recommendations could be produced by 2007 .
The Commission believes that the adoption of common standards for the regulation of the content of tobacco products and emissions and the adoption of common rules for measurement methods are essential measures to be taken by all parties to the Convention .
Recommendations made by the Conference of the Parties can be a very important instrument for harmonising standards , and parties should therefore be called upon to duly consider them .
However , as such harmonisation could lead to a lowering of the level of public health protection , the Community 's position is that such recommendations should not be binding . That is to say , their adoption should be left to the discretion of the parties .
This would allow parties , such as the Community , to keep their already existing strong legislation in this field .
In this context , I would like to draw to Mr Wuermeling 's attention the fact that , according to the negotiating directives provided by the Council , the negotiations must aim to base the operative provisions of the Framework Convention on existing Community legislation .
Finally , concerning the very last part of Mr Wuermeling 's question , the Commission firmly believes that the negotiations on the Framework Convention will be successful and is doing its utmost to ensure that an efficient instrument with the maximum impact on tobacco consumption will be agreed upon .
However , in the extremely unlikely event that the negotiations should fail , the Commission would not see this as a reason to propose modifying the provisions of Directive 2001 / 37 on exports .
Mr President , I should like firstly to thank you very much for the information and to present Mr Würmeling 's apologies , as he had to leave for Berlin at very short notice to attend an important meeting .
I should then like to add two short questions , which the Commissioner may be able to answer briefly together .
Might it not be the case that the Commission 's negotiating position would possibly be improved if it reserved the right in the negotiations to amend the directive in respect of the export ban if necessary , because it could then exert pressure on the other countries to go along with such a recommendation ?
Secondly , if the negotiations fail do you expect production to shift significantly from the European Union to third countries ?
Does the Commission know , or does it have any estimates of , how many jobs might be lost in the European Union as a result ?
The negotiating position of the Commission is that we want to achieve the best possible outcome for public health .
That is the overriding consideration . It will be the motivation for me and my staff in negotiating on behalf of the EU , where the issue is within Community competence .
The question whether production will shift to third countries is often raised .
In other words , are jobs going to be affected by this ?
I have two answers to that question .
First of all , public health cannot take second place to job considerations .
That is fundamental as far as I am concerned . I have already said that on a number of occasions .
Even if there were concern about jobs , some work was undertaken on this when the legislation we now have before Parliament was being considered .
There was certainly some evidence available to us in those Member States that introduced , for instance , strict legislation banning the advertising of tobacco products .
Unemployment did not increase as a result .
There was a shift in other directions . Therefore , I have never seen any convincing evidence that introducing legislation of this type would have adverse effects on employment .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
As the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 51 to 108 will be replied to in writing .
On behalf of myself and the Members of the European Parliament , it is a great pleasure to welcome you , Mr President , to our House today .
It is an especially great pleasure for me , as an Irish European , in a week when the people have spoken and told the leaders of the fifteen states of the Union that the time for enlargement has come .
Tomorrow you will be back in Hungary to commemorate and celebrate your nation 's national day , and to recall the brave Hungarian uprising of 1956 and the proclamation of the republic in 1989 .
On the floor of our House today stands a very special symbol of that moment - the Hungarian flag raised during that period in 1956 .
( Applause )
The martyrs of that 1956 revolution in a way died for Europe and for the values that today , through the enlargement of the European Union , we are now anticipating and creating .
And so those people did not die in vain , Mr President , and your being here today is a mark of their contribution to Europe .
The values they died for are the values that now unite us across our continent .
Mr President , I have no doubt that your country will be one of our new Member States in 2004 .
This Parliament was the first of the European institutions to set a clear timetable for enlargement .
We want Hungary in the Union and we want your representatives in our Parliament , directly elected by the people of Hungary , for the session starting in the summer of 2004 .
( Applause )
What we are now poised to achieve is the direct result of the events of 1989 in which Hungary , once again , played a decisive role .
It was Hungary that first agreed to open the iron curtain for people from the former German Democratic Republic waiting in the German Embassy in Budapest for passage to West Germany .
One of my own treasured possessions at home in Ireland is a piece of wire cut in August that year on the Hungarian / Austrian border .
It symbolises for me the night that Europe has lived through .
Enlargement symbolises for me the day ahead of us .
Mr President , I want you to feel at home here .
I want you , as the President of your republic , to understand that in being here today on the eve of your national day you are coming home .
For the first time on our continent we are creating something powerful and new , through the free will of free and sovereign peoples and on the basis of shared values , not this time at the point of a sword , or at the barrel of a gun .
As a young man you studied in Strasbourg ; it gives me great pleasure , on behalf of the European Parliament , to ask a man who studied at a student 's desk now to speak at a rostrum before the largest directly elected transnational parliament in the world and to share with us our common sense of the Europe in the making .
( Applause )
Mr President , first of all I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the European Parliament for commemorating the Hungarian revolution of 1956 .
I stand here to address you for the first time at the Plenary in Hungarian .
Hopefully , it will very soon be one of the official languages of the European Union .
With your permission , however , I would anticipate this possibility now and will continue my address in Hungarian .
You will have the opportunity to listen to it in English , hopefully with a good interpretation
Mr President , thank you for those remarks and for the reminder that the spirit of 1956 , of which you spoke so eloquently , lives on through our Europe of values today .
( The formal sitting was closed at 12.34 p.m. )
The next item is the report ( A5-0329 / 2002 ) by Mr Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on an Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament and the Council concerning access by the European Parliament to sensitive information of the Council in the field of security and defence policy and on amendments to the Rules of Procedure [ 2002 / 2130 ( ACI ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report , should it be adopted , will take us into uncharted territory .
Why uncharted territory ?
Because it will give us the opportunity , on the basis of an interinstitutional agreement with the Council , to examine secret military documents and be party to certain information and will therefore enable us to develop a means of extending parliamentary scrutiny to these areas .
This has been under negotiation for years and I should like in particular to thank the Swedish Presidency , now a distant memory , and the Spanish Presidency for their help , which has made it possible for us to negotiate here today .
Of course this paper is not perfect .
We are entering new territory here and that is why learning is also the order of the day .
We must not , however , go too far at the outset , because this is a very sensitive area and at stake are the security interests of the Member States of the European Union and all of our fellow citizens .
That is why everyone , both the Council and Parliament , first needs to learn how to work together and to build confidence , so that the necessary information and control processes can then be set in motion on this basis .
That is why we have also made it clear that either of the two sides can terminate the agreement after two years , so as to draft a new agreement on the basis of the experience acquired , and that this is therefore not a permanent arrangement but just a first step on this sensitive issue of internal security .
It has also been explicitly stated that this agreement in the field of foreign , security and defence policy is without prejudice to future agreements on the transparency of internal documents for internal policies .
As has been said , agreements also need to be reached in these areas .
I will make it quite clear that in my opinion it is quite conceivable , if not a necessity , that measures will be adopted in internal policy areas , where there are particular sensitivities due to the possible participation of third countries , and that these might go very much further even at the first attempt than is the case in this document .
I believe that we have achieved something here that certainly bears comparison with the standards in national parliaments and that the security standards , which we ourselves need to develop in this House , will also certainly have their part to play in enabling us to meet the requirements , just as the five Members of the special committee will have to undergo security checks by their respective Member States .
As you can see , there are no separate rules here either ; the situation is comparable to that of national Members of Parliament .
On this basis we can find solutions that will help us to make further progress .
I should like to ask you to support both of these papers on amending the Rules of Procedure and on the agreement itself .
I would also ask you to reject one of the amendments , because it concerns the extreme case of criminal offences being committed , by whichever side .
This is something that could arise whenever the handling of public funds and public documents is involved .
It is regulated elsewhere - not in the Rules of Procedure - and does not need to be regulated here .
It is far more appropriate here to proceed in accordance with the traditional principle that action will be taken against anyone committing a criminal offence .
Ultimately , of course , we rely on the consciences of those who know of any such criminal offences to speak out , so that action can be taken against their perpetrators .
I think that this marks a step towards greater transparency and control of our foreign , security and defence policy , and if someone had said five or ten years ago that we would be negotiating the establishment of a committee of this kind in the European Parliament , I would not have thought it possible .
This shows how far the European Union as a whole has come since the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Cologne Summit on security and defence policy .
However , it also shows a commensurate need for parliamentary scrutiny .
That is why I would urge the House to support this initiative .
Mr President of the European Parliament ... no , EB of the EB , Mr President of the European Parliament ... no , EB , EB .
What is all this about ?
You can either present and justify all of this as being in the interests of the State , just as Elmar Brok , whom I personally hold in high esteem both here and in other professional contexts , has done , or you can comment a little on the procedure and how this agreement has come about and consider why someone behind me always says , ' EB , EB ' when I say , ' EP ' .
We certainly need to be a little wary here .
I welcome the fact that this agreement will give Parliament a bit more power and that there is also going to be the opportunity to examine certain documents .
I do not wish to run the risk of the little man behind me , who always says ' EB , EB ' , being proved right by people confusing the European Parliament , ' EP ' , with EB , ' Elmar Brok ' .
Why am I saying this , and why , strange as it may seem , are they seen as one and the same thing ?
Because I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that the way in which this has been negotiated is not exactly exemplary , and that the fact is that , in the final analysis , we are faced with a take it or leave it situation .
Many Members hardly had the chance to be involved in the negotiating process and above all it is now once again EB who has access to internal documents and , as he himself also said , he is pleased that only Members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy are involved while the EP , the European Parliament , is left out in the cold .
We can , indeed we must , live with these objections , because obviously this can be seen as a foot in the door , but as I see it - and I am not the only one - the report does contain some reassurance . It says in the explanatory statement : ' It is ... crucial that the Agreement includes a provision that it will be reviewed after two years at the request of either of the two institutions in the light of the experience acquired in implementing it . '
I very much hope that those who are involved now , that is the two EBs and their friends , will not act in such a way that the agreement is unilaterally terminated by the Council or whoever it may be , so that the EP then has an opportunity to have more of a say when the text is redrafted and actually to become what someone previously called a fully-fledged parliament . Each of the individual committees should be able to have their say and fair account should be taken of the very diverse views represented in this House , so that this clash is avoided , and also so that we prove that what was mentioned earlier is true ; that we are in agreement here that there can be no democracy without transparency , and that includes within this House .
Mr President , on very solemn occasions , those of us in Parliament and in the other institutions of the EU talk about how we should go about bringing the EU closer to the people .
One of the ways of doing this would be to give people an opportunity to participate , play their parts and be partners in the whole of the decision-making process taking place in and between the institutions of the EU .
The prerequisite of people 's being able to take on that role is that they be able to obtain a feeling for what goes on before the decisions are taken .
That is why the principle of access to documents is so important .
As my fellow MEP , Mrs Malmström , said , we are all of us aware of there being confidential documents that are difficult to make available .
The European Parliament has , in my view , embarked upon a slippery slope , however .
We find ourselves in a position which we should not have occupied .
As the people 's guarantors , as the custodians of democracy and as the institution that should be the democratic guarantor of this project , we have now moved into an area in which we consent to people 's not being given access to documents , with only ourselves or a small group of us having such access .
In this way , we are complicit in considering our own interests or , more accurately , those of a small group of MEPs at the expense of the interests of European citizens and their opportunity to be players in the democratic process .
As my other fellow MEP from the Group of the Party of European Socialists put it , the whole process involving public access to , and scrutiny of , documents has taken place behind closed doors .
That is in itself a problem when we specifically talk about transparency and public access to , and scrutiny of , documents .
That is why I do not warm to this document .
Mr President , the PPE 's Congress in Estoril has now advocated complete transparency in the legislative process in the Council .
All the important political forces therefore support the transparency placed on the agenda when the Danes voted against the Treaty of Maastricht on 2 June 1992 .
We have seen progress in a number of areas , but we also have a number of things to look forward to .
The Commission now publishes its agendas and the minutes of the meetings at which decisions are taken .
It is important to know who said what and how they voted .
The Commissioners must be accountable to the public .
The Council has issued minutes relating to the working party 's discussions on transparency .
We must have similar access to other working parties ' working documents and minutes , and we must have access immediately so that we can follow developments before the laws are adopted .
We are currently debating a proposal for a compromise on Parliament 's access to confidential information , but the new rules would limit that access to which all MEPs are entitled under the Treaty .
I believe we could make more progress by going to the Court of Justice , as has been done with great success in connection with proper agreements .
I shall not therefore vote in favour of the compromise .
If truth be told , the European Parliament has never negotiated anything in the way of progress .
There have been individual MEPs who have exerted pressure , together with the Ombudsman and active citizens who have won one legal case after another .
It is before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg that we have achieved most progress , not in negotiations between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
That is the sad fact .
The European Parliament is always ready to make demands , but it becomes silent whenever , as now , there is the possibility of a framework agreement 's being entered into or a regulation on transparency 's being negotiated , entailing the danger of documents at present publicly available in Denmark and Sweden being regarded as secret as soon as they are forwarded to the EU .
Nor am I happy with the new agreement , and I would call upon the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to go to the Court of Justice in connection with those documents we cannot obtain , such as the screening reports on the candidate countries ' adjustments to EU legislation .
The screening reports are very good examples of documents it should be possible for everyone here in the Chamber and in the candidate countries ' parliaments to read .
I doubt if we should be able to obtain them under the new rules .
I cannot imagine the Court of Justice preventing us from obtaining documents that are a clear part of the legislative process .
I believe we can obtain more progress by putting up a fight than by entering now into a poor compromise .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brok very much for having taken the initiative , together with the President of the European Parliament , of producing a clearer , more detailed framework regulating Parliament 's access to sensitive Council documents .
Although there are gaps in the agreement , as the rapporteur himself points out when he says that Parliament has had to make concessions to the Council , it is , at least , a step towards greater democratic control .
In my capacity as a member of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I find it absolutely inconceivable that Parliament should be blatantly denied access to documents in the field of justice and home affairs , the very area in which rules have a direct impact on the citizens ' rights and freedoms .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council of 14 and 15 October discussed the framework decision on drugs , but the most recent document available on the register dates back to June .
A number of documents have been circulated since then but the European Parliament has not seen any of them .
Why is it that the citizens are being prevented from knowing what compromise the Danish Presidency has proposed ?
Maybe it is fear that people will find out that the ministers do not respect the mandates of their governments , parliaments and citizens behind the closed doors of the Council and that they are therefore doing at European level what they lack the courage to do at national level .
Even the Danish Minister , Mrs Lene Espersen , lacked the courage to describe the contents of this compromise to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights today .
One last example : at least 20 of the 39 documents discussed at the meeting of Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs of 14 and 15 October were not published on the register .
We believe that there must be an end to this way of treating the European Parliament and the citizens who elected it , who continue to be disgracefully humiliated by the Council .
Mr President , despite attempts to make them otherwise , security and defence are matters for the European Council .
This Parliament has no competence in that area , either legislative or budgetary .
Furthermore , it has to be said that , within the context of the Treaties , the function of this Parliament is to scrutinise the Commission .
Its responsibility does not extend to the scrutiny or review of Council activities .
Scrutiny of Council members remains the responsibility of individual national parliaments .
It is to them that their individual ministers are responsible .
Only those parliaments can hold ministers to account .
On that basis , it seems to be a measure of the self-importance of the Members of this Parliament that they are seeking information that is not in the public domain .
I would say that it is none of their business .
Parliament should not be asking for it , and the Council should not give it .
This also has wider implications .
The information is not to be given to all Members but to a select and privileged cartel within this Parliament .
Furthermore , those who receive that information are to be sworn to secrecy and can be disciplined for breaches of confidence .
There cannot be a better way of muzzling representatives of the public .
The central point is that , if the primary role of Parliament is scrutinising the Commission , then that is exactly what it should be doing .
Time allocated for debates on these matters is already ridiculously short , and scrutiny is therefore minimal .
It would be far better if the House concentrated on its statutory duties , rather than poking its nose into areas which are none of its business .
In pursuit of more information , therefore , it would be much better if it devoted its energies to pressing for more transparency and openness from the Commission .
Mr President , I hope you will allow a point of order .
During the debate I became aware that , according to tomorrow 's voting list , we are also going to vote on a Bureau proposal concerning the security rules , which are a precondition for adopting the interinstitutional agreement .
I would like to know why there has been no mention of these security rules on our agenda .
Would it not be appropriate for the House to discuss those security rules , which are being put to the vote tomorrow in the context of the interinstitutional agreement and the amendments to the Rules of Procedure ?
I consider this procedure to be most insulting to the House .
Thank you for your comment , Mrs Hautala . However , I think you ought to make it again before the start of the votes tomorrow .
In my opinion , it would be a good idea for you to make the comment again so that you can receive a response from those who planned the voting schedule .
Mr President , these security rules were submitted and discussed in the Committee competent to deal with them .
This agreement can also be adopted or rejected regardless of them , but it cannot yet enter into force , as the security rules have not yet been adopted .
The Interinstitutional Agreement can therefore be adopted tomorrow in any case .
Please permit me to address a brief comment to the Members .
We are dealing here solely with foreign , security and defence policy , none of which form part of the legislation .
That , Mr Bonde , is why this committee does not deal with any papers that have to do with legislation , in which area Mr Turco is talking about justice and internal affairs .
I have said quite clearly that the Agreement recommends that a separate agreement be negotiated for this area , and I believe that this should go much further in taking Parliament 's rights into account .
Mrs Hautala is right to say that , if this does not succeed , one of the options provided is that of an appeal .
I would , by the way , like to tell Mrs Hautala and others that it is only when we know the documents that we can say whether their classifications are justified .
If we see that access is not being given to papers that Parliament as a whole is actually meant to be able to see , we can say that they have been wrongly classified , and in this way bring about a change in practice at Council level .
If , though , we know nothing about the documents , we can have no criticism to make on this score .
Apart from that , we have to say that getting access to such documents represents a new start for the Council and the Commission as well .
Without such a settlement , we will have difficulty in carrying on any sort of European foreign and security policy .
In this instance , therefore , all the institutions have a shared interest in finding a point from which they can all start .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0308 / 2002 ) by Mr Hans-Peter Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of the provisions of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning the discharge procedure [ 2001 / 2060 ( REG ) ] .
Mr President , although it is customary to express gratitude , please allow me to unite that with wonderment at the report that is now before us .
The task in hand is clear indeed .
We were asked , especially in view of the experiences of 1999 , to find another , less ambiguous way whereby the Commission , and not only the Commission , was in future to be granted discharge .
What was at stake was that there should be the minimum of room for manoeuvre where people are simply stalling , that proposals for decisions that are very clearly set out should also result in appropriate results , and that no areas of uncertainty should remain .
If one is dealing with Parliament , one learns that this place attaches primary importance to compromises , and it is compromises that we have worked towards very intensively .
For that , I would like to thank not only the officials of this House , who , with great commitment , kept on coming up with new formulations and proposals , and not only my own colleagues either , who had a part in this process , which - as we don 't work as quickly as Elmar Brok - has in the meantime lasted nearly a year , but also the Members of this House belonging to other groups , who have made the effort to do this .
Compromise means that there is give and take , and that is a small chance to take part in a process , if you are seated up there in the gallery or , through some other fortuity , find yourself listening to what is being said .
I hear that amendments handed in by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control at the very last minute , which go against this great ideal of compromise , are now to be promptly withdrawn .
If they ask how it is that a rapporteur does not know that , it has to do with another of the realities of life in this House , that is , the fact that such last-minute agreements are often reached outside the plenary and are often not completely transparent .
But we will shortly hear whether we have pulled it off .
There is another thing , though - I am looking around to find Mr Bourlanges , with whom I did most of the negotiations - and that is something I can do .
( Interjection by Mr Bourlanges )
Perhaps Mr Bourlanges will hear it as well .
There is another thing ; that is , that I have to offer and would like to say that I withdraw the request for a split vote that we made on one point , itself very close to the heart of Mr Bourlanges and of the PPE Group that he represents , in other words that there will be no split vote on the matter that is so dear to them .
It goes without saying that this is being done in the hope that we can achieve the precise result that we need , which is broad agreement to this report .
It is the case that , without 314 votes , we will achieve no durable compromise , and we will make no progress without effort .
My concern is not only that unambiguous rules should be created for the Commission , but also - something in Article 93a to which I would gladly return - with working out how this Parliament should at last flex its muscles a bit more at the Council in its executive capacity , and that we should make this our concern .
I believe that to be this report 's second pillar , if that is indeed the term to be used .
It is , in this sense , my very great hope that we will now , on the one hand , hear about compromises struck outside the plenary , and , on the other hand - as Mr Bourlanges is also on the list of speakers - that we will hear him say that he agrees to it , and that we may thus bring the whole business to a satisfactory conclusion .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , although it is for Parliament to debate its own Rules of Procedure , I would like to take the opportunity to say a few words .
The discharge procedure is of course of very great importance to the Commission , and it is enshrined in the Treaty itself .
Now it has a place , and is couched in even clearer terms , in the financial regulation , so that there are two existing legal bases , which of course have to be taken together in reaching decisions .
I must therefore raise the question of whether all the amendments that have been submitted are in accordance with these legal bases .
Over the last two years , Parliament has negotiated with the Council and the Court of Auditors and done very in-depth work on the recast financial regulation .
A good and clear result has finally been achieved .
Article 146 ( 1 ) states : ' The European Parliament , acting on a recommendation from the Council , which shall act by a qualified majority , shall give a discharge to the Commission before 30 April of the year n + 2 in respect of the implementation of the budget of the financial year n .
Where the time period provided for in paragraph 1 cannot be adhered to , the European Parliament or the Council shall notify the Commission of the reasons for the suspension of the discharge resolution .
Where the European Parliament defers the grant of the discharge resolution , the Commission shall act as soon as possible to remove the causes of impediment . '
End of quotation from Article 146 .
I believe that the legislative authority had a clear aim in choosing this formulation .
Where , exceptionally , the discharge resolution is deferred , the Commission is to respond very quickly in order to remove the causes of the impediment .
Now these proposals refer to October , all of six months later .
That is , of course , not exactly a quick response within the meaning of Article 146 .
This deferment procedure also involves three other difficulties .
The first is that the Commission has to take care that Parliament keeps the reasons for the suspension of the discharge resolution realistic and within the bounds of feasibility .
The second is that , if it is envisaged that action will be taken , six months is again a relatively short period .
If the Commission is meant to come up with responses and commitments , it can - and should - do so more quickly .
Thirdly , if these conditions are to be seen as a normal option in the Rules of Procedure themselves , there is of course the risk of suspension being regarded as a regular course of action .
I would like to point out that Parliament already , of course , has instruments available , by which it can impose further tasks and actions on the Commission , and , indeed , it has done so in recent years .
The resolution on the discharge procedure was combined with quite unambiguous demands , concerning which the Commission is drawing up a follow-up report - not as a matter of choice , but because it is obliged to - and has to set out in clear terms what measures it has submitted in accordance with the motion for a resolution .
Yesterday evening , amendments were tabled on what I would like to call the ' October option ' question , and these now raise further issues .
The Commission would therefore welcome it if these could be further clarified .
Mr President , as we are political anoraks in the Committee on Budgetary Control and there are a lot more people listening to us tonight , I will try and explain to them what is going on because budgetary control and discharge are really not terms that normal people understand .
One of the primary tasks of the European Parliament is to assess the way the Commission is functioning .
We are here to make sure that the Commission carries out its work properly .
Therefore when people say that the Commission is unelected , we can tell them that we keep the Commission under control and hold them to account .
One of our formal responsibilities is to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget .
We have to be able to account to the people who elect us and explain to them how their money is spent .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is the principal committee responsible for leading this task on behalf of the European Parliament : we scrutinise budget lines , follow up potential scandals , we see how the money is being misspent and we try and find out why processes are so complex and cumbersome .
It was the discharge procedure that ultimately led to the forced resignation of the Commission back in 1999 .
That is what started the whole process .
However , there is a danger - we must not be naive about what is going on - that the whole process could be hijacked for more sinister and for more political motives .
It has become almost established practice within the Committee on Budgetary Control to postpone the discharge and to ask for more information .
That means that there are now three options .
In the past there were two options : we could give or refuse discharge .
Now , as Mr Bourlanges has explained , we can give , refuse or postpone discharge .
It is much easier if we have only two options and that is what is being put to us today .
The Commissioner has a point when she says that the Commission could probably comply more quickly .
I do not see this October part-session as the date by which we have to have the answer .
That is the latest point at which Parliament gives its decision .
We do not have to stick to October , but we have to do it by October .
That is a slightly different interpretation .
It is clear that we all want to complete it before the summer .
It is also right that the Commission should have this additional breathing space , because if Members refuse discharge and want to criticise the Commission , then it needs time to try to put things right .
The new process will also ensure that the process does not go on and on .
That is what has happened in the past . It is what happened in the 1996 discharge - it just carried on .
We are giving you an end date , we are telling Parliament that by this time it has to decide one way or the other .
That is why this system is much better .
The situation is clearer and the process will not be hijacked for political aims .
Mr President , the discharge procedure is one of the most important rights and duties of the European Parliament .
Parliament must acquaint itself with how finances are being managed and establish whether the Commission has been doing its job properly .
Parliament cannot therefore grant discharge without justification .
Granting discharge means that the information received and obtained by Parliament indicates that the Commission has functioned properly .
If there are points that need clarification that emerge later on , we can always return to them , even if discharge has been granted .
The report proposes that a deadline be given for discharge .
This is a good thing .
A situation where discharge is still pending from one year to the next , as has been the case here in recent years , does not show a businesslike or responsible approach to administration .
One problem is refusal to grant discharge .
If discharge is not granted and a decision is taken on this , the reason is either malpractice or political distrust .
Malpractice necessitates bringing charges against the authority or authorities concerned .
If malpractice is not indicated , the accounts must be closed .
If the reason for refusal of discharge is political , I think the Commission in that case should be forced to resign .
The system that has now been outlined , according to which refusal of discharge would be followed by a vote on a motion for censure , is good but unclear .
If there is a motion for censure against the Commission or a Commissioner but discharge is not granted , there is a contradiction in the system .
The contradiction may be due to the fact that discharge can be refused by a simple majority but a motion for censure only by a qualified majority .
For that reason this conflict should not in any sense be made possible .
Mr President , Mr Martin has invested a great deal of time and effort in this report , for which I wish to express my utmost appreciation .
The rapporteur and I also had some good discussions .
The granting of discharge is Parliament 's most important prerogative as a monitoring body when it comes to the assessment of how the budget has been managed by the executive - that is , primarily , by the Commission .
This is a political act and not only the closure of the accounts , important as that is .
Using the reports of the Court of Auditors and other information , some , incidentally , from the Commission itself , we look to see if the objectives set have been met with proper and economic use of the funds allocated .
We highlight weak points in order that they may be rectified and also avoided in the forthcoming budget .
Where the three discharge options , which the rapporteur has elucidated - grant , deferment , and refusal - are concerned , I think it right to specify time periods , so that there will not be two discharge procedures running in parallel , as often happened in the past , but so that one procedure is concluded before the beginning of the next , and so that the two stages can function .
Mrs Schreyer , I believe that the timeframe is indeed sufficient - if the time taken up by the summer recess is included - for constructive solutions to be arrived at in due time .
I have to tell the rapporteur that I cannot , however , accept that discharge should be deemed to have been granted if , in April , the plenary rejects a proposal from the Committee on Budgetary Control that it be deferred .
Such a refusal may have contradictory motives behind it and does not express Parliament 's unambiguous will .
I might add that the Legal Service 's opinion says the same thing .
Granting discharge would be the wrong answer to the question put , and , for those to be given discharge , it would be a second-class discharge , being granted en passant .
I would therefore have liked the proposal , in its three parts , to be sent back to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Should the discrepancies between the resolution and the result of the vote , as described in paragraph 3 of the new Article 5a , occur , the Committee on Budgetary Control should be given the task of removing them and submitting the resolution to the plenary for a second time .
However , as has already been mentioned , my group 's amendments have been withdrawn .
I must therefore rely on my own experience when I say , as I have done before , that , although there is in the report much that I can accept , I do not feel able to vote in favour of it if no other way is found of dealing with the issue of suspension and hence of the grant of discharge .
Mr President , we have already had the opportunity to hear many of our fellow Members emphasise the importance of the discharge device in the context of the budgetary procedure and the powers of this Parliament , and so I shall refrain from repeating these words , but I should also like to say that great power must be matched by serious consideration and great moderation in its use .
This is precisely the concern that brings us here and which led our rapporteur to find a way of setting a time limit for our examination of the Commission 's financial management .
I would say that , from this point of view , this is a legitimate concern and that the wording chosen is perfectly reasonable .
In this debate , however , we cannot forget the fact that underlying the discharge procedure are aims that are very clearly expressed in Article 276 and , specifically , that the European Parliament is examining the accounts and the balance-sheet setting out the Community 's assets and liabilities .
And , in this context , we must bear in mind that the accounting and financial control systems of the European institutions , on the basis of which these accounts and balance-sheets are drawn up , must be totally exemplary and must strictly , fully and unequivocally comply with the highest international quality standards .
This is one observation that we must take into account for the financial year that we are about to begin .
Another observation to be emphasised is closely connected to the way in which the discharge has been undertaken in previous years , particularly the discharge for 1999 , and concerns outsourcing .
Mr Bourlanges is , as a matter of fact , the author of many of our references .
I should also like to take this opportunity to stress the importance of this aspect .
Mr President , at the Laeken Summit , the Heads of State or Government called for greater transparency , simplicity and comprehensibility in the European regulatory system .
The Convention has tried to live up to this task , and has , among other things , set up a working group on the simplification of procedures .
Today 's report by Mr Martin again makes it abundantly clear just how urgently necessary it is that this group should exist and that it should produce a result .
In 1999 , as one of the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I experienced first-hand the dilemma into which we were all plunged by the Rules of Procedure - or , as one should perhaps say , the Rules of Disorderly Business .
At the time , the conduct of a number of Commissioners was unacceptable , discharge ought really not to have been granted , but , reasonably enough , we neither wanted nor were permitted to make scapegoats of the Commission as a whole .
The problems of those days have been resolved by history - or probably , only by the honourable attitude of our present colleague Jacques Santer .
It is evident , though , that we have not learned much from this .
The system now proposed is no less complex than its predecessor .
The present system is just as opaque as that which went before it , and if there were any need of proof of this , it has been provided by the events surrounding the efforts towards a compromise on this proposal .
Goethe , that prince among poets , has his Faust say that he is driven mad by thoughts that seem to revolve in his head like a millstone : ' Mir wird von alledem so dumm , als ginge ein Mühlstein mir im Kopf herum ' .
I do not believe that we should inflict such headaches on our citizens in Europe - at any rate , not in the long term .
All we can do , then , is to take on ourselves the task , here today , tomorrow and the day after , of finding a compromise and , in the Convention on the Future of Europe , to work out a model in accordance with which the public and their representatives understand what the political implications of discharge resolutions are and are meant to be .
Mr President , it is indeed a fine thing to read out allegories and then say that the report is too complicated , moreover referring , as Mr Rack did , to the fact that one has seen the amendments .
Of course , details are deceptive - as you , being an outstanding representative of the legal profession , will be well aware .
It was in precisely such a decisive situation as this in which we found ourselves .
Let us move more towards clarity , or towards what one might term the absence of intellectual doubt .
Absurd though it might sound , I was wholeheartedly on Mrs Theato 's side , and said that it really should be worked out with absolute clarity and utterly unambiguously , and that the third variant was to be left open .
But that , Mr Rack , would have meant that the amendments would have been far more extensive , far more complex and much harder to understand .
Hearing what we have heard from the Netherlands , and other positions , makes it possible , however , to live with a fellow-countryman saying that sort of thing .
Please allow me to enlarge on two points , those made by Mrs Theato and by Commissioner Schreyer .
Both refer to legal bases and to the Legal Service , both of which are sources of doubt .
Of course we had to give ourselves safeguards on that , in order to have any chance of reaching a compromise , as we eventually did when we negotiated one with Mr Bourlanges and the Liberals ' Mr Duff .

One legal opinion is now being pitted against another , and that is something we will have to live with .
I do think though that , as a whole , what we have worked out reflects this House 's thinking , and it goes without saying , Mrs Theato , that I respect your attitude .
I only hope there will not be too many who think as you do , as otherwise we will be back to the beginning .
Those who want everything sorted out in the Convention will perhaps be happy with that .
There is no more simple way , though , for us to put this together .
We have to make a political statement - that is our task as MEPs , but the Rules of Procedure are not designed for that purpose .
With that in mind , then , thank you again for your cooperation and support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0310 / 2002 ) by Mr Stephen Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication : Adapting to change in work and society : a new Community strategy on health and safety at work 2002-2006 [ COM ( 2002 ) 118 - C5-0261 / 2002 - 2002 / 2124 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , while my report welcomes the Commission 's communication , it is also constructively critical in a number of important respects .
The report emphasises three horizontal issues of great importance to the success of the strategy .
First , the lack of an action plan .
The strategy suffers from an unacceptable imbalance and a lack of strategic vision for follow-through .
The initial analysis is basically good but the proposals for action are often little more than a description of an issue .
Where they propose action , they are often vague , and there is virtually no indication of resources or the timing of the strategy 's implementation .
For example , the communication presents a good analysis of the changes being brought about by the increasing feminisation of society and the impact of an ageing population , but then proposes virtually nothing by way of action .
The report therefore calls for an action plan with timing commitments against each major proposal , for such a plan to be endorsed by Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in time for the spring 2003 European Council and for it then to be subject to annual monitoring through the Social Agenda scoreboard , as advocated by the Council .
Parliament and the advisory committees would also need to be involved in this monitoring process .
This is a serious point and I know the Commissioner will be listening to it .
I call upon her to give a clear indication tonight that there will be a positive response to this call .
If not , I have a clear mandate to ask for this report to be referred back to committee , where it will be reformulated to reject the Commission 's strategy .
The second major horizontal issue is a lack of resources .
In 1992 , some 130 officials were working on occupational health and safety within the European Commission .
Today , that number is down to around 24 .
We might disagree over the precise numbers but the Commissioner would agree there has been a dramatic reduction in the number of staff working in this area .
This is not a basis for the kind of dynamic and proactive administration that would be required to implement the strategy , capable of responding to a changing policy environment while continuing to monitor and scrutinise the implementation of existing legislation and policy measures .
It is essential that this trend is reversed and that adequate resources are allocated to this policy area within the Commission .
The third major horizontal issue in the report highlights a lack of balance between legislative and non-legislative instruments .
I am concerned that the development of non-legislative instruments should in no way be seen as an alternative to maintaining and improving Community legislation on occupational health and safety .
Specific instances are given where the gaps and deficiencies in the existing legal framework need to be addressed and where comprehensive approaches to legislation , rather than ad hoc tinkering , will be important for both established and new risks .
Turning to the specifics of the report , there is clearly not enough time to deal with them all , so I shall highlight only a few .
First , the report makes the point that , given how much more problematic health and safety are in small and medium-sized enterprises , it is regrettable that the Commission has still not launched a multiannual SME programme based on the two years ' preparatory action undertaken by the Bilbao Agency on the initiative of the European Parliament .
Such a programme was supported by the Commission in the European Social Agenda endorsed at Nice .
It would facilitate the testing , analysis and dissemination of successful measures in this critical sector .
I very much hope the Commission will respond positively now .
Second , in terms of emerging risks , I hope the Commission will look at the need for new laws in areas such as harassment at work , recently called for by Parliament .
Equally , in relation to repetitive strain injuries , I hope it will revisit the display screen directive - the directive does not even mention the computer mouse - and the directive on manual handling .
I hope it will go further and accept our call for a comprehensive directive on workplace ergonomics .
The report also highlights a number of existing directives that are in need of revision .
The Commission needs both commitment and resources to tackle that work .
Reflecting the helpful opinion we received from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , the report advocates the integration of a gender dimension throughout the strategy and highlights a number of specific strands of work to be tackled .
The report also welcomes benchmarking , but it takes the view that a successful benchmarking approach will need not just more comparable and reliable data but also a harmonised system of definitions , recording and reporting of occupational injuries and diseases .
My final point is that the report also welcomes the proposal to codify and simplify existing Community legislation in this field , so long as that is not coded language for deregulation for deregulation 's sake .
I am not accusing the Employment and Social Affairs Directorate-General of that , but there are forces elsewhere in the Commission that have that tendency .
In committee I even went as far as to propose a joint amendment with Mr Bushill-Matthews saying that the review of the legislation should be used as an opportunity to promote the simplification of legislation and its repeal when it is redundant .
None of us here should have an interest in maintaining redundant legislation , nor in making legislation complicated rather than as easy as possible to understand and implement .
I hope the Commissioner can give us the assurance we need on this action plan .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Hughes and particularly the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their close cooperation .
The communication entitled ' Adapting to change in work and society : a new Community strategy on health and safety at work for 2002-2006 ' is a strategy on health and safety for the period in question .
It is a new strategy which includes some key new elements .
These elements concern the quality of work and the need to combine a variety of different political instruments such as legislation , social dialogue , progressive measures and best practices , corporate social responsibility and economic incentives .
Of course , the basis of the analysis is that health and safety issues are related to competitiveness and there is always a cost when we neglect social policies .
The main points in this communication are as follows .
Firstly , and I think this must be very clear , it is not just a proposal from the Commission , it is also a Community strategy , so there is a need to include all the European partners including , at political level , the European , national and regional authorities .
At operational level , it concerns the social partners and , at the level of services , it concerns all institutions dealing with health , prevention services and insurance organisations .
A very interesting point in this communication is the question how we can develop the prevention culture .
There are , of course , a number of priorities concerning the need to reinforce our capacity for risk surveillance and the need for better legislation .
I totally agree with the need for simplification and codification , which is one of the commitments in the Commission strategy .
There is also a need for cooperation between the Commission and the national authorities as far as the implementation of the strategies is concerned and , at the same time , for cooperation at international level .
I have tried to outline in a few words the main points of the communication , because I believe that responding to Mr Hughes ' specific remarks will make for a more interactive debate .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs made some specific proposals , many of which the Commission has worked on and taken into account .
Some of the proposals could perhaps be examined in greater depth .
We could be more precise in terms of the timetables and description of the activities that must be carried out , and could do this in a meeting with the Committee on Employment , when we can discuss the activities and proposals of the strategy individually , particularly the five points referred to by Mr Hughes .
Firstly , there is the issue of SMEs , which was raised in the report .
You are aware of the problems we have with the SAFE programme .
Thanks to Parliament we now have a specific budget in Bilbao for SMEs and we can discuss the details for implementing this project as well as the timetable .
Regarding legislation on stress , an analysis has been undertaken .
We have launched the first stage of consultation .
Again , we can be more definite .
The same applies to the proposal for a directive on workplace ergonomics and issues concerning the manual-handling directive .
The analysis is under way .
We can be specific about the timetables for the study and can make specific commitments on when and how we are going to launch the first stage of consultation .
Next there is the issue of women : on that there is total agreement .
Gender mainstreaming is a general principle in all actions in our strategy paper .
As regards benchmarking , you are right that perhaps we could find a better way to enforce the procedure .
The report specifically refers to the need to encourage Member States to use benchmarking in this area , but maybe we can discuss this together to see how it can be made more concrete .
Perhaps we can discuss this with Member States and ask them to set firm objectives .
Then we could have a report seeing what progress they are making .
It cannot be an obligation - we cannot oblige Member States to do it - but maybe we could present it in a more organised way to see how benchmarking can move forward .
Finally , I shall comment on simplification and codification .
We are working on a total evaluation of health and safety legislation . This is one of the main commitments in the strategy .
It is not an easy task but our final goal is to simplify the provisions , see whether they are consistent and then codify them .
One commitment is to codify the health and safety directive .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I welcome the communication on this strategy for health and safety at work .
I would particularly like to congratulate Mr Hughes on his report .
As he said , I have been very pleased with the way that our committees have worked together on this issue and , in particular , the cooperation with the rapporteur which has ensured that the points made by the Committee on Women 's Rights have been fully taken on board .
This is important because , while men are more often the victims of serious accidents at work , women tend to suffer for longer periods of time from work-related illnesses .
Adult women receive less vocational training and education than their male colleagues .
That is why it is so important that we have a gender breakdown of statistics on work-related ill health and accidents for full-time , part-time and temporary employment .
The Commissioner agreed that gender must be mainstreamed throughout this strategy so that issues such as the effect of the double workload of paid employment and personal responsibilities and issues such as harassment in the workplace are properly addressed .
If risk assessment and workplace design fail to take gender into account , women will continue to be prevented from entering certain professions and sectors .
An evaluation of current health and safety law is needed so that we can identify problem areas to make future legislation more effective .
For example , domestic workers and home workers , many of whom are women , must be protected , as well as women in agriculture and spouses in family-run small businesses .
I totally support the rapporteur in his comments on the lack of resources in the Commission to deal with health and safety policy and , in particular , the need for a detailed and costed action plan and a very strict timetable for improving legislation in this very important area .
I support the report .
Mr President , as is apparent from what the Commissioner said this evening , we rarely disagree with the Commission on the direction we should all take when we talk about the working environment .
We are all of us concerned about the fact that far too many people receive lasting physical injuries in the course of their work .
What perhaps is worse is that , in a long list of areas , there has in actual fact been no improvement in the working environment in the EU .
It is against that background , Commissioner , that we had hoped that the Commission might have been more ambitious in its working environment strategy and , in any case , when it came to following this up .
I had hoped that we might today have been able to obtain a promise of more than just timetables for the various activities .
As the rapporteurs have emphasised , the situation in the area of the working environment is such that , since 1992 , there have been swingeing cutbacks in the resources available to the Commission in this field .
I am aware that there are different ways of doing the calculations , but the fact is that the money is not enough .
We are concerned here with cutbacks at a time when problems in the working environment have become more complicated and extensive and when , as a matter of fact , we face new working environment problems .
We must work with different tools , we must look into prevention and we must help the national authorities .
There are many very complicated tasks that have to be carried out , and the challenges we face in terms of directives cannot adequately be described in a three-minute speech .
As Mrs Evans has also pointed out , we know that working environment problems may be in danger of becoming problems for women .
We know that small and medium-sized enterprises require special attention .
There is an urgent need for a directive on the whole range of muscle and bone problems .
Stress and harassment require concerted action , and we are also aware of the possible need for a general recognition of occupational illnesses in a minimum directive .
In the light of all the initiatives we all consider necessary , what is probably our greatest disappointment is that the Commission does not intend to follow up this strategy with a proper action plan .
When the Commission says that it would like to be involved in timetabling , our answer must be that timetables should be made still more binding , and we must propose that a proper action plan in actual fact be prepared .
If the Commission agrees that we must have timetables and that we must make them more binding , it will hopefully - at the end of this debate in which there will presumably be more people demanding an action plan - explain to us why it does not go the whole hog , pursue this strategy further and draw up a proper action plan .
We know , of course , that this would be more binding upon the European Parliament , the Commission and , especially , the Member States .
I hope that we can make progress .
We need an action plan covering the working environment .
Mr President , although I welcome some of the points in Mr Hughes ' report , especially the simplification of existing Community legislation and better monitoring , I am very unhappy that my amendments on comprehensive impact assessments did not pass in committee .
My group agreed that I should table the amendments again in plenary but , unfortunately , no other group was prepared to open up the process .
Legislation should only be brought forward when we demonstrate that there is a clear need for it , rather than best practice or the exchange of best practice .
We must first make sure that existing legislation in the same field is being implemented across the European Union .
Secondly , as I have already said regarding comprehensive impact assessments , we must have an impact assessment for each Member State , taking into account the impact on industry , on business and on the workforce .
Unfortunately , quite often the impact assessments coming forward from the Commission look more like explanatory statements to me rather than comprehensive impact assessments .
Above all , in health and safety we need to have up-to-date scientific and medical evidence to demonstrate the need for such legislation .
Take the example of the vibrations directive .
I was given a lot of documents by the Commission .
The ISO standards report , the only one that was really up to date , actually said that there was no quantitative link between whole body vibration and lower back pain , but still we brought legislation forward .
I am pro-European but we bring forward more and more legislation without demonstrating the actual need for it .
This brings the European Union into disrepute .
Although we may need some of the legislation Mr Hughes has proposed in his report and which the Commission has proposed , without a guarantee of a proper comprehensive and independent impact assessment , the ELDR Group will have to abstain on the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , I am highly sympathetic to the content of Mr Hughes ' report .
The text is very clear .
He is extremely worried that so little is happening , and he puts forward a long list of proposals of a legislative and non-legislative nature which could improve the situation .
I am sure that he will gain the support of the whole Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left for all this .
At the same time , he also addresses implementation and the difficulties of getting it all to work in reality .
I believe we should speak more plainly in this context .
This is in fact a dispute .
We talk about dialogue and cooperation , but it is actually a dispute .
Companies are required to put pressure on costs and profit margins in competition with other companies .
The cutbacks have to be made somewhere .
Health and safety cost money .
We cannot achieve proper health and safety at work if the unions are not strong enough to put pressure on companies .
These are the circumstances of the dispute , which are inherent in our system .
We should recognise this in some way if we want better health and safety at work .
Legislative and non-legislative methods work where there are employee organisations able to use the laws , recommendations and guidelines which we draw up .
That is the reality of the situation .
Perhaps we should discuss whether we need to strengthen employee organisations , for example by strengthening union rights .
It may be that the opportunities for legal assistance in disputes should be increased .
Increased expert assistance might be considered .
In the nineteenth century , when there were no strong unions , factory inspectors helped workers .
In Eastern Europe we might need work and factory inspectors of the type found in the UK in the nineteenth century .
We should perhaps make it clearer to the candidate countries that the right to strike is part of the body of law , or acquis communautaire , which they are expected to introduce .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Hughes , the fact that sound reports are being produced is excellent , in my view .
I particularly endorse Mr Hughes ' report .
I have heard him say once that in his opinion the analysis in the Commission communication was solid , but the actual detailing of it left something to be desired .
I think I saw this in the EU reports today .
In my view , the analysis is satisfactory , but certainly not solid , for the simple reason that there are far better practices in Europe than those described in this document .
I am particularly concerned with the element of well-being at work .
After all , legislation on health and safety at work is solid legislation .
It is about vibrations , noise , and so on .
Extensive research has been done in the Netherlands , for example , as to how well-being at work should be interpreted .
This covers aspects that involve organisations , and aspects that can also have repercussions at a later date in the form of repetitive strain injury , stress or numerous other forms of non-well-being .
A number of these elements have been mentioned in the Commission 's document in connection with investing in quality , but this aspect came to an abrupt end with the indicators that were developed afterwards by the Belgians .
It is regrettable that this area is not further elaborated upon , as the proposals are actually a kind of odd collection of various points .
The clinical pictures and problems concerning well-being have been known for a long time , and yet no date has yet been set for these proposals .
So once again , I endorse Mr Hughes ' description of the problems , and I also hope that he may have the moral fibre to withdraw his report if the Commission is not committed to solving the problems surrounding the reduction in staffing levels , the balance between legislative and non-legislative measures - which , in my view , is still wanting - and , above all , the lack of an action plan with a timeframe to back it up .
Mr President , the Commission document on health and safety at work is a good document .
It talks of the importance of health and safety at work , of the need to strengthen the prevention culture and to secure a better application of existing law .
I very much agree with all of that .
It portrays the problem as follows : the preventive culture of EU directives has not yet been fully understood , nor has it been applied effectively on the ground .
I agree .
It admits that people tend to see the Community legal framework as being excessively complex and unclear and proposes that it be simplified and rationalised .
I agree with that too .
I would have hoped that Parliament might have seen fit to endorse these Commission proposals , but the rapporteur has gone off in the opposite direction .
He claims that , because Commission staffing has been reduced to some 40 % of its 1992 levels , this indicates much lower priority within the Commission .
This is nonsense .
However , for some people all roads always lead to the standard socialist solution of more money , more people and more regulation .
I note the rapporteur graciously referred to the joint amendment we tabled , which was the great highlight in committee - perhaps it could be the highlight of his report .
Colleagues may well hope this is the start of a great new partnership , but I suspect they may have to wait a little longer for it to blossom .
We will hope together for progress .
Meanwhile , the rapporteur wants to extend the scope of the framework directive to propose new legislation on workplace bullying and a new directive on workplace ergonomics , strengthen the display screen equipment directive and amend the manual handling directive .
All that appears on just the first page of his recommendations .
We do not need more directives .
I suggest his conclusions are wrong because his analysis is wrong .
The UK Conservative delegation will be voting against it and we will not be alone .
I would add that Ireland has just voted to allow the entry of applicant countries into the EU .
If the applicant countries read the Hughes report , they may not want to join .
Mr President , I want to thank the Commission for a sound report .
I also want to thank Mr Hughes for emphasising the importance of focusing upon implementation of the legislation .
Danish employers often maintain that , unlike their opposite numbers in many other countries , they have to comply with the regulations governing the working environment .
To be frank , I am tired of having to listen to this remark without being able in all honesty to contradict it .
I should like to be able to repudiate such assertions in the future .
That is why it is important for us to obtain more focus on the practical implementation of working environment legislation so that a good and safe working environment really is created at all workplaces in the EU .
That being said , we must also give careful consideration to the type of regulation with which we can best make the working environment safe .
Legislation is not always the correct route to go down .
Sometimes , improvements are better achieved through training , the sharing of experiences and the development of the social dialogue .
A good example is the combating of stress and harassment as problems that can only be solved through better cooperation in the individual workplace .
That is why I also think that the combating of stress and harassment is a matter for the two sides of industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no disputing the fact that , along with the rules on free movement , health and safety at work is one of the European Union 's spheres of activity that does not lack an unambiguous legal basis .
The enactment of minimum requirements in this area is necessary in order to prevent , in this European internal market , competitive advantages from being won as it were on the backs of the workforce .
In this sense , it is also laudable that the Commission is thinking about the future and setting out its primary areas of concern .
As well stated in this report , women and people with disabilities should be the main areas of concern .
I am , though , rather wary of efforts to interpret the law broadly and make every conceivable aspect of working life subject to European regulation .
In this area , too , there must still be room for national peculiarities and independence .
We are indeed facing great changes in working life in Europe .
There are fewer and fewer employees in the traditional sense of the word .
What are termed atypical working patterns are on the increase , and I also cannot rid myself of the suspicion that , in the absence of solutions to the real problems , we are increasingly churning out papers and declarations of intent that do workers at their actual workplaces precious little good .
It seems to me to be a fact that - be it on the grounds of the oft-cited globalisation or of general developments in society - there is less protection for workers , the value of work as a factor of production is decreasing and the worker 's need for protection is falling behind , whether despite European integration or because of it .
Greater attention therefore needs to be given to the maintenance of the status quo as regards safety in actual workplaces .
We have to maintain the level of protection that we have achieved and made into one of Europe 's common assets ; it must also be introduced in the candidate countries , not only on paper , but also in reality .
Paper can hang around a long time , even , and indeed especially in Europe - we all know that .
But the industrial safety that we have achieved is at the heart of the social dimension of a Europe that is becoming more integrated , something that I believe workers see as a far more positive development than papers on employment and other aspects of strategy .
Mr President , of course we all want health and safety at work , employers , workers and shareholders .
What good is it if we have health and safety but no work ?
There is the problem and there is the challenge .
There is an honourable tradition in the long campaign and struggle to achieve acceptable standards of health and safety in the workplace .
This started way back with the industrial revolution .
It freed children from hard manual labour in the mines and the mills , and to this day it protects workers against avoidable accidents and illnesses .
And it is not over yet .
Still there are unacceptable accidents on the farm and on the factory floor .
Only last month on a farm next door to mine in Scotland , the young husband and father of a family died after being caught in a potato-harvesting machine .
We must do all we can and continue to strive to eliminate all such tragedies .
Our work and business culture must be a safety culture , but life and work can never be devoid of risk .
There is no way we could achieve that utopia and still have a working economy , where men and women leave home each day for their workplace and thereby support their families and our economy .
Be in no doubt that absurdly exaggerated restrictions and red tape will only kill off enterprise and the enterprises to which our constituents resort each day to make their living and provide the prosperity on which we all depend .
The Commission has it very nearly right .
Apply effectively the legislation we already have and encourage health and safety actions as good for business as well as for workers .
Mr Hughes ' report goes far too far .
Its litany of exaggerated good intentions and its demand for yet more legislation risk the future of Europe 's businesses , of our prosperity and our jobs .
Mr President , although there are different opinions on this communication , I believe we can strike a balance .
As I have said , this health and safety at work strategy is an action plan for the European Community as whole .
So we have to take account of the differences between the Member States , their different laws and definitions , the Treaty , the legal basis and the constraints on the Commission 's human resources budget .
Attention has been drawn to the human resources cutbacks . But we have the Bilbao Agency .
The Commission services and the Bilbao Agency have different terms of reference , but the Bilbao Agency provides support in the form of information , campaigns , analyses and studies .
So there is very close cooperation .
In any case , I cannot commit myself to more human resources , since you all know how difficult an issue that is .
What we have proposed in this strategy is realistic and the Commission is able to carry it out with the existing resources .
Now some specific comments .
It is always assumed that the solution for any political issue is legislation .
We do not automatically accept or rule out the need for legislation , we are just saying that , in many cases , the situation needs to be assessed to see whether such legislation is necessary .
Mrs Lynne questioned whether this procedure was always right and whether the existing data or studies were necessarily sufficient to demonstrate the need for legislation .
On the specific issue of vibration , there have been many different studies .
We have received data from all the Member States proving there was a real problem .
We shall be analysing it and then presenting proposals for any follow-up action .
It is not just legislation .
There are so many different issues in the Commission 's text .
Reference was made to quality .
We have already started working with Eurostat on the harmonisation of at least the definitions in the various Member States .
At the moment they define accidents differently , which sometimes causes confusion .
We are therefore working towards harmonisation of the existing definitions .
Then we have to work on concrete indicators . These are very specific and should be submitted according to a timetable .
Benchmarking has been referred to .
I spoke about that earlier .
Partnership is one of the cornerstones of the whole concept .
Under the strategy , each of the partners involved is required to present its own action plan .
We have already received action plans from the social partners .
Each Member State and each partner has to submit its own specific programme .
We have already worked through the issues with the applicant countries , and there are concrete references and commitments concerning those countries as well .
In conclusion , we can in future work together in cooperation with the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to assess the potential for more precise commitments .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Álvarez , and the Members of Parliament for their report and their support .
This is an important proposal , designed as it is to ensure that all workers are protected in the workplace because , as Mr Álvarez has explained so well , and there is no need for me to repeat what he has said , workers cannot be treated differently depending on how their work is defined .
The purpose of this initiative is to guarantee the same level of protection for self-employed workers and employed workers and it calls on the Member States to distinguish between three types of action .
The first is to include self-employed workers within the scope of health and safety at work regulations , assuming , of course , that their national legal systems so allow .
Secondly , it calls on the Member States to take the necessary measures so that self-employed workers can access information , training and technical support on risk prevention .
The third element is that the Member States are called on to provide access to suitable health monitoring systems .
It would appear that most of your amendments address situations where employed workers and self-employed workers work alongside each other and I agree that this sort of situation needs to be defined more clearly in the recommendation .
The Commission therefore accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 10 and 11 and will make every effort to ensure that the Council does likewise .
The Commission does not agree with Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 because they are either included in other amendments or call for certain binding legal arrangements which prejudge the efficacy of the recommendation during its first four-year pilot application .
The Commission feels that this proposal is an important step towards ensuring that legislation benefits all Europeans , irrespective of their type of work , a step towards the final objective of reducing accidents at work and occupational illnesses .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Pérez Álvarez for an incisive and thoughtful report .
The application of health and safety legislation to self-employed workers is an important subject , not least because of the ever-growing number of self-employed , subordinated , sub-contracted or atypical workers .
The creation of false forms of independence and self-employment can put workers who are in an employment situation beyond the framework of protection .
That is something we need to address .
This is something that the Commission recognises and , working together , as Mr Pérez Álvarez has said , we have tried to do something about it over the years .
The extension of working time protection to road transport personnel in the directive , agreed at the end of last year , will cover owner-drivers , but only because parallel legal bases covering occupational health and safety on the one hand , and operational safety on the other have been used .
As Mr Pérez Álvarez has pointed out this evening , the issue was also tackled in the framework of the directive on temporary and mobile work sites , but in a fairly limited way .
We therefore needed a more comprehensive approach and this recommendation may prove to be a useful contribution .
But other actions are possible , such as the more general extension of health and safety legislation to the self-employed suggested in Mr Pérez Álvarez 's Amendment No 4 .
I know the Commission has difficulty with that .
The Commissioner will say that the legal base in Article 137 will not permit this .
But , if the recommendation does not have a positive impact , then we will all collectively need to come back together to reconsider the legal bases that are available to us and maybe take the route suggested in Mr Pérez Álvarez ' s Amendments Nos 7 and 22 .
If not , imagine the sort of problems we face in relation to , for example , the proposed directive we are currently considering on protection of workers from risks related to exposure to asbestos at work .
We have massive amounts of asbestos hidden in our workplaces , homes , schools and hospitals .
Many people with employment contracts will handle it and , if they work for a demolition , removal or transportation company , they will be covered .
But a whole army of self-employed workers are also exposed to asbestos , in particular the electricians , plumbers and carpenters who come across it while doing maintenance work .
They will be predominantly self-employed .
It is also true that , even if we had a tenfold increase in the number of inspectors , they could not inspect this whole army of self-employed people at work .
They need to be able to take responsibility for themselves .
They need the information , the support and training to understand the risks they run if they take short cuts .
The recommendation is a very useful contribution in that respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Pérez Álvarez .
Thank you for this sound report .
I should above all like to focus on one element in this report in which reference is made to the Commission 's approach , which has been relatively cautious so far .
The topic is labour relations .
Everyone knows that they change at an incredible rate , and when I say an incredible rate , I mean an incredible rate .
As has been mentioned by different people , these encompass non-typical work of different kinds , and include temporary staff , the self-employed , the self-employed without staff , the spurious self-employed etc . , a large number of whom attend the workplace to work .
This is not only important for the workers ' own health , safety and well-being , but also for that of those indirectly involved .
In other words , changes do need to be made , particularly if you consider current legislation in the different countries and realise that some countries include the self-employed in their occupational health and safety legislation to some extent , while other countries do not at all .
The Commission has opted for a recommendation .
I would have preferred a stronger instrument , with immediate effect .
The reason is simple : we can accept the fact that a kind of evaluation is planned in four years ' time and better measures will follow if need be , but on the other hand - and I should like to come back to this in connection with the previous topic - at what stage is the enforcement of this legislation monitored ?
In the workplace and , if you are lucky , by labour inspectorates .
This inspection is often inadequate , however .
The most forceful impact is exercised by employers ' organisations , trade unions in the workplace , works councils or other consulting organisations .
They carry out this work , and without legislation they have no leg to stand on .
Relations between employers and employees at the workplace are being completely overlooked here .
This is of crucial importance , and this is why tougher legislation will be needed in this area in due course .
Mr President , perhaps the most surprising thing about this is that in the committee vote it was only passed by 36 to 1 .
I would have thought that anything like this would automatically have got unanimity in committee .
It is quite revealing also that it is only a recommendation .
As the Commissioner will know from the ' falls from heights ' directive , it was pretty clear that we needed a very strong political message to cover the self-employed .
It is not only the construction industry that suffers from accidents every day of the week .
For instance , the interpreters in the booths around us , who are often self-employed and have to work under very stressful conditions , are the very people we would expect to receive Community protection under Community law .
You know very well that the European institutions abstain from introducing any of those laws to cover many of their staff , so we will not go down that path .
There is no doubt that by recommending Community health and safety legislation for the self-employed we have taken a giant step forward .
We should no longer rely on national statistics which tell us that accidents only happen to full-time employees .
That is clearly ridiculous .
You might - if you are a Christian - call a it sin that so many people involved in industries , just because they are considered self-employed , do not enjoy the protection they deserve .
Mr Pérez Álvarez has spent a long time discussing health and safety in this Parliament .
I am very pleased that he has taken on this report , because I know the commitment we need from all sides of the House .
It is vital for the self-employed to be included in any health and safety and employment legislation that emanates from the Commission and this House .
Everyone in Europe must enjoy the same level of protection .
Mr President , a survey carried out by the Bilbao Institute shows in actual fact that the self-employed suffer occupational accidents , including fatal ones , more frequently than are those who are employed .
We also know that there is very considerable under-reporting of accidents involving the self-employed .
A survey in Britain reveals , for example , that only 5 % of accidents involving the self-employed are reported , compared with half of those involving wage earners .
It is also the case that the self-employed are more vulnerable to occupational accidents than wage earners because of their limited resources and perhaps because they do not have to comply with the health and safety provisions .
The Commission must therefore be commended for raising the issue .
Clearly , such non-compliance must be brought to an end .
The self-employed must not be able to freewheel when it comes to the EU rules on the working environment .
We should , however , have liked the Commission to have looked at some of the amendments that try to make the recommendations more binding .
I am aware that there is no basis in the Treaty for doing this .
If we are now all agreed that there is a problem in its not being possible for the self-employed to be covered by the legislation governing the working environment , is it not then time we tried to change the Treaties ?
Perhaps the Commission should be called upon to table a proposal on the subject to the Convention that is currently at work .
Mr President , Mr van Hulten , honourable Members , I would like to start by again thanking Parliament for its intensive and efficient cooperation on the recast financial regulation for the European Budget .
It was only the degree to which all the institutions were committed to working together that made it possible for the new financial regulation to be adopted unanimously by the Council on 25 June 2002 .
The new financial regulation forms a fundamental part of the reform of the Commission , and I am proud of our having achieved this feat of strength in 2002 .
I would like to re-emphasise my most especial thanks to Mr van Hulten and Mr Dell 'Alba , the latter of whom is not here , but I would like to take this opportunity to mention him again .
One of our main concerns in the recasting of the financial regulation was that it should be simplified by incorporating the very detailed provisions in the rules for implementation , which are to be adopted even before the end of the year in order that they may enter into force on 1 January 2003 , that is , at the same time as the new financial regulation .
Together with the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mr van Hulten has done very thorough work , for which I thank you most warmly .
Speaking on behalf of the Commission , I have the following to say concerning the individual amendments .
Firstly , many of the report 's amendments are aimed at incorporating all the reports and items of information to be transmitted to the budgetary authority in an annex summarising the annual activity reports of the authorising officers whose offices administer resources .
The Commission favours such a tightening-up of the procedures .
It is proposed in the report , with reference to the summary of the annual activity reports of the authorising authorities , that the requirement that such a summary should be submitted to the discharge authority should apply not only to the Commission , but also to the other institutions .
The aim underlying this is one that I share , but the wording of the financial regulation does not permit us to impose such an obligation on other institutions , which in our view would have to agree to it .
Secondly , amendments are proposed in the report relating to the financial actors named in the financial regulation , and these amendments have two aims in view : a ) that the budgetary authority be informed when the authorising authorities - at A1 level - and the accounting officer change , and b ) that the posts of accounting officer and internal auditor be advertised externally .
It therefore follows that the budgetary authority will be informed of new appointments .
We are unable , however , to go along with the report 's proposal , and , moreover , immediate external advertising would be contrary to the Statute , which expressly provides for posts to be , in the first instance , trawled within the institutions , before they can be advertised externally .
This means that immediate external advertising would not be compatible with the Statute .
Thirdly , as regards the amendments on the panel on financial irregularities , we can agree to the proposal that one of the panel 's members should be an independent expert .
However , we see the mandatory investigation of irregularities even in unimportant cases as going too far .
Fourthly , as regards the directive on late payment , I note Parliament 's reminder that the deadline for implementation has expired and that the institutions must , or at any rate should , abide by the rules on interest rates and deadlines applicable to late payment .
Fifthly , I am , in addition , able to agree to several amendments on accounting practice .
In particular , the Commission agrees to the clarification regarding the introduction of an integrated data processing system , which is entirely in line with its own earlier proposals .
As regards the demand for the drawing up of a list of all persons with the right of access to the electronic accounting system and the creation of an audit trail clearly showing what changes have been made to the system and by whom , I am able to inform you that the Commission is already in possession of both of these .
We welcome the incorporation of this provision into the rules for implementation , although I am at the moment unable to give you any information as to whether these conditions are already being complied with by the accounting systems of institutions other than the Commission .
My sixth point is that , in Amendment No 17 , you demand that the budgetary authority should be informed of all waivers of recovery of debt in excess of EUR 100 000 .
The Commission will take this on board as well .
Let me conclude with another clarification relating to the final amendment in the report .
This reads : ' The accounts for the 2002 financial year shall be drawn up and presented in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Regulation of 1977 , except for the obligation to submit these to the Financial Controller . '
I will point out now that it was made clear in the new financial regulation that there will be a transitional period up to the 2005 financial year for the clearance of accounts , meaning that , until 2005 , the clearance of accounts shall follow the procedure laid down in the financial regulation as at present valid .
In view of the fact that the only Member States so far to have largely gone over to accrual accounting - a system of accounting of a rather more Anglo-American stamp - is Great Britain , where it took over seven years to introduce it , the timetable for the Commission continues to be ambitious in the extreme .
I repeat my offer to inform the Committee on Budgetary Control as soon as possible concerning the proposals that the Commission has made here .
Mr President , if this debate was scheduled at this time because of the Conference of Presidents ' suspected interest in the subject matter , they were probably right .
It is not a very exciting topic to be discussing but , as we all know , it is very important or we would not be here .
I have to say it is a shame that two of the three committee members who voted against the report in committee and , therefore , triggered a debate in plenary , are not here today to explain their objections to the report .
I would like to thank the committee members who supported me in drawing up this report and giving it near unanimous backing in committee .
Thanks are due also to the Commission for the excellent cooperation we have again had on this report .
Many of the amendments contained in the committee 's report are technical in nature .
I am not going to go into that .
I just want to mention a few substantive issues the Commissioner also raised .
The report deals with a number of points where we feel the implementing rules could be strengthened .
The first concerns weaknesses regarding the appointment and functioning of senior financial actors , something which has been an issue for the last few months .
There have been several instances of transfers or terminations of duties involving directors-general and there has been the case of the accounting officer , Mrs Andreasson .
The issues raised are being dealt with by the committee and assessed on their own merits .
However , issues of form have also arisen concerning how such appointments , transfers and terminations are dealt with within the Commission .
We would like to see certain safeguards built into the Financial Regulation .
Safeguards , not in the sense that you can be sure mistakes will never be made or problems will never occur , but safeguards that introduce more transparency to ensure that the process is visible and that we are not faced with surprises and faits accomplis .
This involves the appointment of senior officers , something to which you referred , Commissioner .
I will request that a report be submitted to the budgetary authority and that the accounting officer and internal auditor be appointed on the basis of a vacancy notice in the Official Journal .
They should be external candidates , where necessary on limited-term contracts .
I realise that we cannot change the Financial Regulation but we must take the matter up in the Staff Regulations , because it is an important point .
Secondly , there is the question of the financial irregularities panel , which is designed to fill a gap in the existing set-up and introduce new expertise .
What we want to avoid is a system where peers are assessing peers .
The introduction of an independent external element is , therefore , important , and I welcome the fact that you have accepted that proposal .
Thirdly , there is the matter of improving the quality and integrity of the computerised accounting system , something you also mentioned .
We want a single integrated computer system , with access restricted to a list of authorised persons to be kept by the institution .
I realise that the Commission is already doing this , and it is important the other institutions should be required to follow .
Finally , we want to see an easy-to-read audit trail maintained , to ensure adequate control of expenditure .
The final point I want to mention is late payments and the need to bring commercial payments in line with the relevant directive .
I am sure my colleague , Mr Casaca , who has worked hard on this , will have something more to say .
Three amendments have been tabled in plenary in addition to the ones from the committee .
One by the PPE-DE Group and two by the GUE / NGL Group , none of which I support .
The PPE-DE is retabling an amendment that was rejected in committee , proposing to create a fully independent accounting officer with no lines of accountability and responsibility within the Commission .
I cannot support that because it contradicts the Financial Regulation itself , in relation to which these are implementing rules .
Nor is there any point in creating an isolated island within the institution , which would go against the whole principle of accountability .
Great formal power does not necessarily mean better decision-making , as we know .
With regard to the amendments by the GUE / NGL Group , I can agree in spirit with Amendment No 34 on the need for the accounting officer to have full information , but in practice it would lead to a huge bureaucracy , with 600 000 payments going through one single person .
Although not the aim of the amendment , it would certainly lead to unnecessary bureaucracy .
The second amendment concerns the proposal on the criteria to be taken into account in the event of a waiver of recovery of an established debt .
There are two criteria : one on competition and one on economic and social damage caused by a debt if it is recovered .
The GUE / NGL Group wants to scrap this possibility for authorising officers .
The amendment we have introduced and which you have just accepted , introducing a reporting requirement to Parliament , offers sufficient safeguards .
To conclude , I think these amendments strengthen the proposal and I call on the Commission to incorporate them all into the final text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what would a regulation such as the EU 's Financial Regulation be without rules for its implementation ?
Obviously , it would be worthless or impracticable and incapable of being implemented , for , in the aftermath of our sustained work , in committee and in plenary , on a recasting of the Financial Regulation , here , hot on its heels , comes the regulation on the rules for implementation .
Why do I lay such emphasis on this ?
I do so because I think we are giving another example of how legislation is evidently insufficient , but needs further elaboration .
That does not help European law to be clear , simple or comprehensible .
Perhaps , though , this wide-ranging creativity in legal matters does indeed contribute towards legal veracity , by which I mean the application of laws currently in force .
It is with reference to this that I ask the Commissioner responsible for these matters to act in accordance with the law and not follow the example of the President of the present Commission , who simply describes current laws - such as the Stability Pact - as stupid and fails to apply them .
The fact that the degree to which public has confidence in this Europe of ours is largely dependent on the Financial Regulation and on the rules for its implementation means that these are not in any way suited to being played about with in this way .
Such confidence is damaged by the Commission 's thoughtless and arrogant way of acting or failing to act ; among other things , it has obviously neglected to ensure that its accounting system is reliable and proof against manipulation . This is a dereliction of duty dating back to the day it took office , despite repeated admonitions from , inter alia , the European Court of Auditors , and one for which it must be held accountable .
That is also precisely why it is so important that the so-called accounting officer should be in a clearly defined and independent position .
The Commission having , unfortunately , been so irresponsible as to abolish the independent financial controller , the accounting officer will acquire even greater importance .
He must be able to get his hands on additional information with absolute independence , suspend payments , and criticise people in prominent positions , without being removed from office and subjected to disciplinary proceedings or something of that sort .
I therefore ask you to support my group 's Amendment No 33 , and also the other two amendments tabled by Mr Blak , which are also intended to enhance the clarity and transparency of the law .
We must not allow large margins of appreciation in budgetary law .
Mr van Hulten , I am not surprised at your lack of support for Amendment No 33 .
The arguments you adduce here are the same as in committee , but their constant repetition does not render them any more effective .
We must , in these matters , avoid the least suspicion of decisions being arbitrary or partisan , for only in this way can the Commission disabuse people of their impression that a more lenient standard is applied to the handling of European funds than applies to the handling of national funds .
Incidentally , I greatly regret the fact that Parliament has needlessly allowed itself to be put under pressure of time in dealing with these rules .
I do not know why we have not waited for the European Court of Auditors to give its opinion , but perhaps the rapporteur , in his great wisdom , will be able to give me an answer on that .
Mr President , I should like to place this debate in a political context : ultimately , we are in the European Parliament , which is supposed to be the most representative political body , and the one in closest contact with the citizens .
The use of the financial resources available to the European Union is probably the most complex but equally the most attractive duty that falls to the Community institutions .
The structure of the budgetary authority as defined in the Treaties , and the still inadequate role in budgetary policy allotted to Parliament require and justify particular attention to the control and monitoring of budgetary implementation .
The truth is that the monitoring of budgetary implementation can only be effective and useful if it is underpinned by principles of transparency and clarity and is supported by rules that are at once ambitious and simple .
This is clearly the aim of the new financial regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities , which will enter into force on 1 January 2003 , and , specifically , the aim of the new implementing rules proposed by the Commission .
The wording used by Mr van Hulten for these rules , without undermining the essence of the Commission proposal , enriches the control and monitoring procedure to an extraordinary degree , making it more comprehensible and straightforward , in other words , it significantly steps up control of the efficiency of Community expenditure .
The current budgetary framework is acknowledged to be a precarious one , which does not respond fully to the Union 's political priorities .
Consequently , and in the absence of a revision of the financial perspective that could increase the volume of resources available to the European Union , it is becoming mandatory for the European Parliament to make full use of all its competences and prerogatives .
The European Parliament will only make full use of these prerogatives and competences if it is able to intervene politically within an administrative framework that is sufficiently dynamic and stabilising but , above all , comprehensible and effective .
The principles of unity and universality enshrined in the rules contained in the new regulation - albeit in embryonic form - and which the rapporteur strengthens , as well as the status conferred on internal hearings at the initiative of the rapporteur for each institution are , in my opinion , extremely important and significant steps forward .
The report by Mr van Hulten whom I welcome and congratulate personally , therefore deserves the support of the European Parliament .
Mr President , Mr van Hulten has done some excellent work in reforming the Financial Regulation and this report is also an excellent example of that .
My sincerest thanks go to him accordingly .
The reform of the Financial Regulation began with the report in 1999 by the external committee of experts commonly known as the Five Wise Men .
The report mentioned the importance of both simplifying financial administration and clarifying personal accountability .
Parliament and the Council approved the new Financial Regulation last spring and it comes into force from the beginning of next year .
The reform is partly linked to the Commission 's administrative reform .
The rules for implementation now being discussed are connected with this new Financial Regulation .
The reform would mean an end to the old ex ante control with responsibility moving away from financial administration to be borne entirely by the authorising officer .
This change will mean an increase in their power and responsibility .
Because authorising officers are the officials with the most important executive role they must be fully accountable for their actions , and cannot take refuge behind the backs of others .
With accountability hopefully becoming clearer , we can also increase efficiency , as at present , for example , delays in making payments in the Commission are too long and do not in any way match the sort of efficiency we see in the world of business .
The system now to be decided on must not be spoilt by new amendments .
For that reason , Amendments Nos 33 and 34 , for example , are not acceptable , as they would allow for responsibility for execution to be shared once again by two people , the authorising officer and the accounting officer .
The system has to be clear and transparent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Financial Regulation currently under discussion is likely to apply for many years to come .
It is therefore crucial that its provisions for implementation are as clear as possible .
The new Financial Regulation should not only lead to efficient handling but also better supervision than was previously the case .
When supervision and operation are handed over to the various directorates-general , they must be monitored effectively .
It is therefore vital that the accounting officer has a strong and independent position .
We have proposed an amendment in this vein .
The accounting officer must be able to demand and receive more information , stop payments in cases of doubt and report directly to the highest level .
With this in mind , we would also like to express our regret that Parliament has not taken this opportunity to investigate the confusion in this area which has existed for years .
This should have been carried out by summoning Mrs Andreasen to appear before the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The fact is that we have still not received full answers on the approval of the Commission 's accounts for 2001 .
My political group has also proposed an amendment limiting the Commission 's ability to write off and write down liabilities .
There must be clear grounds for writing off liabilities so that we do not see more cases like the Flechard case , where the person responsible for a serious error is not forced to accept the full consequences of their action .
This explains our second amendment .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Schreyer , if we are to take the Commission at its word when it makes these statements , then the new Financial Regulation is leading us into a new era of financial management , in which we will be able to resolve the problems of the past .
We will simply have to wait and see .
What we can , unfortunately , see at the present time is that the new era is being ushered in by the weakening of Parliament 's rights .
The new Financial Regulation 's rules of implementation , should , according to previous rules , have been decided on in agreement with Parliament .
In law , the Commission is no longer obliged even to listen to Parliament .
Of course , Mrs Schreyer , we welcome the way that you are doing that any way , as these rules of implementation do not apply to the Commission alone , but are in future to be applicable to all the EU institutions .
Let me pick out a number of points on which we should be asking the Commission to think again , if not to make improvements .
Take the accounting officer : according to this proposal , the institutions have to select their accounting officers from the ranks of the civil service .
Applications from outside will not be possible .
This means that we are in fact spoiling our opportunities for even considering external candidates .
You have told us , Mrs Schreyer , that the Statute prevents this .
Let me turn to the accounting officer 's functional independence , on which depends the reliability and credibility of the figures we have to present to the public in their capacity as contributors to the European Union .
The draft has nothing to say about this .
Why do you not give the accounting officer a right of appeal against attempts at interference in his work , as you have to the internal auditor ?
There are other aspects that cause me concern ; one example is the so-called panel on financial irregularities .
I hope that is not meant to compete with OLAF or even interfere with its work .
Conflicts of interest are given a comprehensive and appropriate definition in the Financial Regulation , but the rules of implementation make it look as if this can be simply evaded .
Finally , Article 84 's provisions on the waiver or claims open the door to waiving the recovery of debts .
It will be the European taxpayer who will have to cough up for these decisions , by paying additional contributions .
Thanks are due to the rapporteur , Mr van Hulten , for the speed with which he has worked under enormous pressure of time .
Mr President , the rapporteur on the rules for implementing the Financial Regulation has presented many good proposals , but I would like to say right at the outset that we should avoid giving the impression that the last Commission 's downfall was due to a bad financial regulation and the rules for its implementation .
It is my belief , Commissioner , that such would be a false assessment and would lead us into renewed disaster .
It was far more a matter of culture .
If , on the one hand , you are saying that the amendment of the Financial Regulation and the rules associated with it is one of the most ambitious tasks involved in the reform of the Commission , then I have to say that you cannot be aiming very high !
You tell us that the reason we cannot have external candidates for the post of accounting officer is that there is a Statute that says so .
I ask you !
If the Commission cannot even alter a Statute , how does it think it is going to govern the EU ?
Surely one of the first things that the executive should be able to do is to change the rules governing its own staff !
That , Commissioner , is just not acceptable !
Perhaps you are putting the cart before the horse .
In my judgment , this is about changing the culture .
That was possible under the old rules , and will also be possible under the new ones .
When , for example , I study reports , as I have done in connection with the whole Eurostat business , in which you looked on and you continued to spend European taxpayers ' money on employing firms that , to your own knowledge have demonstrably deceived and cheated you , I do not know , Commissioner , whether this renewed culture , under the banner of zero tolerance , the idea with which we started out in 1999 , has actually gained a foothold yet !
Mr President , I wish to use this minute to congratulate the rapporteur on the magnificent work he has produced to date , which leaves us an extremely positive legacy , but which also commits him to the future and requires him , in the implementation of this regulation and specifically in all aspects concerning the accounting system that will be implemented , to respond as effectively as he has done in the case of the Financial Regulation .
I wish to say to Commissioner Schreyer that I have listened closely to everything she said , especially her approach to one of the points that I believe to be crucial : the issue of the directive on payments , which is included in this implementing regulation .
I believe this to be an extremely positive point and I wish , therefore , to congratulate the Commission , but there is no doubting that the great challenge is to see how this regulation will be implemented , both in the accounting system and in the financial management system .
With regard to this challenge , we will be here to assess the Commission 's action .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to return to some of the points that have been made .
Let me first put something straight .
The Court of Auditors may have had many criticisms to make of various accounting rules and of the system itself , but it always used to confirm that the completed accounts were a true and faithful record of income and expenditure .
Turning , secondly , to the question of the accounting officer 's role , I am also grateful for the clarifications that have been given today .
The accounting officer carries out the orders of the authorising authority , and the accuracy of the accounting system is his responsibility , but he is not the financial controller .
On the contrary , it is important that financial management and accounting should be kept as separate tasks , and that the bookkeeper should not be involved in the management of funds ' resources .
That is not his job , nor should it be ; on the contrary , it is for him to keep the books properly .
This separation of the functions is important .
As far as the external advertisement of posts is concerned , the Statute - which , as you will be aware , is laid down by the Council - governs the sequence of events involved in recruitment .
It does not prevent posts being externally advertised .
It is the stages that we are dealing with here .
I must , though , reiterate that the Financial Regulation stipulates that the accounting officer shall be an official of the Commission .
Why is that the case ?
It is of course because this person opens accounts for the European institutions , which means that he or she is in a position of trust .
That being so , one cannot but wonder whether the concealment of important facts in a job application could justify this position of trust .
It has been urged that the rules on accounting procedures should be clear .
In the past , of course , we had very clear and simple rules , in that the entire public accounting system was based on what , in Germany , we term cameralistic accounting , in which the cash spent and the cash books - the actual outgoings and the actual receipts - are compared with what is in the budget .
That is , of course , also the way in which the Commission and other offices administering public expenditure are accountable to the body which legislates on the budget .
They want us to tell them how much of any given budget line they have voted has actually been spent on it .
This accounting system will of course continue to play a part in the future , but this information is now no longer adequate for the purposes of management .
For that , we need more information in the accounting system .
The Commission has therefore proposed , and the legislature has so decided , that we should go further along this Anglo-American road towards a system of accrual accounting , containing more rules and information specific to management functions .
We will , however , have another opportunity to discuss these issues .
Let me repeat that I would be more than happy to talk about these issues in the Committee on Budgetary Control , but , at this late hour , I will just thank Mr van Hulten again for the report and congratulate him on it .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Preparatory work for the European Council in Brussels on 24-25 October
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparatory work for the European Council in Brussels on 24 and 25 October 2002 .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I have been asked to make a statement entitled ' Preparation for the European Council meeting in Brussels on 24-25 October 2002 ' .
This meeting will play a central role in further work during the Danish Presidency .
As we know , the agenda will be dominated by the important topic of enlargement and also , in this connection , the subject of Kaliningrad , in which the European Parliament has of course taken a great interest .
The outcome of the meeting will be of great importance as regards the possibility of realising the common goal of concluding enlargement negotiations with up to 10 countries .
Therefore , the important thing is for the European Council to reach as many decisions as possible , so that as little as possible remains to be done in Copenhagen .
It is true that what remains could be really tough going .
At the European Council meeting , the Chairman of the Convention will inform the European Council of the status of the Convention 's work , and the President of the European Parliament will also speak to the European Council .
Let me start with the latter .
The meeting with the President of Parliament has become an established tradition which I know is valued highly by Heads of State and Government in the European Council .
Bearing in mind the agenda before us , it will of course be particularly interesting to hear the views of the President of Parliament on the issues the Council will be discussing , that is , enlargement , and also the related subject of Kaliningrad , which I shall come back to .
It is very convenient that the discussion with the President of Parliament is taking place immediately before the working meetings on enlargement and Kaliningrad .
In addition to the contribution of the President of Parliament , it is of course our hope that the meeting , including the opportunity to exchange information and ideas for use in further work , will prove beneficial to the President of Parliament and Parliament as a whole .
I now wish to say a little about enlargement .
It is strongly to be hoped that decisions will be taken in Brussels on a number of very important subjects that could pave the way for enlargement .
It must be decided which of the candidate countries will be able to conclude accession negotiations this year .
The starting point will be the Commission 's progress reports on the individual candidate countries and the Commission 's strategy paper on enlargement as a whole , which was presented on 9 October by Commissioner Verheugen , who is also present here .
On the basis of a comprehensive evaluation of the progress of each individual candidate country , the Commission concludes that 10 countries will be able to meet all the criteria by the start of 2004 , and on that basis it is recommended that accession negotiations be concluded as planned here this year .
At its meeting in Copenhagen , the European Council will also discuss those candidate countries which are not expected to be able to conclude negotiations this year ( Bulgaria , Romania and Turkey ) , with a view to making decisions on the further course of the accession process for these countries .
Decisions are also to be taken in Brussels on the outstanding issues in the accession negotiations in connection with the financial package .
There was agreement on the institutional issues at the General Affairs Council yesterday , and the European Council will amongst other things lay down , as part of the financial package , the total amount to be allocated to enlargement , candidate countries ' participation in the common agricultural policy , including their share of direct income support , and the total aid from the cohesion and structural funds to the candidate countries .
The European Council should also take a decision on the matter of the net position of the candidate countries in relation to the EU budget , and agreement has been reached as to the basis for these calculations .
The debate on these subjects to date has shown that it will not be easy to reach agreement .
The European Council in Seville concluded that the EU 's positions concerning the outstanding , financially onerous , chapters will be presented to the candidate countries at the beginning of November .
That means that the Brussels European Council must take decisions on these matters if the timetable laid down in Seville is to be met .
The Danish Presidency will insist on this , and so the meeting must go on until a solution has been found .
As I have said , we can expect it to be very difficult .
It will require a willingness to compromise on the part of everyone concerned , but a solution must be found .
In addition , Kaliningrad will be discussed , and on this point , too , significant progress was made at yesterday 's meeting in Luxembourg , from which both Mr Verheugen and myself have just returned .
The matter was discussed in Seville : the Commission was asked to study the possibilities for an effective and flexible solution to the question of transit ; a solution which would be in conformity with the acquis and would have the agreement of the candidate countries concerned .
The Commission submitted its communication on 18 September .
This has been discussed twice in the Council , and it was also discussed here in Parliament only last week , on 15 October .
Together with the Commission , the Presidency has held a series of talks with Russia and consulted Lithuania , in particular , which is the candidate country most affected .
Over and above the principles on which the Seville mandate was based , the EU has emphasised Lithuania 's sovereign right to control its borders and to reserve the right to refuse entry .
Furthermore , it has been laid down that a solution must not hinder or delay Lithuania 's full membership of Schengen .
The Council has agreed to give Lithuania a guarantee in that respect , and ultimately the Council agrees that Lithuania must be compensated for any additional expense arising from a solution to the transit question .
Russia has pressed home its desire to obtain the right to visa-free transit by train through Lithuania .
This is a solution which entails many problems of a technical , economic , legal and political nature .
The EU has not , however , ruled out examining the possibility , and the Presidency will continue to work towards a solution which satisfies all parties to the greatest possible extent and can win the support of the European Council .
The guidelines I mentioned here were followed at yesterday 's General Affairs Council in Luxembourg .
Agreement was reached yesterday on making the provision I referred to : that Lithuania must be able to become a member of Schengen at the same time as the other candidate countries if it wishes ; and it does .
This is the EU 's position , and it seems to me , therefore , that the 15 governments have prepared themselves as well as possible for the discussions which are to take place at the European Council meeting in Brussels , and also for the subsequent talks with Russia which are to be conducted by the Presidency , and which will culminate in the EU-Russia Summit in Copenhagen in November .
On the subject of the Convention , the European Council , in conformity with the Laeken Declaration , will hear a report at the Brussels meeting from the Chairman of the Convention , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , on the progress which has been made with the Convention 's work .
Helping the work of the Convention along is an important ambition of the Presidency 's .
The Convention has got off to a good start , and has now moved on to the important analysis stage .
The number of proposals is rising , the mounds of paper are growing , and it seems to me that we have been witness to an extremely exciting debate on the future of Europe , both in and around the Convention .
It has been a pleasure to see the firm commitment on the part of the members of the Convention , not least those members hailing from Parliament , who had been armed to the teeth , and who have made a particularly deep mark on the debate .
In the shape of the Convention , we see for the first time - and in the full glare of publicity - something as extraordinary as a genuine debate across European borders .
This is not something we are accustomed to .
As a rule , European politicians aim their contributions to the European debate at the public in their own , rather than other , countries .
That is not , however , the case where this debate on the future of Europe is concerned ; and this , I believe , bodes well for our ambition to create European cooperation which is more democratic and has grass-roots support .
As will have been clear from my statement , we have an extensive and ambitious agenda for the Brussels Summit .
It is my hope and belief that all the countries will now show the necessary willingness to compromise and help to take the important decisions which I have spoken of here ; and I shall not , of course , conceal the fact that the questions that remain are particularly tough nuts to crack , and here I am of course speaking of the economy .
I would like to repeat and underline that the European Council is looking forward to hearing what the President of Parliament , Mr Cox , has to say and to exchanging views with him .
The importance of Parliament to the enlargement process is undisputed . Speaking almost with one voice , Parliament said very early on , first in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and then in plenary , what was to be done .
This has contributed to the momentum , the driving force , which means that the enlargement process cannot , we hope , be halted at the last minute .
This is something for which , on behalf of the Presidency , I wish , moreover , to thank Parliament most warmly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the Irish have voted in favour of the Treaty of Nice , the last political barriers to ratification of the Treaty have been overcome and the way to enlargement is open .
I congratulate the Irish people on their decision .
It demonstrates their openness and sense of responsibility .
What is true for Ireland is true for us all .
It is in all our interests that enlargement should proceed without delay .
The forthcoming European Council in Brussels is therefore crucial .
The debate will focus on our proposals regarding the ten candidate countries with which we recommend winding up negotiations by the end of the year .
The date for the accession of Bulgaria and Romania and the next stage of Turkey 's candidacy will also be discussed .
The agenda will include the issue of Kaliningrad too .
We may have the opportunity to review the international situation , focusing particularly on how best to continue combating terrorism in the light of the recent tragic events in Bali and the Philippines .
We will also hear what the President of the European Convention has to report and we will hold our customary exchange of views with the President of the European Parliament .
The first item on the Council 's agenda will therefore be enlargement .
I would like to spell out once again the compelling reasons behind our recommendation to the Member States to conclude the negotiations with the ten countries .
We have a historic and moral duty to share with our European neighbours the stability and prosperity we have built up over half a century of integration .
Peace , stability , democracy and the rule of law are the essential ingredients for political stability .
All this has worked very well for us in the past . It will work for the future Member States too .
Enlargement will extend European governance and standards to the entire continent .
We expect to see a positive impact in very many areas : more efficient public administrations , more robust judicial systems , greater protection of minorities , more effective crime prevention , especially where cross-border crime is concerned , more stringent controls on illegal migration , enhanced monitoring of products on the market and , in particular , of food safety , and , lastly , stricter environmental standards .
The European Union 's greater size will increase its political potential on the world stage .
This will bolster our policies in the fields of trade , financial markets , the environment and security . Europe will be in a better position to defend human rights and to help reduce the North-South divide .
If we succeed in uniting faithfully and speaking with a single voice , we will be able to make a difference in issues such as climate change and managing the impact of globalisation .
On top of that , however , the first wave of ten new Member countries will bring enormous economic benefits for the Union as a whole - for both current and future Member States .
The increase in the Union 's population will strengthen the single market : the population will be increased by approximately 75 - 77 million , bringing the total number of citizens in the Union to 453 million .
By way of comparison , consider that NAFTA - comprising the United States , Mexico and Canada - has a population of around 400 million .
Some say that , after the ten candidate countries join the European Union , the Union 's GDP will grow by only 4 or 5 % while the population will increase by 20 % . There is nothing negative in that .
These statistics highlight the fact that we alone are achieving a process of democratic globalisation , even if only at regional level . They are by no means negative , for they are evidence of huge potential for growth , considering the trends displayed by these countries .
Indeed , we must not forget that the ten candidate countries are already growing at a consistently higher rate than the present 15 Member States .
Year on year , this was 2.4 % in 2001 compared with 1.5 % for the current European Union and a remarkable 4.1 % in 2000 compared with our 3.4 % .
Most importantly , the ten candidate countries will bring highly qualified human resources to the Union .
It is true that the enlargement countries will increase the Union 's population by 20 % and its income by only 5 % , but the percentage of science and engineering students graduating in these countries each year corresponds to 25 % of our total .
This is a resource which will contribute greatly to the increase in development .
Interpreting all these factors intelligently , we see that the candidate countries are our new frontier .
European industry will have new scope for development and expansion because there will be a great need for new technologies and because the new Member States will provide a market for our goods and services .
Ladies and gentlemen , those are the benefits enlargement will bring .
It is now time to address the remaining problems .
First , however , I would like to make one minor general point : we must take great care not to jeopardise the success of enlargement by wrangling over details , as often happens in political decision-making .
The unification of Europe must always take precedence over narrow sectoral and national interests .
We need to concentrate on the larger picture and never lose sight of the opportunities I have just described .
The ten countries have made enormous progress in recent years .
The Commission 's Regular Reports presented recently make this abundantly clear , and I want to emphasise that these analyses were neither overindulgent nor overoptimistic .
The Commission 's confidence in the candidate countries is based on facts and thorough analysis .
The progress already made is the guarantee that all ten countries will be ready for membership in early 2004 , including in those areas where the work undertaken still - of course - needs to be completed .
Nonetheless , despite our total confidence in the candidate countries , the Commission has undertaken to monitor their final preparations and progress even after accession .
To this end , we have prepared safeguard clauses for the internal market and justice and home affairs , which are the areas with regard to which our citizens have the most fears and the least confidence .
The safeguard clauses will take effect should pledges given not be respected - an extremely unlikely scenario but one which is still possible , and we must make provision for it .
As you are aware , the key points that will be on the table in the debate between the Heads of State and Government relate to the financing of enlargement .
These last remaining issues are nonetheless highly significant .
The issue that meets with the broadest agreement is net transfers .
There is clear unanimity on two principles : firstly , on accession , the ten candidate countries must not find themselves in the position of net contributors ; and secondly , all expenditure commitments must fall within the strict limits set at Berlin .
We have adhered to these two principles , and I therefore believe that it will not be difficult to reach agreement on the exact figure at Copenhagen .
As regards the Structural Funds , too , there appears to be growing consensus on an annual figure of around EUR 25.5 billion for 2004 , 2005 and 2006 .
Frankly , we can hardly offer our new fellow citizens less .
It will mean that the per capita amount received by the cohesion countries - the existing countries - will be EUR 231 in 2006 while the citizens of the new Member States will be entitled to EUR 137 per capita .
I do not think we can make the discrepancy any wider than this .
Lastly , there is the issue of agricultural expenditure , with which we are all familiar .
I know that some of the present Member States have reservations regarding the budgetary sustainability of these proposals and that they have asked for further guarantees .
It is right to reflect on the Union 's future financial system - indeed , it is our duty .
The Commission stands by its position : all our proposals are in line with the financial ceilings laid down at Berlin and are without prejudice to any future decisions .
On all the financial issues outstanding , I expect the Brussels European Council to give the Danish Presidency and the Commission a mandate to conclude the negotiations with a view to a final decision being taken at Copenhagen .
On this I ask for your support .
Nevertheless - and this is a final addendum - the biggest effort we need to make in this last phase of the enlargement process is in the area of information .
The latest Eurobarometer survey , published two days ago , tells us that half the current Union citizens are in favour of enlargement while one third are against .
The remainder is neither for nor against .
These figures are fairly reassuring in one sense but , in another , they give cause for concern : 65 % of those surveyed think that enlargement will bring an increase in drugs trafficking , international organised crime and unemployment , which is exactly the opposite of what , on the basis of analyses , I genuinely believe will happen in the future .
Why , then , you may ask , should enlargement give rise to those fears ?
The answer lies in the last Eurobarometer figure : those who feel that they have been properly informed about enlargement make up only 21 % of the population , whereas 79 % feel that they have not received sufficient information .
We clearly , therefore , need to make an effort to provide practical , sound , detailed information .
Those who the statistics tell us do not feel well informed are not necessarily against enlargement - they tend to be indifferent .
That , for me , however , is perhaps the most disturbing factor .
We must convince our fellow citizens that enlargement will bring solutions , not problems .
That is why the Commission has launched an information campaign targeting both the present Member States and the candidate countries .
The success of enlargement will depend on our ability to keep the public properly informed . We must not disappoint millions of Europeans in this respect .
Indeed , the future of our Union depends on the enthusiasm , the vigour and the astuteness of our final endeavours to complete the process .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the signal we got from Luxembourg yesterday was a strong and positive one .
The Council has accepted the Commission 's recommendations that the negotiations with ten countries should be concluded .
The Council did this because the Commission had been able to make a convincing case that our recommendations were not based on a political wish list .
Our desire was not to take a politically desirable scenario and pronounce it realistic , but to declare what actually is realistic .
The Commission 's statement that these ten countries will have completed their preparations by the scheduled date of accession is not a rough estimate , but rather a firm prognosis , founded on knowledge , experience and the actual stage that preparations have reached , and one that we will defend fair and square .
I think it important to note that the Commission came to this decision unanimously and that all my fellow-Commissioners , who bear responsibility for the extent to which policies work , said unequivocally that there remain within their fields of responsibility no problems that cannot be rectified by the scheduled date of accession .
If one considers what has to be done in the remaining 12 to 15 or 18 months , as against what has already taken place over the past five years - for it is only then that the complete picture becomes apparent - it is very clear to see that we are not being over-optimistic when we say that the nature of the preparations will be such that we can tell the citizens back home that the enlargement is as well prepared as it possibly could be .
The Council also took on board the Commission 's proposals relating to monitoring and safeguard clauses .
This is a very important point .
This is not about any failure to trust the new members .
This is where we need a new instrument , because we find ourselves in a completely new situation .
The internal market and the single currency have , in the meantime made rapid progress and are almost fully developed .
We are dealing with countries that are undergoing a process of transformation .
Never before have we been in a situation in which we wanted to integrate ten countries at once , with a large number of them still in a process of transformation .
This can give rise to problems that nobody can foresee .
The Commission therefore considers it right and proper to have a very broadly framed safeguard clause , permitting us to intervene wherever unforeseen or unforeseeable problems crop up .
There is still a difficult stretch of the road ahead of us - that much is absolutely clear .
As again became clear yesterday , however , political momentum is strong enough to carry us onwards to Copenhagen and make Copenhagen , too , a success .
Not one Member State couples the threat of a veto to the demands and desires that are still present in this process .
It is important that we hold fast to the fact that , yesterday , all fifteen again committed themselves to the goal of completing the negotiations .
I would therefore like , briefly , to set out two expectations for the Council in Brussels to consider .
The very least that we need from the Heads of State and Government is an agreement permitting us , in the time between Brussels and Copenhagen , to get together with the candidate countries and properly sort out those financial and agricultural policy issues that are as yet unresolved .
The Commission does not believe it to be possible to reach compromises as late as the Copenhagen stage , as we would then be putting the candidate countries in a position where they would have to ' do or die ' , and we have to take the democratic rights of our future Member States seriously .
The enlargement process cannot be forced , but must be the outcome of mutual agreement and founded on mutual trust .
Discussion of the financial problems connected with enlargement no longer focuses , essentially , on the financial issues of 2004 , 2005 and 2006 ; we are indeed already doing the groundwork for discussion of the next financial perspective for the post-2006 period .
Whilst this must be understood , it must also be said that the enlargement process must not be allowed to be taken hostage for positions that should be discussed only in the context of the next Financial Perspective .
I also think we can agree that we of course have to carry on down the path on which we set off in 1999 in Berlin , which involves the requirement that the European Budget be consolidated rather than simply allowed to burst .
I am glad that France and Germany in particular are currently making special efforts , including bilateral contacts , at coming to an understanding on this fundamental issue .
I do not believe that Germany and France have a responsibility in this area markedly different from the responsibility shared by others , but it is certainly true that it was always good for Europe when these two countries took a common line on a great , important , and forward-looking European project .
I would be very glad indeed if it proved possible for them to give this common line its final shape by the time the Brussels Council begins .
I believe that everyone must take on their share of responsibility and do their share of the work involved in this .
The Commission 's work is , in essence , already done , but that does not mean that we can now sit idly twiddling our thumbs - I am not going to be out of a job for a long time yet .
What matters now is that everyone should understand that the enlargement project is political in nature .
Over the last few weeks , I have been in touch with a number of national parliaments and can say with all due caution that certain problems I have encountered there have something to do with a noticeable information deficit in those places .
What President Prodi said on the subject of information is crucial .
I draw for my concluding remarks on my experience of the Irish referendum ; in Ireland , it became quite apparent that , if we are to be able to advance our European cause and gain public support for it , we have to really fight for this Europe of ours and for our European cause ; we really have to be prepared to meet people halfway and tell them , in plain language , why it is right and necessary .
It will not work if we think that it will take care of itself or that the media will do it all for us .
Political leaders in all the European institutions , in the Member States ' governments and parliaments , the economic , political and cultural elites in all our Member States - these must now take upon themselves the responsibility of engaging in dialogue with the public .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we unreservedly support the political objectives set out here both by the Council and by the Commission in the persons of President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen , but we must also point out that the European Union is in a very grave situation .
What we have heard indicates that the prospects for the summit now being held in Brussels are not very rosy .
On behalf of our group , I would again like to make very clear that we had always envisaged a timetable according to which negotiations would be concluded by the end of 2002 , with the treaties then being signed in March or April and the accessions formalised in 2004 , so that the candidate countries would be able to take part in the 2004 European elections .
Now , Commissioner Verheugen has just made reference to Germany and France .
I agree on the importance of these two countries coming to an understanding , but , along with our group , I consider it a serious political error now to attach new conditions to the completion of the negotiations out of the desire for a new financial framework for the post-2006 period and perhaps even sooner .
Mr Böge , who is an expert on Budget matters , has confirmed to me , and I would like to point out , that Article 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement states that the adjustment of the Financial Perspective , and hence the allocation of the funds that enlargement will require between 2004 and 2006 , can be decided on only on a proposal from the Commission and by a qualified majority in the Council as well as an absolute majority of members and three-fifths of the votes cast in Parliament .
This , then , is where Parliament also has a part to play .
I very much hope that an agreement can now successfully be reached in Brussels , as both Mr Haarder and Mr Verheugen have said .
For if no success is forthcoming from Brussels , negotiations will be held up .
I have to say , speaking for my group , that we regard delaying the negotiations in such a way as irresponsible if it means that they cannot be concluded by the end of this year .
That is why the appearance of these new conditions at this juncture is a grave political error .
It would have been possible to discuss them at a much earlier stage .
It would be a tragedy if the candidate countries were to end up losing out because insufficient agreement had been reached within the European Union .
I agree wholeheartedly with what Commissioner Verheugen said about the candidate countries having done their duty over recent years , but it is the fault of certain of our Member States that we in the European Union have failed to do what had to be done .
We would be in breach of the trust placed in us by the candidate countries if we were to fail to come to an agreement in Brussels now .
I call upon all the parties involved to unite in Brussels and make the task of the Danish Council Presidency easier , enabling us to conclude the negotiations in time for Copenhagen .
Reference has been made to public information , and I can emphatically underline what both President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen have had to say on the subject .
Commissioner Verheugen , Parliament also needs to hear what is actually being done with the funds that the Commission has allocated to information work , in order to give better information on the use made of these funds to our voters , whom we of course have to take with us along this road .
Mr Haarder also mentioned how Kaliningrad will be a topic of discussion in Brussels .
Whatever the necessity of resolving the problems Russia has with transit - and there is no doubt that Russia has a major interest in this - it is important for us that we make sure that Lithuania does not get the impression that we in the European Union are now making decisions over its head .
On the contrary , Lithuania must be strengthened in its sense of its own sovereignty , and whatever is eventually decided must , of course , be subject to its agreement .
The Schengen criteria must also be adhered to .
It is on this basis , and also in relation to security , that we of course counsel flexibility in resolving matters with Russia .
The issue , however , is not only access to the Kaliningrad region , for beyond it , of course , lies Greater Russia .
There are other problems with borders .
Take , for example , the small amount of cross-border traffic between Poland and the Ukraine or that between Slovakia , Hungary and the Ukraine . I urge this House to bear in mind the need to , on the one hand , guarantee security , and , on the other , to use flexible solutions to make it possible for people on either side of the border to meet each other .
In Brussels , you will hear a report from Valéry Giscard D 'Estaing , the President of the Convention .
Our group and also our party - the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - is , as we have now confirmed at our congress , quite clear about the timeframe involved .
We want the Convention to produce a result by the end of June 2003 , with , after that , a short Intergovernmental Conference , so that , under the Italian Presidency , we may achieve a Treaty of Rome or a constitution of Rome , a basic treaty for the European Union by the end of 2003 .
This , therefore , is our call to all the parties involved : let us be ambitious , so that we may , adhering to this timeframe , bring into being the historic project , not only of enlargement , but also of a European constitution within the time allotted us .
This is our collective duty if our European continent is to have a good future .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are approaching the debate on the forthcoming European Council in Brussels with a certain amount of optimism .
The President-in-Office of the Council , the Danish Prime Minister , Mr Rasmusen , when he was kind enough to invite us to the Conference of Presidents in Copenhagen , spoke of the three stages of the Danish Presidency .
We knew that the Irish referendum and the elections in various Member States ( Sweden , France and Germany ) would have to be overcome , and now the second stage is beginning .
We need to clear up a few grey areas in Brussels and reach agreements in order , as Commissioner Verheugen has said , to be able to prepare for the Copenhagen Summit in time .
That is very important .
First of all , I shall address the question that I believe to be the most decisive : we must not only be able to talk about negotiations and money , which is always important , but we must also be able to provide a political impetus and vision for this entire process .
Before a wedding , the pre-nuptial agreement can be significant .
In Hollywood , some film stars sign pre-nuptial agreements over 100 pages long .
It is also important to know which house the couple will live in , and that is the job of the Convention .
Our main problem in the European Union , rather than in the candidate countries , however , is managing to muster political enthusiasm and historic vision .
This is the responsibility of the Commission , the Council , and also our responsibility here in Parliament .
I consider this to be the most decisive factor , and I would say that this is the weakest point at the moment .
We have talked about the budget , which is a summary of our policies .
In my personal experience , in the process of the integration of my country - and also of Portugal - into the European Union , budgetary issues were extremely important and defined the current framework , the 1988 Brussels Summit , the MacSharry reform and the Edinburgh Summit .
I believe we must start with the fact that it is good to have financial perspectives - I was the rapporteur for Parliament when the first financial perspectives were proposed - but these must not be restrictive .
They must be interpreted according to a fundamental political principle : that the budget is adopted annually .
My group believes that we cannot wait until 2006 , because there are important questions that need to be resolved .
The first , as President Prodi has said , is that the candidate countries are not net contributors .
This aspect is absolutely fundamental , not only in presentation , but also as a display of solidarity .
Secondly , we need to talk about 80 % of the budget .
The Commission has put forward a proposal , which my group considers to be of interest and which we should debate , which does not refer to changing the ceiling of the common agricultural policy , but of making this a possibility in future , and , in particular , of introducing criteria of sustainable development and solidarity , which this policy is lacking .
It is therefore our responsibility to address these problems now , without waiting until 2006 .
The same is true of the Structural Funds , which are a sign of economic and social cohesion , not total cohesion , but an important tool for the modernisation of these countries , as they have been for others such as Ireland - the country of origin of the President - Spain - my own country - Portugal , etc .
We must make the effort to consider how we can achieve better agreements that enable us to protect our interests and , at the same time , extend them to the candidate countries .
That is something that cannot be put off until 2006 .
We need to address it today , and it is important for agreements to be reached between France and Germany at the Brussels Summit , naturally - it is not good for one country to isolate itself from the rest of the Community - but also between all the current partners .
This is also an extremely important signal .
Lastly , Mr President , in this case we must also talk to the candidate countries knowing that we are on the threshold of a decision that involves a shared destiny in the future .
And we must also make a joint effort in Parliament to be able to adhere to a complex timetable which is an obstacle course we must overcome with a common political will .
Mr President , if the Treaty had been rejected by your countrymen , this week 's Council would have been marred by recrimination and disarray .
Due in no small part to your efforts , Ireland 's ' yes ' vote has put us back on track for Europe to be reunited in 2004 .
The decisions that remain will not be easy .
As our esteemed former colleague the President-in-Office has said , decisions involving money rarely are .
But the Heads of State and Government must not allow themselves to flunk this historic opportunity by fighting over how to pay the bill .
My group believes that enlargement can be financed under the financial arrangements agreed in Berlin .
Some shifting between the different headings should be possible , within the overall limits .
The final package must guarantee that new Member States will not be net contributors before 2007 .
Otherwise we will feed resentment and face the risk of more cliff-hanger referenda in the aspirant countries .
Inevitably , the major area of disagreement is the common agricultural policy .
While the Liberal Group does not regards CAP reform as a precondition for enlargement , it is clear that significant reform of our farm policies is essential to the success of enlargement and also for other reasons .
I hear that President Chirac expects the United Kingdom to bring its budget rebate into play , while he refuses to countenance reform of his farm policies before 2006 .
We support the Commission 's proposals to phase in income support to farmers for the new Member States , but we also expect all existing Member States to commit themselves to far-reaching reform of the CAP , as proposed in the mid-term review .
The second major area of concern is the readiness of the applicant states to live within the disciplines of the single market and respect the European Union 's values .
We share the concern expressed in the Commission 's progress report about corruption in a number of these countries and the need for progress in implementing EU legislation , particularly in the field of justice and home affairs .
That is why it is right that there should be a reinforced monitoring system to ensure that countries fulfil their commitments .
The President of the Commission called for enthusiasm and intelligence .
Commissioner Verheugen 's approach has demonstrated the latter , but a touch more enthusiasm in the Council for enlargement and for the new Europe it heralds would not go amiss .
Mr President , the candidate countries have now devoted many years ' hard work to adapting themselves to the European Union .
They have the right to expect that the EU does its share of the work and that no obstacle now arises to prevent the ten countries identified by the Commission being admitted into the European Union as planned .
It would be an irony of fate if there were discord in the EU which ended up delaying enlargement .
Our group does not share the opinion that the Treaty of Nice was an absolute condition for enlargement .
Enlargement could have gone ahead all the same , based on the old treaty .
The Treaty of Nice is , above all , about strengthening supranationality and increasing the power of the large countries within the EU system .
In addition , there is a problem with the Treaty of Nice as regards the distribution of power to the new countries .
The Czech Republic and Hungary are in actual fact discriminated against in terms of the number of seats in the European Parliament allocated to them .
It is our opinion that this should be adjusted in the Treaty of Accession .
It has to be said that the negotiations have gone well from the EU 's point of view .
The candidate countries have worked hard to take over the acquis .
The important thing now is that they will not only take it over in theory but also in practice , and then not only as regards the internal market but also as regards the environment and social rights for workers .
The question is whether the EU should not also adapt itself to having ten new members .
I believe that more should have been done .
It is our own inability to reform agricultural policy which has given rise to a situation in which the new Member States are actually going to be treated significantly worse than the previous Member States for quite some time .
This is unacceptable .
Any discrimination should be kept to a minimum and should be as short-lived as humanly possible .
In other areas , too , we must be able to revise our own policies so that they are suitable for enlargement .
The Schengen Agreement is one such area : its strict border controls are in danger of becoming a serious obstacle to cooperation for new Member States and for countries which are not in the next wave of enlargement of the European Union .
On the subject of the Kaliningrad area , we wish to see a solution whereby Russian citizens are able to travel between different parts of their country without needing a visa .
On the subject of the labour market , it is our opinion that everyone should be treated equally .
It is crucial that workers ' rights are respected in all countries from day one , so that a situation does not arise in which we have social dumping or in which workers from the candidate countries are discriminated against on the labour market .
Therefore , we regret that the Commission has effectively called this into question by means of a legal case in Finland which questions the contention that Finnish agreements apply in Finland from day one .
The important thing now is to avoid enlargement giving rise to an ' A team ' and a ' B team ' in the European Union .
This would also require the ability on our part to make changes to the Union .
Naturally , the candidate countries also have a choice .
They can vote ' yes ' , or they can vote ' no ' .
If they choose to vote ' no ' , the alternative is close cooperation with the European Union .
Mr President , an historic process , the opportunity for peace and stability on our continent - words do not come more impressive than these .
I wish a bit of this historical spirit and sense of opportunity would make itself felt at the Brussels Summit , to prevent it from degenerating into the horse-traders ' fair that we fear it will become .
There must be a willingness there to solve problems rather than keep putting them off .
The candidate countries ' impressive performance will leave the Council with no option but to confirm that ten candidates are ready for membership .
The Member States ' lack of solidarity , however , and unwillingness to reform is making living together in an enlarged EU increasingly problematic .
It is thus that we discuss - as if it were the most self-evident thing in the world - how the candidate countries will in future finance the British rebate , even though they are barred from being given one themselves .
In terms of the history of the EU , that is a one-off ; previously , all net contributors got a rebate in their first year .
The fifteen EU members benevolently welcomed the proposal by the Commission and the Presidency that they should get one extra year 's payment from the Structural Fund .
Why is this so ?
It is because the lack of absorption capacity means that the money ends up back in the Fifteen 's treasuries .
That is not the solidarity that the EU needs .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance unambiguously reject such a continuation of bank-driven enlargement .
Let me say something about agricultural policy . The disinclination to make reforms in this area stinks to high heaven , and the citizens of the European Union will no longer stand for it .
It is not only because of enlargement that reform is needed ; it is in itself overdue , and it is absurd to put it off any longer .
Unconditional direct aid payments as extensive as these have simply outlived their usefulness and an enlarged EU will mean that they will no longer be workable .
We have to make a start on agricultural reform now and work together to develop a fair structure for the twenty-five members that the EU will have in 2007 .
The maintenance of privileges must not be allowed to become a new condition for enlargement .
I would like to say something about the Irish yes-vote . The Irish said yes to the Treaty of Nice , thereby removing the greatest obstacle to enlargement , but the reform of the European Union 's institutions is still pending .
The Treaty of Nice has not really moved the EU any further on .
It is first necessary to create democracy and improve decision-making , and that is in the Convention 's hands .
I therefore want to argue that the Convention 's draft treaty absolutely must be capable of being adopted in 2003 .
Functionality is not a prior condition for the enlarged EU , but it will be needed .
President Prodi referred to a lack of public approval .
And why is that so ?
The EU quite simply lacks transparency and democracy , and that must change !
Mr President , I wish the Danish presidency well in the run-up to the EU Summit this week in Brussels .
Enlargement , being the main subject on the agenda , has been very much at the heart of the referendum campaign on the Nice Treaty in my country .
The other issue - Kaliningrad - is also directly linked to enlargement .
I welcome the measures proposed by the Commission to ease the direct transit of goods and people between Kaliningrad and the rest of Russia .
All of us have benefited from the in-depth and often intense debate on enlargement that has just taken place in my own country .
The decision taken by the people of Ireland underlines their strong commitment to European integration and enlargement of the European Union .
I welcome the fact that their decision clears the way for the conclusion of the accession negotiations for the first new Member States .
I support what Mr Poettering said .
There must be no new conditions introduced or strings attached at this stage in the negotiation accessions .
That would be a recipe for disaster .
The lesson we can all learn from the recent debate during the Irish referendum campaign should not be taken lightly .
I endorse very strongly what President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen have said on the need to keep people informed .
The Irish electorate are making it clear that they will not be patronised or taken for granted by the political leaders and governments of the Member States , or by Brussels .
It is frightening to hear President Prodi say that almost 80 % of respondents in a recent poll had no idea what was going on .
Mr Haarder said earlier that there is an exciting debate in progress in the Convention .
It may be exciting to insiders , but outside , as he well knows , it is hardly mentioned in the newspapers .
Remember that when we hold a referendum on this in the near future , the issues we will be asked to decide on will be of far greater complexity and importance than those related to Nice .
And we recently had great difficulty reaching a decision on that .
Mr President , ask a leading question , and you get the answers you are looking for .
Ireland has won an emphatic ' yes ' to more jobs , to neutrality and enlargement , but there are neither jobs nor neutrality to be had from the Treaty of Nice , and , regardless of whether the Irish had voted ' yes ' or ' no ' , enlargement would have gone ahead anyway , by taking Declaration 20 and moving applicant countries ' votes in the Council and seats in Parliament into the accession agreements .
I will vote for this in the House , but future historians have to know that a people was harmed .
Ireland is the most EU-friendly country there is .
It voted ' no ' .
Instead of giving other people the chance to express their opinion , the Irish were bullied into voting ' yes ' using the fabricated contention that failure to do so would block enlargement .
Up to now I have had nothing but praise for the Danish Council Presidency .
Today , however , I am sorry to say that the Danish President of the Council was party to the deception of the Irish voters .
Would Mr Rasmussen have stopped enlargement following an Irish ' no ' ?
He would probably have pulled another proposal out of the hat and secured enlargement without the Treaty of Nice .
The best that can be said about the Treaty is that it will only last for a year or two .
Then , a new basis from the Convention of the time will be put to the vote .
The Treaty of Nice is the worst mess to date .
I have published it in consolidated form , but I can by no means recommend the book .
Nice is ill-suited to secure popular support in the applicant countries .
It takes away the countries ' right to choose their own Commissioner , in favour of an EU government appointed by majority voting .
Remove the stumbling block now and declare that there will still be a representative of each Member State on the Commission .
The Irish voters by no means declared themselves in favour of losing their Commissioner .
The subject of the Treaty of Nice was scarcely discussed this time and some skill went into ensuring that the Irish did not come to know about Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's first draft constitution .
This was presented at a closed meeting last Thursday .
The copies were numbered and were collected in again afterwards .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing has a cure for referendums : if a country votes ' no ' the next time , it will be left behind .
Vote ' yes ' or disappear .
Countries permitting their population to vote ' no ' will no longer be paid any attention .
The EU state comes before the voters .
In Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's democracy there is a choice between voting ' yes ' and ' yes , please ' .
No , thank you , Mr President .
I will not abuse the privileges of the Chair by allowing myself the comment I would like to make , Mr Bonde .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in 1957 , next to the huge Soviet bloc , the Europe of the founding fathers was , in the words of Paul Valéry ' the little peninsula at the end of Asia ' .
Less than 50 years later , the European Union has become the third greatest power in the world in terms of population , rivals the United States in terms of GDP and is the greatest trading power in the world .
The European Union is the only example in history of a power that has grown through the voluntary accession of its neighbours .
This extraordinary example set by Europe must be maintained when the Community is enlarged to encompass a further ten countries .
It is not enough , however , to grow in body ; one must grow in mind as well - this European mind that the German philosopher Karl Jaspers characterised as ' the meaning of History , Science and Freedom ' .
Let us add solidarity to this list .
We must develop the European spirit and prevent this spirit from being discredited at the forthcoming Brussels Summit by ridiculous displays of haggling and national self-interest , by arguments about who should pay more and who should pay less .
This does not mean that the financial offer to be made to the candidate countries should not be substantial and significant . Nor does this mean that the future funding of the Union should be of a redistributive nature .
A Union in which so many inequalities remain must concern itself with this issue .
We must not , however , confuse the matter .
President Chirac is mistaken .
The CAP is an unfair , imbalanced and damaging policy from the ecological point of view .
It cannot be compared with cohesion policy , which really is a fair policy and a policy that strengthens Europe 's internal unity .
Comparing the two policies is a serious mistake .
Lastly , Mr President , we must consider the case of Turkey : the most basic sense of loyalty obliges the European Union to set a timetable for negotiations with Turkey .
Linguistic , cultural and religious arguments cannot be used to keep Turkey out of the European Community , when this country has been hoping for so many years to achieve this and has made considerable efforts to do so .
This is a question of the EU 's loyalty and honesty towards its partners .
Mr President , Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I just want to look at the problems that will arise for the people of Kaliningrad as a result of transit arrangements , and the solutions that have been proposed for them .
The transit permit , or Kaliningrad passport , as proposed by the Commission , is in my opinion a good solution for both sides .
It would make it easier for the Kaliningrad Russians to travel to their mother country than is the case with normal visas , but it would also safeguard Lithuania 's sovereignty .
The option of establishing a train corridor has been put forward .
This idea , however , does not tie in with current reality .
The point is , how many of the present Member States would agree to have a train tearing along through their own country , coming from another country that does not belong to the European Union and whose passengers could not be checked ?
Would Belgium , Spain , Italy or France agree to this ?
It is good that the Council since yesterday has had a common position on transit arrangements for the people of Kaliningrad .
In examining the way opinion has been formed I have noticed that the further away from Kaliningrad a current Member State is , the more unrealistic the points it has put forward to solve the problem .
This is , frankly speaking , go-it-alone irresponsibility .
Russia 's suggestion for visa-free travel between herself and the EU has also , unfortunately , gained the support of some Member States .
It is regrettable to find that people are unable to view the drawbacks or dangers which that would bring realistically .
If we want to start relaxing visa policy radically should we not start with Turkey , which at least has candidate country status ?
Visa-free travel is not , however , today 's issue .
For that reason , it is rash for just one individual EU country , for example , to promise such a thing , and I seriously fear that merely discussing the issue would harm the favourable attitude the citizens of countries applying to join the Union have towards the EU .
I nevertheless give my wholehearted support to policy with regard to Russia that backs that country 's long-term development and makes it possible for visa-free travel to be introduced one day .
Incidentally , I would like to suggest that it might be worth asking the Russians why , as they have renounced Lenin in Leningrad and Stalin in Stalingrad , they still sully a major area of European culture with the name of Mikhail Kalinin .
Immanuel Kant 's Königsberg should once again have the honour .
Finally , I should like to raise the matter of the Eurobarometer .
The Commission is quite right to say we must share this information , but 70 % of our citizens expect to hear the truth and information from their national governments .
Why do they do nothing ?
This is hardly a speech by the opposition , as I am a member of the party in government in Finland .
Mr President , thank you for the statements by the Council and the Commission , and also sincere congratulations and thanks to the Irish people , who removed a great obstacle to enlargement last Saturday .
I am pleased that both President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen concluded their inspired interventions by speaking of information based on the latest Eurobarometer surveys .
Only one in five Europeans feels ' well ' or ' very well ' informed .
This does not make pleasant reading .
Nor does it come as much of a surprise , because we have been aware of the problem for many years .
I have said it before in this House , and I will gladly say it again : EU information and communications policy is in need of improvement .
We must be prepared - as Mr Poettering mentioned - to find the necessary means .
Information forms the basis of understanding and thus of the popular grass-roots support that the EU needs .
The enlargement negotiations have now passed the point of no return and there must be no new demands made .
Admittedly , there is need for a radical reform of agricultural policy , but let us first put all the arrangements in place .
I am pleased with the results from the meeting of the Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg over the last couple of days , and it is particularly good news that agreement has been reached on the fact that none of the new applicant countries can under any circumstances start their membership of the EU as net contributors .
Anything else would have been unreasonable .
I am confident that the Council , headed by the Danish Presidency , will be able to accomplish this great historic task in Copenhagen in December .
Mr President , I am positive that the penultimate step before Copenhagen will be taken in Brussels over the next two days on this exceptional policy , the European Union 's policy of admitting ten new members .
This step needs to be taken in a decisive and realistic manner which overcomes any petty perceptions and subsequent moves need to be determined by this step , not the other way round .
I have just two or three comments to make as time is so short .
First , Kaliningrad .
Obviously , this problem needs to be resolved , not with a Gordian knot but with a clean sweep , by which I mean a harmonious , rational , functional solution that respects nations and states .
Secondly , the widely discussed issue of the budget .
We must not be mean and tight-fisted and we must not forget that the countries about to join the European Union have manpower in abundance but , unfortunately , limited resources .
However , abundant manpower is what determines development and development is what we need to see .
Thirdly , in connection with other issues which may have prospects or require decisions , the European Union of the 15 or of the 25 , or of however many other members there may be , must remain an area of social cohesion , development and democracy .
Clearly , therefore , any solutions to budgetary questions need to be resolved on the basis of these priorities .
In other words , they must be predicated on the need for the European Union to maintain the values which it has already acquired and which must continue to apply , they must be predicated on peoples ' priorities and not on petty political perceptions which , in the final analysis , are short-lived and are sometimes to do with antagonism of one sort or another , which gets us nowhere .
Having said which , I am positive that two new steps forward will be taken over the next two days and , as we continue on this course , we at the heart of the European Union , the European Parliament , must generate the political spirit and climate which , unfortunately , tend to be lacking , reducing the debate from a debate on overcoming problems to a mean , tight-fisted debate .
The impending enlargement is one of the most important political events since the initial inception of the European Communities .
This enlargement will heal a rift between Western , Central and Eastern Europe .
This rift came about before the Second World War and was reinforced by an iron curtain and a wall after the Second World War .
The healing of this rift is a jewel in the crown of the present European Union and also of the acceding countries .
They have been adapting their democratic systems , their economies and their legislation since 1989 , which has required major efforts .
I therefore lend my wholehearted support to the ten accessions proposed by the Commission .
A crucial debate on the topic of enlargement is taking place in the Dutch Lower House today .
The Dutch Government is in support of enlargement despite the opposition of two coalition partners , namely the Liberals and the Fortuyn group .
I regret this deeply , but there will still be a democratic majority in the Lower House today prior to the accessions , which means that the Netherlands will not necessarily put a spanner in the works .
We may have our Social-Democratic friends to thank for this .
If a number of conditions have not yet been met , however , the acceding countries will be required to make a final effort and , if necessary , introduce safeguards in areas such as food safety , the internal market and justice and home affairs .
Incidentally , I am pleased that Mr Prodi has stated that these safeguards will actually be put in place should this prove really necessary .
It would also be much better if a financial agreement were to be reached , so that there would be more clarity about the financial costs involved in the enlargement , as this is an area which our citizens are particularly concerned about .
It would also be preferable if better agricultural agreements were concluded .
These should not be a pre-condition , but I agree with those fellow MEPs who claim that they are required as a matter of urgency .
I now have a question for Mr Haarder .
Would it perhaps be possible for you to have a frank discussion with our Liberal colleagues in the Netherlands , who are your fellow party members , to ensure that this issue does not complicate matters at this time and that it is not misused in the Dutch elections ?
The Netherlands has always been a pro-European country .
The political parties that are trying to turn the Dutch into eurosceptics are taking on a major responsibility .
The enlargement receives the support of both the Christian-Democrats here and the Christian-Democrats in the Netherlands .
I should like to say to Mrs Maij-Weggen that I spoke in terms you would be rather pleased with regarding our Liberal friends at a Liberal congress last week .
Mr President , there is good reason to rejoice that Ireland has now accepted the Treaty of Nice , with its specific declarations on Irish neutrality .
This removed a serious obstacle to enlargement .
Enlargement is a historic occurrence for which , in my opinion , both the Commission and the Danish Presidency have prepared the ground most competently .
The applicant countries have made a tremendous effort to prepare themselves for accession to the EU .
I sense that the remaining problems are clear .
Now , therefore , it is up to the Heads of Government of the 15 countries to show leadership and responsibility in order that the Presidency can in the coming week obtain the required common mandate to conclude the negotiations with the ten applicant countries on the basis of the Commission 's January proposal .
No new conditions for enlargement should be imposed .
Agricultural and funding reform should not be tied up directly with enlargement . On the other hand , of course , as we well know , the present and future members of the EU should be able to agree at the Copenhagen Summit in December on at least some of the principles for future agricultural and funding reform , which , as we know , will be necessary from 2006 .
It is also important that the outcome of negotiations we are aiming at is fair on the applicant countries , and that we bring about a fair competitive situation , possibly with slightly shorter transitional arrangements in the field of agricultural subsidies , so that referendums in the new Member States can obtain a ' yes ' vote .
With regard to the Kaliningrad issue , I also hope that a good enough solution can be found , so that the little enclave does not become a conflict region , but instead a positive player in the Baltic region ; a solution which of course fully respects both Lithuania 's sovereignty and its desire to become a member of Schengen .
A ' corridor ' solution , which brings back memories of earlier solutions to similar problems in Europe , must be avoided at all costs .
We should be able to solve the transit question in a different way , possibly by means of a special passport system .
But I extend my thanks to the Danish Presidency for its competent leadership .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission and Commissioner , the electorate has spoken in France , Germany and latterly also in Ireland .
There are still a few countries in which they need to have their voices heard , which will cause the necessary problems , as there are still questions on this score .
The politicians , however , must now roll up their sleeves as a matter of urgency , not as carpet dealers , as Mrs Schröder mentioned , but with the necessary vision and courage .
I should like to ask a specific question with regard to the information which President Prodi mentioned .
In my many dealings with the public , I have noticed that the same questions arise time and again among the people in Flanders and Belgium .
I think that they are entitled to an answer .
There is the answer about the vision , and you can win people over with this .
However , there are other questions that keep being asked in my country .
Will horizontal enlargement not obstruct vertical enlargement ?
In other words , will this enlargement not spell the definitive end of our growth towards a community ?
Will this be intergovernmentalism 's final victory ?
This question has been raised in Belgium and has , for example , prompted the Socialist Party - which is , after all , the key government partner at present - to question the meaning of this enlargement .
I should like to ask a second question which people keep asking me - at least people in our regions .
They naturally visit the countries that will be our future partners , and in that sense , Europe is already growing in the hearts and minds of the people , but they notice that those countries are experiencing major problems , abject poverty and problems involving minorities .
We are also experiencing a time of economic decline and a time when the spectre of unemployment is once again looming large in the EU countries themselves .
Then people want an answer to the question whether we will be able to fight the unemployment that is now threatening us .
I am convinced that future enlargement will make this possible .
I do believe , however , that we should not merely present people with a vision and good news ; we should also produce specific answers to the questions that are being raised on a daily basis , questions concerning the costs and also , of course , questions that I have raised myself and that will need to be resolved in the Convention .
Mr President , now that Mrs Maij-Weggen has made it clear that the Dutch Christian Democrats are no longer the problem , and now that it is also clear from what you have said that the Liberals are not either , the only people who seem to be left hitching a free ride and imposing special conditions are the German Social Democrats and the German Federal Government .
I think , though , that we ought to make clear that , whatever else we might rightly or wrongly desire , no new conditions for the enlargement of the European Union must be allowed to be imposed .
That has to be made clear and - as you , Commissioner Verheugen , know better than any of us - those things that were neglected when negotiating Agenda 2000 cannot now be put right again a quarter of a year before Copenhagen .
We will have to do that at a later date .
Now that Saturday 's events make it possible for us to get back to discussing Nice 's critical aspects , it is right and proper that we make it clear that , in structural policy for example , the Convention must accept majority decisions , thus giving us better decision-making structures for the reforms in 2006 , and enabling us to implement the necessary reforms at the right point in time .
The actual content of that can of course be prepared by the Commission and in the debates , but here too , we have to do the necessary homework if we are to make progress in 2006 .
Let me briefly address the Kaliningrad question , which , I believe , encompasses some of the political issues that remain to be dealt with .
We have to take account both of Lithuania 's sovereignty and Russian sensitivities and make clear that big countries cannot ride roughshod over small ones when they engage in negotiations .
Part of our picture of Europe is , after all , that small countries have a value of their own .
It is evident that any solution here has to be practicable and makes allowances for everyone 's sensitivities , and I believe that what the Commission has presented and yesterday 's decision by the Council of Ministers provide a basis for negotiations , one on which we can proceed .
I take the view that , in today 's battle order , the Commission and the Council are indeed doing their best to achieve a result in October .
Allow me a final comment .
Information work and information campaigns will be of great importance , both in the Member States and in the candidate countries .
I hope they will be better organised in the latter than they currently are in the former ; in my own country , they involve little more than putting the Federal States ' ministers for Europe on display , and have little relevance to the actual work of informing people .
Perhaps , Commissioner Verheugen , we could at some time discuss how we can change this .
Mr President , yesterday 's and this morning 's meetings and the meeting due to be held in the coming days in Brussels are all trial runs for Copenhagen , aimed at defining the European Union 's position before the last sprint to complete negotiations .
The ten countries have made considerable progress since last year and will be ready in 2004 .
I believe that the justifications contained in the report will also be included in the report currently being drawn up by Chairman Brok , and that they will not be very different from what has already been said .
I represent a fairly straightforward case - Slovenia - which would actually appear to be pretty representative of other small countries in the sense that , without the hard schooling from Europe , these countries would have been psychologically much , much further away from Europe than they are today .
Economic , administrative and political problems and the desire to respect the Copenhagen criteria have placed Slovenia and other countries among those which have recently tackled the various chapters on reconstruction of the administrations and the economy most vigorously .
Of course , they need to continue to concentrate on restructuring the economy and they need to improve their insolvency legislation , but , at the same time , I would point out that a large number of experts have been drafted in and that some banks which were completely state-owned have become 76 % private in the space of a year .
This would appear to be a great achievement .
By agreement with the European negotiators , the country has opted to remain a single region , not least to avoid feeling , after Vienna and Belgrade , that it is under the yoke of yet another foreign power .
There is a possibility that this may change in 2006 , depending on national feeling .
The most important thing , however , is to keep the citizens informed , something which has been the subject of much discussion today and which is poorly organised .
I feel that more needs to be done in this respect .
Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking the Danish Presidency for its good work .
It does not surprise me at all , but of course there are , and were , Members who doubted the Danish will and ability to carry out enlargement of the EU .
This really has now come to nought .
To listen to Mr Bonde , one wonders if he is not dreaming that he is back in the ' good old days ' of the GDR .
Last Monday I was in Bratislava , in Slovakia .
There , it emerged that people felt very unfairly identified as an unreliable candidate country in connection with what had been said during the Dutch Government crisis .
Other countries have also been named .
I would like to say to Mrs Maij-Weggen that there are actually many Dutch liberals who share your opinion , as Mr Cox also quite rightly said .
The last word has not been said on this subject .
In order to reassure people in Bratislava , Warsaw , Riga and Vilnius , I wish to say that the President of the Council and the Commissioners confirm that there is no cause for concern .
There is no information in the country reports to demonstrate that , in general , any countries are in a worse position than others .
As Commissioner Verheugen emphasises , there is nothing today to show that there are any problems in any of the ten countries which cannot be solved .
It is true that there are difficulties , but they are not insurmountable .
I believe that it is extremely important that the Council and the Commission are clear on this subject .
The historical and moral reunification of Europe is irrevocable .
The EU honours its agreements .
We stand our ground .
I quote in Latin , which I once studied : pacta sunt servanda .
Mr President , we are facing a very complex European Council , and I should like to wish the Danish Presidency every success in this .
We owe it to the presidency , the European Union as it stands now , as well as the candidate countries to be able to take some serious decisions .
Crucial decisions will need to be taken within a few months , and in my view it is especially regrettable that we are still finding out that 79 % of the people in Europe are claiming to be badly informed .
This is not only regrettable , but also very dangerous , because a huge number of people in Europe - indeed in all the Member States - feel uncertain and unsafe .
This uncertainty and lack of information about enlargement only serves to intensify these negative feelings .
I think it is high time we explained to people that enlargement could be a springboard for a safer Europe , a Europe that gives them greater security , and it is also high time we reassured them that Europe need not become less social , less prosperous or even less democratic as a result .
It is high time we told them that - and started working on that .
This is why , just as our group chairman asked the President of the Commission , I should like the Commission to tell me exactly what its information plan looks like , and I should also like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether it might not be a good idea to discuss this with the government leaders at this important European Council after all ?
Large-scale European information campaigns with sizeable advertisements in major newspapers may help to some extent , but the euro campaign has taught us that we should make use of decentralised information methods .
We must involve the governments and civil society in the Member States .
If we do not , people will never be sufficiently informed .
Are there such plans in the pipeline ?
Are there plans afoot to quickly set up a campaign in this way ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , taking into consideration the fact that quite a number of governments in Europe have left a great deal to be desired in this area , will you be quizzing your fellow government leaders about this ?
Your point is worth emphasising .
The information campaign is not only about public relations .
It must have political conviction behind it .
If there is no political conviction , no message gets through .
In this Parliament we must understand that the time has come for the politicians to repossess the enlargement agenda following the highly complex work carried out by the Commission .
This is the message we must deliver at the summit meeting on Friday .
Mr President , enlargement is not just meant to bring peace , democracy and the rule of law ; it is also , of course , meant to help raise the standard of living in the countries that will be joining us .
Economic cooperation ended up being a formula for the European Union 's success , and this formula is to be applied more widely to give us stability in the sense of peace - not only external , but also internal and social peace .
Great economic insecurity lies in store for the candidate countries , and we have to get them to understand that we know what difficulties they will face .
For example , we have been able to learn from the Economic and Monetary Committee 's delegations what advances have been made , and which have proved difficult , in such areas as , for example , competition policy or the control of aid payments .
This has also had an effect on jobs in the candidate countries and cannot be organised without it running the risk of rejection .
We are , then , well aware of the credit that is due to the candidate countries for their efforts , but it is also evident that they , when they join , must not only be capable of functioning as market economies ; they must also be able to stand the pace of competition .
There is still room for improvement in this respect .
I want to give just two examples of this - steelworking and shipbuilding - and propose to mention energy only in passing , even though it is equally important .
That is why the Commission was right to insert safeguard clauses .
I think the candidate countries will also be able to handle these , and we must see to it that these safeguard clauses are inserted in such a way that they do not affect this or that country in an arbitrary way .
I am confident that the process of reform in the candidate countries will continue ; indeed , it must continue and be a success , as it is not only the failure to inform the public in the European Union that is an issue here ; it is also the lack of information in the candidate countries .
It would be a good thing if we could help to resolve this problem .
Mr President , this enlargement project is to the little country I hail from , Denmark , a matter of national pride .
The criteria for the accession of new Member States were drawn up at the Copenhagen Summit in 1993 , and the process is to be concluded at the Copenhagen Summit in December .
It is irrational that this should be a matter of pride for the little nation , but it boosts our self-confidence , and that is of course always good .
The problem is , of course , simply that so many issues are still unresolved .
The Belgian negotiator of the Maastricht Treaty , an economist by profession , has stated that there is a long series of funding problems which have not been solved .
Everyone wants enlargement , he says , but no one wants to pay for it .
Why , for example , should the British keep their rebate while the much poorer candidate countries pay full price ?
This is one problem .
Another problem , which has been completely overlooked , and which is under the extremely roomy carpet under which problems are swept , is the question of the reliability of the progress reports .
I cannot find a single instance in these analyses of a sober attitude to the decisive question of the last and crucial Copenhagen criterion , according to which the candidate countries not only have to comply with the acquis communautaire but must also have the administrative , legal and political structure which is a prerequisite for its effective implementation .
A Swedish report last week pointed out that these problems are extremely serious .
Simple mathematics demonstrate that the legal and administrative personnel simply do not have the training .
The whole basis for actually implementing the acquis communautaire is absent .
These problems have not been dealt with , and the question to my Danish friend and former colleague , the Danish Minister for European Affairs , is : what do you intend to do about this badly neglected problem ?
Mr President , I welcome the fact that enlargement is proceeding relatively smoothly .
However , when the whole of the EU institutional machinery is focused on the enlargement process , do not forget that there are other European countries with very legitimate cultural and historical links to Europe .
They feel aggrieved that their ambitions for EU membership in the long term are being ignored and decreed unrealistic , particularly by the Commission .
I have in mind particularly Ukraine , which is locked in a political struggle between westernisers and those who wish to see it join a reinvented economic union with Russia and the eastern republics .
As soon as this round of enlargement is over , we must reconsider our policies to other countries in Europe .
I am thinking here of the Balkan states in particular and neighbouring countries such as Ukraine which need anchoring in peace , prosperity and western security .
Since the break-up of the former Soviet Union ten years ago , they have moved some way towards democracy , human rights and good government , although a great deal remains to be done .
If Turkey has been granted candidate status , surely a country like Ukraine has just as much , if not more , of a claim to be a candidate for the European family of nations in an enlarged , wider and looser European Union .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the Irish people , as well as the Danish Presidency , which has done a tremendously good job , and the Commission , which has been working on the issue for a long time .
There is of course a large number of problems associated with enlargement .
The opportunities outweigh the problems , however , although obviously we do need to solve the problems .
They should not be allowed to overshadow the opportunities .
It is a question of our children and children 's children .
It is a question of creating a Europe of peace and democracy for our children and children 's children .
It is a question of a better environment .
Sweden shares a border with many of these countries : we have the Baltic in common , for example .
If we wish to tackle the problems of the Baltic region for the future , we can simply do it together .
It is also a question of workers ' rights in countries bordering on ours , so that these countries cannot practise social dumping , and so that they have fairer conditions and stronger trade unions .
All of this is our responsibility .
The President said that we need to have information campaigns .
Of course we do , but this is first and foremost a political responsibility .
Now is the time for us , the politicians , to get out of the conference room and hold a dialogue with the people in our Member States , with a view to convincing them of the importance of enlargement .
I would like to see a change in agricultural policy .
We need a change in structural policy , but this must not be made a condition for enlargement .
It is not the candidate countries ' responsibility , but our responsibility - the responsibility of all of us - to make a change in agricultural and structural policy .
A brief word about Kaliningrad .
I hope that a solution can be found , particularly so that the people are able to move freely over the borders .
We should not forget another aspect , which is that there is a risk of the gulf between Kaliningrad and Lithuania widening when Lithuania undergoes improved development as a Member State .
This could potentially lead to tensions in the border regions .
It is important , therefore , to make efforts in the social and economic fields for the people in the Kaliningrad area , too .
Mr President , I wish to appeal to the Heads of Government and Foreign Ministers who are congregating in Brussels : that appeal is that they take seriously their responsibility in respect of enlargement .
It is not possible to make everything dependent on everything else , nor is it possible to force through an agricultural reform with enlargement in the offing .
Time must be found for that later on .
It is not possible to be willing to pay more for enlargement and , at one and the same time , to compel others to pay less .
I think it must be clear that the costs of enlargement , within the bounds of reasonable perspectives , should rather be planned to be below the level of Agenda 2000 as set out in Berlin .
We should be looking seriously at proper finance for agriculture , making it possible for there to be stable conditions for farmers by 2006 , but we should also be clear in our own minds that not everything has a final solution .
There will be no pre-enlargement agricultural reform without postponing enlargement for ever and a day , and nor can we prejudice future , post-2006 , Budget frameworks .
It is with this in mind that I can say that we in the Austrian People 's Party , and I as a representative of it , take the line of 100 % support for enlargement .
I know that your team in Brussels is empowered to act properly in the interests of the European Community and of Austria .
We hope , of course , that there will be sensitivity for our concerns about transit and support for border regions , but we are all aware that enlargement is a great chance - a chance that must be made use of .
This must be guaranteed in a policy and a procedure that means that the candidates for accession are not forced into a ' do or die ' situation , about which we have heard so much .
So I ask you this : how do you intend to go about finding a method whereby , on the one hand , the Brussels Conference is prevented from degenerating into a secretive conclave and , on the other , there is enough space left for negotiations with the candidates for enlargement ?
I should like to thank Mrs Maij-Weggen , who congratulated us on the fact that the Social-Democrats in the Netherlands are certainly helping our country out of an awkward situation today by not raising any obstacles with regard to Copenhagen or the European Council which is to be held within the next couple of days .
It is important for both the Greens and the Social-Democrats , who are in opposition in the Netherlands , to help the Netherlands move in the right direction .
We are pleased that the European Union is still on schedule concerning enlargement .
Given the years of preparation and the importance of enlargement , we hope that we can complete the process with all ten candidate countries within the next eighteen months .
The frank Commission reports , for which my congratulations , confirm that a few things still need to be resolved .
The European Parliament has also pointed out the weaknesses on several occasions .
Most candidate countries are still lacking in areas such as implementation capacity and the fight against corruption .
The further agreements concluded between the Commission and the acceding countries will therefore need to play an important role in the European Parliament 's final assessment .
It is too early to rest on our laurels , but at the same time , the European Union must remain reasonable .
We cannot ask more from the candidates than what we can accomplish ourselves .
All this also applies to Slovakia .
Until 1998 , Slovakia lagged behind the other countries , but has since then largely made up the difference - in fact to such an extent that it now has every right , in my view , to feature on the Commission 's list .
The rate at which reforms have taken place over the past few years gives me hope that the remaining problems can be resolved quickly .
' Keep at it ! ' is the message we should like to pass on to the new Slovakian Government .
Fortunately , it was set up promptly after the elections in September and , like the previous government , will be able to work well with the European Union .
I should like to urge this House , but also mainly the Council , to put the Meciar era behind us .
It is over , and it is unfair to keep reminding Slovakia of it .
Mr President , I am concerned for the pensioners of Bulgaria , and not just because I am the representative of the Pensioners ' Party and a member of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee .
The Bulgarian pensioners fought in the Second World War , they lived under the yoke of communism for very many years , and now that they are old , living on miserly pensions , they hope that their quality of life will improve when they too become part of the European Union in a short while .
I therefore wonder , and I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission , whether , seeing as the Stability and Growth Pact too has to be interpreted intelligently and flexibly , is there any hope that the decision of the Community organs to defer Bulgaria 's accession to the European Union until 2007 might be reviewed ?
And , above all , is there a possibility that the decision to close units of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant within the set time frame might be reviewed , allowing Bulgaria to keep them in operation for a little longer in view of the enormous harm their closure will do to the Bulgarian economy ?
Lastly , would it be possible to reflect on the need to proceed swiftly with and put more funding into the development of corridor 8 , linking Puglia to Albania , Macedonia and Bulgaria and terminating in Varna and Burgas ?
I was pleased with Mr Prodi 's call for more political enthusiasm with regard to enlargement .
I can inform my fellow MEPs that as a member of the Convention on the future of Europe , I have the privilege of already working very closely with our colleagues from the candidate countries and that their commitment and enthusiasm for the European project are a pleasure to behold .
What Mr Gollnisch said , namely that nobody in this Convention has given any thought to what a Union with 25 Member States would need to do , and whether this would be different from 6 or 15 Member States , is incorrect .
I am , however , concerned about another matter .
If we want to make a success of this Union of 25 , I do believe that the Convention members should aim a little higher in terms of a strong and democratic Europe with proactive institutions .
It is also very important , in my view - and I am addressing a point made by Mrs Thyssen here - that our enthusiasm for this enlargement and this political European project does not remain confined to European political élites .
The people must also be involved .
I was therefore particularly pleased with Mr Prodi 's call for information campaigns intended for the public at large .
We at our end all do our utmost to explain to the citizens what enlargement is about , but we cannot do this alone .
There are , however , sufficient arguments to suggest that enlargement will offer answers to people 's questions rather than raise new problems .
I would therefore like to join those fellow MEPs who ask how the Commission , the Member States and the Heads of Government can help us in our duty to inform .
The issue of monitoring and safeguard clauses are of particular importance as a way of reassuring the public because it demonstrates , Commissioner Verheugen , that we take enlargement seriously .
You spoke about monitoring in the context of police , justice and the internal market .
I would like a guarantee from you that this monitoring procedure and the safeguard clauses also apply to social policy and environmental policy , as these are , after all , very closely connected to the internal market .
It is particularly in these areas that you could offer reassurance to the public , in my view .
Mr President , half the people of Ireland were induced by out-and-out brainwashing and a packet of money into saying ' yes ' to the Treaty of Nice , having been given to understand that their ' no ' was unacceptable to the so-called defenders of the rights of nations and man .
And , despite all that , the shameless celebrations continue .
The hastily convened summit in Brussels is being called on to contain the differences between the powers that be in the European Union and quell the disappointment of the citizens of the candidate countries , who can now see through the promises made to them by the propagandists of enlargement .
The intense and exorbitantly expensive advertising campaign to sell integration cannot mask the harsh reality , which is that , even in the run-up to enlargement , these countries have given the shirt off their back to the mandarins of the European Union .
It is now becoming clear that not only will certain candidate countries have no net income ; they will be funding the budget .
As agricultural spending is cut and subsidies are abolished in order to release funds for imperialist policies , direct farm subsidies will start to fall at something in the order of 25 % to 35 % per annum , with unpredictably disastrous consequences for farmers in both the Member States of the European Union and the candidate countries .
And from what we have heard today from the members of the Council and the Commission , the people of Europe have nothing to gain from enlargement .
The trade deficit of the candidate countries is several times larger than the funds being allocated to them from the Community budget .
Cyprus is another issue altogether .
The Cypriot Government is being coerced in the run-up to integration into accepting solutions which go against the interests of both communities and the Cypriot people in general .
The way in which integration itself is being handled basically legitimises the disgraceful state of partition , never mind its drawbacks for the people of Cyprus .
We , the Communist Party of Greece , oppose all these procedures and we shall stand with all our might shoulder to shoulder with the people fighting for their rights .
I should actually like to congratulate your colleague Mr Pat Cox , President of this Parliament , warmly on his excellent contribution during the European Liberal Democrat Conference recently held in England .
He made every effort to point out to his Dutch fellow party members that their attitude towards enlargement was totally untypical of true Liberals , because we know that the Liberals have always been keystones of European integration , that they are particularly kindly disposed towards extending the international rule of law and have always used this as a basis of their movement on principle .
I am delighted that the bookkeeping obsessions that are currently doing the rounds in the Netherlands in combination with frightening scenarios in those circles have been contradicted in a way which can be described as truly impressive .
I am indebted to him for this .
His words will help ensure that , with the support of Her Majesty 's constructive opposition , the Netherlands will certainly not be adopting a conflicting position .
I have to say that the European Parliament , from all manner of quarters , has also done what was necessary in this matter .
I have also listened with great interest to our good friend Mr Berthel Haarder , who spoke about Kaliningrad and said that the interests of the Lithuanians should not be trampled underfoot .
Considering it was a speech made by the Parliament 's presidency , I think it was worthy of imitation .
After all , if we set up a joint committee together with the Duma to discuss issues surrounding Kaliningrad , the Lithuanian parliament will also need to be represented in this committee , not with a view to putting Lithuania under any pressure , but so that this representation could clearly protect Lithuania 's interests .
The way we view Lithuania and its sovereignty is a litmus test for the way the enlarged Community will deal with small Member States in future .
This is why the speech by Mr Haarder strikes me as particularly important and I should like to thank him for it .
My final comment is about Turkey .
Needless to say , there is still a difficult issue to be addressed there .
I would plead strongly in favour of Turkey being treated in the same way as the other candidate Member States .
This means that , since Turkey is very different from the other candidates in terms of meeting the political criteria of Copenhagen , we have to put another problem to Turkey .
If we apply the same criteria , we would need to treat Turkey in exactly the same way as we have treated Slovakia and any other country in the past .
This may be difficult for the Turks at the moment , but in my view it is of major importance for Turkey to clearly develop in the direction of a democratic constitutional state that functions well as such , and for them to realise that they cannot participate in the game until they have reached that stage .
It should also be a matter of honour for Turkey not to want to take part as a token member , having made half a pledge concerning the constitutional state .
As far as I am concerned , we can look forward to the European Council with confidence .
That brings us to the end of this stage of the proceedings .
We shall now move on to the second round of speakers listed for the political groups .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Danish Presidency , which has guided the process from Copenhagen to Copenhagen not as a national , but as a European goal .
The Danish Presidency has demonstrated clearly that it is Europe 's servant , and that it is not pursuing specifically Danish goals .
It is the European goal which is being pursued , and , as usual , it is the small , eager , competent countries which are pursuing it .
No new conditions for enlargement should be imposed .
It has been said time and time again , and our political group obviously shares this view of the matter .
No new conditions .
It is clear that a debate on agricultural and funding reform will follow , but , as so many have said here in the House , these must not get in the way of enlargement .
This is something that must be solved in stages .
We have been discussing the provision of information to our citizens on enlargement .
Is it , however , the Commission which is going to do that ?
In my opinion , it is all very well for the Commission to supply factual information , but in actual fact it is us , the politicians - our governments and the parties in our countries - who have to solve the problem of information .
I think we have to realise this , because different countries see things in different ways .
Some things are more important in the north , other things in the south , but the common thread must be that we are carrying out enlargement because we wish to have peace in our territory ; peace for when our children and children 's children grow up .
It is a very simple message , and I think that it is the pivotal element in this connection .
Many issues have been raised along the way , and one which is raised in at least some of the countries is the question of whether widespread corruption exists , which will undermine the fair distribution of EU subsidies .
It is not an insurmountable obstacle , however .
We must of course invite the applicant countries to participate in the existing system of subsidies on an equal footing with the present members .
We should have faith in the applicant countries ' governments , too , being minded to do their best to prevent the misuse of common funds .
They are equal members , but if it should be established that there is any corruption or fraud involving EU funds , the Commission should , in a transitional period , step in and take over the administration of subsidies , so that the money is paid out to those for whom it is intended .
We wish for many things , including that the democracy which we are developing , and which is developing all the time , be strengthened by the accession of the new countries .
They bring with them a wide range of highly educated , extremely interesting people , who will enrich immeasurably the territory we are shaping together , and it is precisely their contribution to the creation of a new treaty which is absolutely crucial in ensuring that this takes into account the many cultural and national aspects which should go into building the new Europe .
Mr President , there is a saying in the United Kingdom that you should not ' spoil the ship for a ha 'porth of tar ' .
I think we would all do well to remember that in the coming weeks .
The financial arrangements are going to be difficult to agree and I do not underestimate them , but we must keep a sense of perspective .
The money for the candidate countries up to 2006 represents one thousandth of the GDP of the EU and is 10 % of what Germany has spent on its own unification .
The costs are nothing compared to the economic benefits that will flow from enlargement .
The costs are nothing compared to the costs of not enlarging and are nothing compared to the costs of trying to maintain the stability of the continent by other means .
The original six Member States would do well to remember why they formed the Community in the first place and the economic benefits that flow from it .
Those of us that joined later should remember why we joined and the efforts that other countries made to integrate us successfully into the Union .
We should remember the economic benefits that have flowed to us from EU membership .
We should all remember that the financial and human effort needed to construct today 's Union was the most efficient investment ever made on such a scale by countries of a whole continent .
Now is the time to bring that investment up to an entirely new level for the future .
I am concerned that this debate seems to be taking it for granted that the ten countries are already in , when they are not .
We in Parliament have to give our assent and we will scrutinise the final treaties very closely .
It is vital that the candidate countries maintain their efforts to come up to the required standards .
We welcome the three-fold safeguards set out by the Commission in the form of economic safeguards , internal market safeguards and justice and home affairs safeguards .
But we expect Parliament to be involved if these safeguard clauses are ever invoked .
We also welcome the Commission 's proposal for a further progress report six months before accession .
We must all be prepared , if that report is negative on any particular country , to take the appropriate action .
The Socialist Group will also be monitoring the social component of enlargement , because we must make sure that enlargement makes things better for people and not worse .
If I could turn to Kaliningrad , Mr Haarder mentioned negotiations with Russia .
Could I gently remind Mr Haarder that Russia is not a Member State of the European Union , nor is it a candidate country .
I should also remind you that many of the problems in Kaliningrad are of Russia 's own making , not least the refusal to allow many countries to set up consulates there .
They cannot have a veto on the future of the EU .
What we must respect absolutely is Lithuania 's sovereignty in this matter .
Nor must we try to find solutions with negative historical connotations , such as train corridors .
We must also ensure that whatever solution is reached is practical and that we are prepared to give financial and other support to enable Lithuania and Poland to enforce it .
The Irish referendum taught us one important lesson .
The ' no ' vote actually stayed the same , the difference was in the ' yes ' vote , and this was the result of the positive engagement by politicians with their people .
In preparation for enlargement , we all have a responsibility to engage with our electorates to ensure that they welcome enlargement and recognise the benefits rather than worry about the costs .
Mr President , the process of enlarging the European Union by ten more States is now entering its final and decisive stage .
Our group has always followed it and played its part in shaping it ; we have been active in doing this , but have kept a critical mind .
There are real fears that the hopes enlargement has nurtured over many years - for social improvements and an economic upturn - will not be fulfilled in precisely that way .
The stertorous political utterances , heard over and over again in this Parliament , about overcoming of the division of Europe and doing away with the inheritance of Communism , block out any more sophisticated view of Europe 's post-war history and , there being so many different problems in the central and eastern European states , go over people 's heads .
People are hardly being involved in the process at all .
The process went ahead along largely administrative and technical lines and was seen by Brussels as having to do with the acceptance of the acquis communautaire .
The governments of the candidate countries were sometimes not allowed to say much , and their parliaments were programmed to give approval after largely uncritical debates .
The acquis communautaire , which every country is to adopt and transpose , constitutes a paper mountain of over 80 000 pages .
If - as is the case - officials are scarcely able to get an overview of this , how can the public be expected to ?
Under such conditions , there was little chance of the debate on the future of Europe , which we are often told we should be having , really getting going , either in the Fifteen or in the candidate countries , and little desire that it should do so .
That there is particularly deep-seated frustration among rural communities is no secret .
If you examine the differentials resulting from enlargement after previous accessions , you cannot fail to see that parity is to come about only in 2003 .
Coupled with that , it is intended that the cooperative firms , alleged to be relics of the Communist command economy , should have the ground cut from under their feet by new directives designed to improve efficiency .
Let me say in blunt terms that European integration will not be made to work well by means of a reheated anti-communism , which cannot do other than target a fair number of the leading politicians elected by the peoples of the candidate countries .
I could name to you several good acquaintances of mine who fall into this category .
It seems necessary , in view of the dangerous lack of information , that we ask as a matter of priority , what effect the European Union has on the public 's everyday lives and how we are meant to discuss it with them .
What is demanded of us is to talk less about transparency and democracy , and do more about them !
Mr President , being Dutch sometimes has its drawbacks .
To tell you the truth , I have been rather embarrassed over the past few weeks about the attitude of the Dutch Government .
It has wavered long , far too long , over adopting a final stance and abandoning the veto .
As fellow MEPs have already pointed out , this was mainly due to the Liberals , who are conspicuous by their absence in this debate , and who , in my view , have adopted a small-minded bookkeeper 's attitude in a bid to obtain short-term electoral victory .
Fortunately , an attitude of this kind cannot count on much support from other European Liberals .
Anyway , it will all be all right in the end , I think , not least because the opposition of the Social-Democrats and Greens will come to the rescue of the distressed Christian-Democrats in the debate that is being held in the Dutch parliament today .
Another reason why it will be all right in the end - and I do want to add this - is because we have before us a sound report from the Commission which is very open and honest about the long list of shortcomings which candidate countries are still displaying - something which I think is very brave - but , crucially , which also offers solutions to all the problems that still exist .
As has been mentioned by many fellow MEPs , the vital element needed to find those solutions is monitoring - monitoring the accession process and safeguard measures for two years .
I should like to put a question to Commissioner Verheugen on this subject .
Mr Verheugen , you spent the past two weeks in the Netherlands , you talked with the Dutch Government and you were undoubtedly informed of the Dutch Government 's stance .
I should like to ask you for your observations on two specific points .
As you know , the Dutch Government proposes not to restrict those safeguard measures to two years , but possibly to extend them to three and four years .
What is your personal opinion about this and what is the Commission 's opinion about this ?
Secondly , it has been proposed to lift these safeguard measures only in the event of unanimity in the Council .
I should like to have your opinion about this too and , with regard to this last point , I should also like to hear the comments of your former colleague , Mr Haarder , current President-in-Office of the Council .
Finally , a word on Turkey .
For reasons that are incomprehensible , the Commission has not adopted a stance on this matter .
I should again like to ask the Council , and Mr Haarder in particular : is it conceivable - and I am choosing my words carefully - that the Council could reach a different conclusion regarding the setting of an accession date for Turkey ?
For example , because Turkey could play a very positive role in the case of Cyprus in the next few months and because it is able to prove that it is taking the reforms seriously .
I would urge both the Commission and the Council to remain critical about Turkey , as we are doing , but also to continue to reflect on how the reform process can be promoted rather than frustrated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened very carefully both to the Council and Commission statements and to what the House has had to say , and I have been struck , in particular , by the problem caused by enlargement .
I am very pleased at the outcome of the Irish referendum and I am convinced that it was Parliament that established the conditions which enabled the Irish people to review their positions .
I am particularly impressed with the work of the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , who explained to us in his report this morning that it is important and necessary that Europe improves its north-south relationship .
Now , it is on precisely these issues that I would like to focus , particularly the question of the south .
When I hear about the arrangements we are making for the Structural Funds , where - it would appear - we are giving EUR 231 per capita to the citizens of the current Member States and EUR 137 per capita to the citizens of the new Member States , I feel that we are disregarding the fact that there are distortions . I have already had occasion to discuss these with President Prodi , and Parliament needs to reflect on the matter .
What will be the consequences of enlargement for southern Europe ?
If I consider my native Italy , there is a large region in the south of Italy - Abruzzo - which is already excluded from the Commission 's Objective 1 .
Would it not be appropriate , therefore - this is my question to President Prodi - to review the Objective 1 and Objective 2 parameters ?
Is there not a need to prevent enlargement , which we all want , having a negative impact on southern Europe ?
This position , outlined by President Prodi , needs to become a major effort to bridge the gap between northern and southern Europe .
Mr President , enlargement by ten new members puts the EU before major difficulties .
Many of the candidate member states still have a great deal of work to do in order to be able to join the EU by 2004 in a proper manner .
The question also arises whether the EU would not in any case become unmanageable with so many new member states .
The necessary amendment of agricultural policy and structural funds alone places the current Member States before well nigh insurmountable problems .
What are the odds of the candidate member states actually complying with the EU 's acquis communautaire ?
These problems cannot simply be brushed aside .
It is , however , surprising how often the discussion is typified by unilateral thinking .
The argument that ' not enlarging ' or ' enlarging at a later date ' also carries a hefty price tag is heard very rarely .
Or the fact that the candidate member states have already made huge sacrifices .
Enlargement is not a matter of meeting a certain number of technical requirements .
It is an act of solidarity , of historical awareness , of strategic and economic importance .
It is a process that cannot be changed or broken off at this stage without major damage being done .
It is therefore to be hoped that the Council will be able to reach a deal on the financial package , the CAP and the institutional issues without delay .
Particularly in the institutional area , it is important to be vigilant of large Member States practising new power politics in respect of the small ones .
Given the major achievements yet to be accomplished by the candidate member states , the safeguard clauses proposed by the Commission are unavoidable .
The Commission must table specific and unambiguous text proposals promptly in order to make these clauses concrete .
It has been suggested that the period of application of these safeguard clauses be extended from two to three or four years .
The question does arise , however , whether the Commission intends to actually deploy these sensitive instruments if necessary .
Its current stance concerning the equally ' hard ' Stability Pact is not very promising in this respect .
Needless to say , this is at present not the right signal we are giving the candidate member states .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to extend my warmest thanks for the presence of history which can be sensed in many of the speeches made by my former colleagues and also for the commitment evident in the speeches by Mr Prodi , as President of the Commission , and Commissioner Verheugen .
We have been able to see how we have come closer to our goal with every passing week .
The week before last there came the Commission 's recommendation , which won the support of a substantial majority yesterday in Luxembourg .
Last week there was the massive support for the enlargement project shown by the Irish .
Yesterday , we achieved common positions on Kaliningrad , on the institutions , on certain calculation methods and , of course , also on the choice of countries .
It must therefore be said that there are now extremely high expectations for the meeting in Brussels on Thursday , Friday and possibly Saturday , in which economic aspects are to be finalised , as Commissioner Verheugen so clearly put it .
The economic position of the present Member States should be laid down in order to make time for negotiations with the new Member States .

I would like to thank Mr Poettering , Mr Brok and many others for the unconditional support which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has given to this whole enlargement project .
I would also like to thank Mr Watson and many others for supporting the view that there must be no new conditions imposed .
This was echoed by Mr Lund and Mr Andersson .
Mr Barón Crespo was quite right in saying that , just as a marriage must be built on love , so enlargement must be built on popular support .
Many people here have spoken about this and it could be a subject for my meeting with the Conference of Presidents at lunch , as it is of course up to Parliament in particular , and naturally also the Presidency and the European affairs ministers , to now get this public debate under way and garner popular support for the project .
On the other hand , I have to say that I was not impressed by the extremely unclear speeches made by Mr Sjöstedt , Mr Bonde and Mr Modrow .

It was a good thing that the Irish voters did not pay any attention to this unholy alliance of old EU opponents , who have taken advantage of every single opportunity in their attempt to stall the European project .
For that I thank the Irish voters .
To Mr Suominen I wish to say that we are maintaining close contact with Lithuania and Russia .
Yesterday , the Council gave us a mandate to negotiate with Russia ; and this is a mandate which fully respects both Lithuania 's sovereignty and its right to join cooperation on Schengen at the same time as its neighbours .
The Presidency will do all in its power on Thursday , Friday and possibly Saturday to establish a common position on economic issues , too , which will make it possible to conclude negotiations with the new countries in Copenhagen .
We will be sleeping with our clothes on so that we do not miss a single opportunity to reach a compromise .
Without wanting to jump the gun , we are incredibly pleased with all the progress made , which has brought us closer to a solution with every passing week .
We must not now let the process be taken over by cold financial calculations of microscopic significance compared with the gains to be had by us all from enlargement .
We must not end up stalling the whole process by investing our energies in small financial details .
Perhaps we , the parliamentarians and governments , should try a little harder to explain to our citizens how little it costs per head .
If we have to sit there on Friday evening and night discussing whether it is 50 , 35 or 75 cents per head , how long would that take ?
One rapporteur said that the total cost of enlargement will be one tenth of the cost of German reunification .
Another mentioned that , in total , enlargement will cost one tenth of one per cent of our GDP .
This must not be allowed to compromise the historic task which awaits us .
Warm thanks to the rapporteurs , the President of the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen .
Thank you to Parliament for today reaffirming that there is a momentum in this historic process .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I will respond briefly to certain questions which I feel are extremely important : briefly not least because I was very pleased to see the extensive support for the enlargement process , which really has united almost the whole of Parliament in the political operation which I consider to be by far the most important part of my entire mandate and the mandate of my Commission .
I cannot think of anything else which is as valuable in both human and political terms as what we are doing .
I will therefore start by responding briefly to Mr Modrow .
Mr Modrow , the appeal to the will of the people for support for enlargement might not have been as successfully carried out as it could have been , as in all political processes , but what I found most remarkable , what struck me the most , was this new striving to implement the principles of democracy , solidarity and respect for minorities which has transformed Eastern Europe .
It has been an extraordinary experience for me to witness the continuous endeavours of the parties in the parliaments of these countries , parties which might be at loggerheads over other issues but which are in agreement regarding enlargement .
I am sorry that we are in disagreement on this very fundamental point .
Enlargement has been treated as an ethical and political matter as well as an economic matter .
Indeed , in many cases , although the economic dimension has been discussed , this great sense of turning over a new page in our history , this great sense of having unified Europe - not reunified but unified Europe , for Europe has never been united - is extraordinarily powerful .
We have - I repeat this too time and time again , and I learned it in the parliament of one of the countries soon to become part of our Union - unified Europe on a different basis , which means we can attract smaller countries too , we can attract minorities as well , for ours is a Union of minorities , it is a Union where no one person or body is in command : that is the immense , unique splendour of Europe .
Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo mentioned two important elements .
Firstly , the need to take the final step as regards the financial framework .
There is no alternative - we cannot jeopardise this great historic process for the sake of EUR 3 per head .
Clearly , Parliament and we at the Commission must push for these last steps to be completed .
Secondly , the problem raised by Mr Barón Crespo of how to avoid the candidate countries becoming net contributors .
We should also be showing a minimum of solidarity with purely formal measures . I reiterate : let us take stock of the situation .
As the last speaker said , it is a question merely of a few euro per inhabitant . That is not asking much .
Just now , I read out the figure which the Member States will receive under the cohesion chapter and how that differs from the amount the new countries will receive .
There are reasons for that discrepancy - life is complicated , we have limited budgets - but it is a discrepancy which we do not condone , which offends our sense of solidarity .
Moreover , as Mr Bigliardo pointed out , we clearly have to behave with the same solidarity in the future towards the Objective 1 regions .
That was our aim in not rushing into a mathematical calculation to produce a figure for the accession of the new Member States but , once again , waiting in order to be able to resolve the issue within a politically appropriate and intelligent way .
My last comment concerns the issues of the provision of information and the citizens ' appreciation - matters raised by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mrs Maes . We need to make a greater effort to reassure our citizens and the citizens of the Member States .
Mrs Maes explored individual , specific areas such as enlargement and poverty , minorities and the economic crisis .
I have to say that the Commission launched a communication strategy as early as the beginning of 2000 : all the questions and answers which we have received today have been posted on the Internet in all the languages .
For this campaign , for 28 countries , we set aside EUR 150 million for a period of five years .
This is a modest affair , then - we are prevented from having recourse to the mass media by the limited size of the budget .
This provision of information is carried out in cooperation with the Member States and , most importantly , using the structures of civil society and supporting them by using them to promote our action .
Nevertheless , the campaign will not have the desired effects if the political leaders of the Member States do not work together with us to set up a debate on these issues , as Mr Rovsing said in his speech on this matter .
Clearly , therefore , I am calling for Member States ' campaigns to be given more support , and maybe we could use some of the resources earmarked for 2004 and 2005 in 2003 , which will be the busiest year .
I have to say , however - and I apologise to Parliament for this - that the new Eurobarometer statistics only reached me this morning because they were only published this morning , and that they are remarkably more encouraging than those I read out a few hours ago .
People usually present statistics to Parliament which are better than the reality , but , in this case , I had come with statistics which were actually less encouraging .
These new statistics reveal a radical change , which is due to the fact that the matter has been debated , that the press have brought the issue to the surface , with the result , for example , that 68 % of German citizens are in favour and as many as 72 % are in favour in France , the most Eurosceptic country .
This shows that , when problems arise , when a clear decision has to be made - ' yes ' or ' no ' - it would seem that the peoples of the countries realise that they are in a situation where they are deciding the course of history and are extremely aware of the importance of European Union affairs .
I would stress that we will analyse these statistics more thoroughly , for I only received them on a sheet of paper a few minutes ago and I would not like to mislead you .
In any case , they reveal that the people become more aware of the importance of European Union affairs above all when they are faced with a historic event .
Therefore , with all due reservations , considering that I am relying on a sheet of paper for information , I believe that this is a genuinely positive sign , for it means that we are working to change the course of history and we are working with the support of the citizens .
It is for this that I want , much more deeply and much more directly , to thank Parliament , the social partners and the great politicians who , after the fall of the Berlin Wall and , in some cases , even before these events , awoke in us this dream of a unified Europe .
In conclusion , bearing in mind the incentives we have regarding some of our neighbours such as Ukraine , it is clear that , while we now have the great task of completing this enlargement , we must also open the debate on Europe 's borders , on its roots , on all these issues .
I remember talking about this the first time I spoke before this House .
It is not , of course , a debate which can be held today or tomorrow , but , clearly , enlargement raises the issues of our identity , our roots , our history and , by extension , our future .
Mr President , I wish to answer briefly the questions that have been put to me directly , starting with the weaknesses to which the regular reports have drawn attention .
I want to reiterate very clearly that we have been tasked with producing regular reports only on the future member states .
I do not know what would emerge if we were to write regular reports on the current Member States , applying the same yardsticks and using the same instruments .
Do you think we would come to the conclusion that there was no corruption anywhere ?
Do you think we would come to the conclusion that privatisation was carried out in a transparent manner everywhere ?
Do you think we would come to the conclusion that concentration in the media had no adverse effects on the free expression of opinion ?
Or do you believe that I could not show you , in any city in any of our Member States , a district in which people live in the same degradation that one finds in a settlement of Roma in Slovakia , Bulgaria or Romania ?
I just think that consideration of the social reality in our own societies gives us no reason to feel superior .
The mere fact that there are no reports on progress in the Member States does not in the least mean that they must in every respect be superior to the countries that now want to join us .
This question demands of us that we keep our feet on the ground to some degree and be fair in passing judgment .
Nor do I believe that it might be possible for a member of the Commission to call on the head of a Member State 's government to join with him in seeking out the worst civil and social blackspots and to announce to the nation 's media that he is ashamed of these conditions and that he will do away with them .
As to whether any head of a Member State 's government can be found willing to do that , I have serious doubts .
If I may turn to the monitoring of the safeguards , the monitoring instruments are many and varied , and they will all continue to be applied .
It is of course the final monitoring report six months prior to accession that is crucial .
The political pressure alone that this report will exert will be so strong that we really can safely assume that the remaining deficits will be dealt with by then .
The situation as regards the safeguards is that I have told both the Council and , as recently as last week , the Dutch Government , that the new instrument on safeguards , which we are proposing , must be of limited duration .
The point must come when , again , it is the Treaty 's ordinary instruments , rather than derogations , that take effect .
The two-year period that the Commission has proposed does not yet , however , exhaust the possibilities offered by the law .
Perhaps I have expressed that in rather complicated terms , so , to put it another way , there is still a certain amount of room to manoeuvre as regards the timeframe , and the Commission has no objection to the Council making full use of it .
I would , though , like to say quite definitely , that the instrument as a whole will be of no use if complicated procedures have to be involved and we need such things as unanimous Council resolutions in order for it to be applied .
In that case , we can forget it .
( Applause )
And , in that case , we will not need it .
Putting it bluntly , this is about having something that enables us to deal with smaller problems very quickly and not always having to set in motion the big weapon of infringement proceedings .
If , then , the products of a slaughterhouse in one of the countries are below standard , we have to be able to close the place down the next day .
By that I mean the very next day , and not only after the Council has come up with a unanimous resolution on the subject !
It is simple , practical things like this that are at issue , and the European public will not be mollified if we have to tell them that such an instrument can only be applied if it has gone through a procedure lasting for months .
Let me say this in all frankness : nothing is any use unless it can be put into action quickly and decisively .
Passing on to the matter of scope , the concept of the internal market applies to everything that has economic effects across borders , or to everything that has an effect on competition .
The honourable lady did indeed ask whether environmental and social matters might be included here , but I have my doubts as to how that might be justified .
If we find somewhere where the environmental acquis is not being fully transposed , I do not know why we should have , in the candidate countries , a fast-acting instrument whilst having to use normal infringement proceedings as regards the present Member States .
There are now thousands of infringement proceedings every year , so it is not the case that the problem of non-transposition of the acquis in the present EU does not exist .
I think , then , that I would have difficulties with us actually restricting this instrument to the internal market .
Apart from that , there are safeguard clauses in every imaginable policy area of the European Union , food safety being one example .
The safeguard clauses that already exist will continue to do so , and they will , of course , be applied .
Let me end with a brief comment on Kaliningrad .
What very much worries me about this whole debate , is the fact that the Russians have not , to date , been prepared to talk about the real problem .
I do not believe that the issues of access , visas and transit constitute the real problem and agree wholeheartedly with what Mr Brok and others have said .
Looking at the conditions on this border , you cannot actually believe that easier access is the real issue .
I think the real problem is how to conduct a policy that prevents Kaliningrad from remaining socially and economically backward in a region that is developing very rapidly - which this region will do . The inevitable consequence of that will be the growth of economic and , eventually , political tensions .
Everyone in this Chamber is capable of imagining how political tensions can vent themselves in a geographical situation like this one .
That is precisely what has to be avoided , and we will do it by engaging in a dialogue with Russia on how we can give Kaliningrad a share in the benefits that European integration offers to the Baltic region as a whole .
I hope that , when this vexatious issue of visas and transit is sorted out - which I believe it will be in a matter of days - the way will be open for us to discuss this question , which is of such importance to the future of Europe .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , that brings us to the end of this very important and interesting debate on the forthcoming European Council .
The sitting is now suspended until voting time .
Mr President , on a point of order , you may be aware that a number of Members were unable to take part in votes yesterday because they were delayed for seven hours at Gatwick airport .
You yourself will have experienced some of the extreme difficulties faced by many Members in travelling to Strasbourg .
In view of the approaching enlargement , are you satisfied that Parliament here in Strasbourg is adequately equipped for the needs of enlargement , given that Members and staff find it very difficult to get here from one of Europe 's largest airports ?
Are you confident that those coming from parts of Europe where the transport links are not so good will be able to travel to Strasbourg ?
Is it not time you joined the growing number of people who think that Strasbourg is an inefficient and inappropriate place to host a Parliament of this size ?
I urge you to look into this as a matter of urgency .
( Mixed reactions )
I do not wish to run the risk of indigestion before lunch today .
Yesterday I had the pleasure to welcome a group of visitors from Lapland , hosted by your colleague , Mrs Kauppi .
The Governor of Lapland remarked how easy it was to get from Lapland to Strasbourg .
She was very pleased to be here in such a short time .
I , however , have experienced the difficulties which you mention .
( Laughter and applause )
Yesterday I wrote yet again to the relevant airline authorities - to some effect I hope - about your predicament , and to say that this is no way to do business .
This is especially true for connections to Strasbourg , a city with an international vocation .
The next item is the vote .
Colleagues , if you had seatbelts I would tell you to strap yourselves in .
We have 517 amendments , 25 split votes and 56 roll call votes .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0347 / 2002 ) from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on occurrence reporting in civil aviation ( 8133 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0312 / 2002 - 2000 / 0343 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Gerard Collins )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0326 / 2002 ) by Manuel Pérez Álvarez , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council recommendation concerning the application of legislation governing health and safety at work to self-employed workers ( COM ( 2002 ) 166 - C5-0235 / 2002 - 2002 / 0079 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0310 / 2002 ) by Stephen Hughes , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication : Adapting to change in work and society : a new Community strategy on health and safety at work 2002-2006 ( COM ( 2002 ) 118 - C5-0261 / 2002 - 2002 / 2124 ( COS ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , a number of members will be wondering whether , as rapporteur , I will be seeking to refer this matter back to committee .
The committee was concerned that the Commission 's strategy document was rather vague in terms of the action to be taken in the health and safety field .
I can now tell the House that , in a meeting with Commissioner Diamantopoulou yesterday and during the debate last night , I received assurances that the Commissioner will come to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to detail the action to be taken and that a report will be presented on an annual basis to facilitate the monitoring of progress by the committee .
On that basis , I recommended to the committee coordinators , at a meeting this morning , that we should proceed with the vote and not refer back .
The coordinators agreed , and I therefore recommend that we proceed with the vote .
Mr President , I wish to return to a subject I raised in the debates yesterday .
In fact Vice-President Imbeni advised me to mention it again now while we are voting on Mr Brok 's report .
I should like to draw my fellow Members ' attention to the fact that we are also voting on Parliament 's right to obtain the approval of Parliament 's Bureau regarding internal security measures , in connection with the agreement on secret security policy documents .
There are some very problematic points in these security measures .
For example , the national security services must find that Members of Parliament involved in examining secret documents are trustworthy .
Mr President , as you are personally responsible for these arrangements , I should like to ask why no debate was organised in Parliament on these security measures in connection with Mr Brok 's report and how it is intended to organise this sort of check .
In my opinion it is something of a scandal that we are attempting to vote on this without any kind of debate , on the quiet , as it were .
The Bureau tabled a proposal for decision to plenary .
It is indicated in today 's voting list .
It follows on from the debate that has been ongoing for some time now in Parliament , regarding access to sensitive documents .
It also reflects the request from the House in an earlier report asking the Bureau to draw up a proposal to bring to Plenary .
So the Bureau tabled this proposal on the basis of debates and votes in the House .
The proposal was discussed in the Bureau some time ago .
On more than one occasion it was presented by the rapporteur , Mr Brok , to the Conference of Presidents .
All the groups - including your own - participate in the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents .
You cannot be surprised , therefore , that this was coming .
No objections were raised when this item was included in the agenda .
I note the point you made last night and again just now .
I can assure you that this matter has been considered very carefully and was put to the relevant bodies in the House some time ago .
It is not an attempt to twist colleagues ' arms at the eleventh hour .
I can assure you that there has been considerable debate and reflection in many meetings , both of the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Proposal for a decision ( B5-0526 / 2002 ) tabled by the Bureau pursuant to point 1 of Annex VII to the Rules of Procedure , on the implementation of the Interinstitutional Agreement governing European Parliament access to sensitive Council information in the sphere of security and defence policy
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Report ( A5-0308 / 2002 ) by Hans-Peter Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of the provisions of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning the discharge procedure ( 2001 / 2060 / ( REG ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , in order to accommodate the strongly expressed wishes of part of the PPE-DE Group , my group withdraws its request for a separate vote on Amendment 3 , which should enable you then to take all the amendments en bloc .
Mr President , at this late stage in voting time , it is exasperating to have to point out that the House is incapable of applying the decisions that it takes .
We decided to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights the Alpha and the Omega of our work .
Within the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , as custodian of the Rules of Procedure , I was obliged to table a number of linguistic amendments which should have been dealt with in an erratum .
These linguistic amendments included a number which , in my view , are not strictly linguistic , since they relate to the Portuguese , Italian , French and Greek versions .
They are seeking to replace the expression ' human rights ' with the expression ' rights of the individual ' .
To my great regret , in the erratum , this so-called linguistic amendment is not taken into account .
I am aware that at the Conference of Presidents , you consulted the legal services to find out which expression the House should use .
I hope that the House is capable of deciding by itself that the Charter should be applied in this Parliament .
. ( PT ) In line with the Community instruments adopted recently to increase safety in civil aviation , the Parliament and Council proposal for a directive on occurrence reporting in civil aviation aims to guarantee the reporting of any situation specifically endangering an aircraft or its occupants .
The data that is collected will facilitate information sharing , enabling lessons to be learnt in order to prevent accidents .
I congratulate Mr Collins on the excellent report that he has drafted on this matter , which I fully support , in particular on the issue of confidentiality in the mandatory reporting of incidents , the only way of ensuring that human error is revealed in the potential occurrence of accidents , which rarely comes to light spontaneously , unlike technical faults , for example .
I also wish to highlight the need to support the creation of reporting systems on a regional basis that would be linked to the integrated network of national incident reporting systems , thereby providing an entire region with information about various situations .
. ( PT ) The creation of information-sharing systems from various civil aviation authorities ' reporting systems will enable all the actors involved to collate information about their errors and to produce a safer system for all air transport users .
This directive is extremely important because it significantly improves the effectiveness of the occurrence reporting system .
The fact that a large number of amendments tabled at first reading have been adopted by the Council in its common position is also to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , differences remain on which I have supported the positions of the rapporteur , which were supported , incidentally , by the specialised committee : on the one hand , when an incident that is reported is due to gross negligence , the Member States must be able to take legal action ; on the other , what was Article 9 in the version originally proposed by the Commission , dealing with confidential reporting , must be maintained because the ' disidentification ' of reporting in this area is often crucial to a better understanding of the factors that can influence the occurrence of air accidents .
.
( PT ) The disturbing rates of accidents at work of self-employed people and the need to ensure the right to working conditions which respect health , safety and dignity required precisely this approach , which is why I have supported the excellent report by Mr Pérez Álvarez .
Despite being inadequate , the Commission proposal makes a major contribution to resolving the problem of protecting self-employed workers with regard to health and safety at work .
It should be noted that it is in the sectors considered to be high-risk , such as agriculture , fishing , road haulage , the processing industry and construction , in which a high number of self-employed workers is concentrated , that a high rate of accidents at work occurs .
It is therefore crucial that an effective prevention policy is implemented , followed up by actions for training and information and by awareness-raising campaigns .
Against a backdrop of increasing professional mobility , it is crucial that Community measures are adopted to harmonise the various levels of protection for self-employed workers in each Member State , in addition to the recognition and implementation of legislation in this field .
I should like to take the opportunity of this debate and the vote on the Hughes report on a new Community strategy on health and safety at work 2002-2006 , which contains some good points , to raise the question of the Commission 's negligence when it comes to applying health and safety at work regulations .
My country , Greece , has a macabre sort of efficiency when it comes to large numbers of accidents at work and small numbers of inspections , and inefficient inspections at that .
Despite repeated questions to the Commission from me and other honourable Members , the Commission has been waiting to examine statistics from Greece for the last five years .
We need to put a stop to this and to provide mechanisms to monitor the application of health and safety regulations , especially in the workplace .
We cannot monitor , issue warnings and impose sanctions for public deficits and turn a blind eye and a deaf ear to health and safety .
. ( PT ) Community data on health and safety at work reveal a general trend towards improvement .
The situation remains quite critical , however , in some Member States . In this connection I would state that the situation in Portugal is cause for concern , especially in sectors such as construction , the textile industry and agriculture .
I have voted in favour of this report , and I wish to highlight the following points :
The need to codify and simplify current Community legislation in this field and to encourage the Member States to apply this more rigorously ;
The Commission must , as a matter of urgency and together with Parliament , draw up a detailed action plan , including financial commitments and timetables , incorporating the gender dimension and new types of risks and illnesses ;
The need to encourage working within partnerships in order to facilitate better data collection and communication between the various actors involved ;
The incorporation of the candidate countries into the institutions and bodies concerned in order to be able to provide effective technical and financial assistance ;
Lastly , the importance of a preventive approach to the aspects of health and safety at work , targeting both workers and employers .
This report was voted on under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure , which allows for no amendments to the report .
The British Delegation of the EPP-ED Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new rule , however , leaves no option but to vote against certain reports .
The British Conservatives support the Commission document on Health and Safety at Work , which talks of the importance of health and safety at work and the need to strengthen the prevention culture and secure a better application of existing law .
The Commission admits that people tend to see the Community legal framework as being excessively complex and unclear and proposes that it be simplified .
The British Conservatives support this .
However , the rapporteur has gone in precisely the opposite direction , proposing extension of the scope of the framework directive , new legislation on workplace bullying , a new directive on workplace ergonomics , strengthening of the display screen equipment directive and amendment of the manual handling directive .
A fundamental flaw in his analysis leads us to conclude that the rapporteur 's conclusions are wrong .
The British Conservatives are therefore against this report .
The report deals with working-environment problems at workplaces in the EU and expresses concern that the situation is deteriorating instead of improving . The rapporteur proposes a long list of measures , including better application of the existing legislation in the area .
This proposal has our full support .
He also calls for new legislation regarding workplace harassment , on the one hand , and requirements for workplace ergonomics on the other .
We oppose regulation by directives , both on principle and for practical reasons .
Existing directives on the working environment are not working well , principally because employers oppose them and because trade unions are too weak , and often set minimum levels that tend to commit the social partners to agreements affording levels of protection which are far too low .
If , on the other hand , we had strong trade unions , and national governments with social ambitions , we could bring in legislation at national level which was more precise , afforded higher levels of protection and could be implemented more effectively .
We have voted in favour of the report , however , as we agree with its political ambition of improving working conditions in the Member States .
. ( PT ) This report , which we have adopted , addresses an issue of enormous importance in the European Union , both due to its importance in dignifying work and in creating better working conditions , and because of the scant attention that the Commission has paid to this issue of health and safety at work , clearly reflected in the drastic reduction in staff attending to these issues by over 40 % in the last ten years , as the report states .
The final text , which is the outcome of an extremely thorough debate to which we contributed various proposals , addresses various aspects of this issue and makes certain demands , specifically :
The urgent drawing up of a detailed action plan containing financial and timing commitments for each main proposal ;
Special attention to be paid to the gender dimension , taking into consideration the discrimination still suffered by women , due both to less attention being paid to vocational training or difficulties in access to employment , and to the difficult , dangerous and poorly remunerated work that women often perform ;
To propose a comprehensive Directive on workplace ergonomics in order to improve the existing directives and to take account of musculo-skeletal problems , which are suffered by over half the people affected by work-related complaints in the EU .
When Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council , regarding public access to information about the EU institutions , was negotiated , it was decided that the European Parliament 's access to sensitive documents should be covered by a separate Interinstitutional Agreement between Parliament and the Council to enable the European Parliament to honour its commitments under Article 21 EC of the Treaty on European Union .
All the agreements which are made between the Council and Parliament must , however , observe the fundamental principles of loyalty and the obligation for the institutions to make information mutually available .
In other words , it is not fair for the Council to take decisions on the internal working procedures of Parliament , thereby arranging the institutions in a clear hierarchy .
There is also a risk of information being withheld from small countries and small political groups .
The agreement limits the right conferred on all members - and the public - by Regulation No 1049 , in that it creates a group which has special access to information .
An interinstitutional agreement in this sensitive area should be combined with strict confidentiality rules ( compatible with those of NATO ) .
Rules like these could have been drawn up for documents concerning external security without this resulting in any change in the interinstitutional structure .
. ( NL ) There was a time when the preparation and implementation of government policy was kept secret as far as possible , as the ordinary man in the street did not need to know how and with what arguments they were governed .
This objective of secrecy has even survived the introduction of universal suffrage .
These days , however , it is assumed that every individual is equal in the eyes of the law , that authorities are accountable to their electorate and that , with regard to government policy , there is public access to information .
However , traditional secrecy strikes again in the case of public security , defence and military matters .
This could be justified in the short term if the majority of the population is being threatened by a dangerous minority of profiteers who want to abolish their constitutional rights .
On the other hand , secrecy can also protect powerful profiteers from popular anger .
The solution opted for , namely a voluntary agreement between Parliament and the Council , seems more appealing than it really is .
The public does not have a right of perusal , whilst Parliament does , albeit restricted to four members jointly appointed by the group chairmen , presided over by the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
In practice , the vast majority of MEPs , and even entire parliamentary groups , will be kept in the dark .
Such a committee on security affairs thus only serves to protect secrecy .
. ( PT ) I heartily congratulate the rapporteur on his work and I also welcome the fact that rules enshrining a major advance in the functioning of the Community institutions and in their political transparency are now clearly written down , even in areas as sensitive as security and defence .
Today 's final steps are the culmination of a long , painstaking and arduous process of political weighting and interinstitutional negotiation , which has led to a very positive and balanced result .
What was really needed was to achieve a reasonable and fair balance between on the one hand , the necessary transparency and , on the other , the essential caution required by the highly secretive nature of this type of information .
Without this balance , no progress would be possible in this sensitive area .
As a result of the practical solutions that have been found , of the good sense that has prevailed and of rigorous political weighting , Parliament , the citizens in general and all the Community institutions deserve our applause .
We have today voted against the draft Interinstitutional Agreement concerning access by Parliament to sensitive information of the Council in the field of security and defence policy .
The main reason for this is that we consider the proposed committee , which is to consist of only four members , to be an overly small circle .
The opportunity for smaller countries , or smaller political groups , to be represented would therefore be minimal .
Their information deficit would increase .
On order to achieve increased openness and equality , there should moreover be more permanent members on the committee , and at the same time a given number of members should be able to be elected in accordance with the procedure laid down in the draft agreement .
. ( PT ) I believe that we have made good progress in relation to the previous system , which created frequent problems and confusion .
The new system , established by this revision of Annex V of the Rules of Procedure , is undoubtedly clearer and more efficient .
Nevertheless , I regret the fact that Mrs Theato 's proposals for amendments , tabled by the PPE-DE Group , have been withdrawn , because I feel that the position of the rapporteur and the majority of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs - which would ultimately prevail in plenary too - might be going rather too far by accepting , at first reading in April , the possibility that discharge might tacitly be granted simply as an indirect result of a motion for a postponement not being adopted .
Mr President , I asked at the very last minute to give an explanation of vote on both the Müller and Grossetête reports .
We supported Amendment 78 , since it is pro-generic in principle .
It would ideally refer to line extension rather than abridged application , but the principle allows for the sale of generics in more than one country without repeating application procedures .
In the Grossetête report , on Amendment 63 , we voted to be consistent with our approach in committee .
On the second part of Amendment 113 , it was put to us that the word advertising was open to misinterpretation .
. ( PT ) The definition of an internal market for medicinal products must not only achieve better standards of health in the European Union but must also stimulate scientific and technological innovation with a view to the development of new medicines and to speeding up the manufacture and commercialisation of generic products .
On the main issues being debated at this first reading I feel that : 1- without this meaning the total elimination of the decentralised procedure ( national with mutual recognition ) , I believe it is crucial , where the marketing authorisation is concerned , to demonstrate increasing commitment to the centralised procedure ( via the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products ) , in particular when it comes to new active substances , in the aim of achieving more rapid access for sufferers to new medicines and in the aim of ensuring that small and medium-sized enterprises are not penalised ; 2- authorisation must be granted for the marketing of generic products whose reference medicine has been authorised for more than eight years in a Member State or in the Community ( and not ten years , as the Commission proposes ) ; 3- with regard to information , the Commission proposal is ambiguous , whereas it is crucial to ensure the ban on direct advertising .

. ( PT ) This proposal for a regulation is extremely important , because it is intended to ensure a high level of protection of human and animal health by means of more rigorous procedures for vigilance of the market and for pharmacovigilance , in order to increase the number of medicinal products available , to complete the internal market in pharmaceutical products and , lastly , to amend the aims and working methods of the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in the prospect of the enlargement of the EU .
Where I disagree is neither on these great aims nor on every patient 's wish to have more rapid access , at Community level , to medicinal products containing new , safer and more effective active substances , but on certain specific details of the regulation , as demonstrated in the way I voted on this matter .
In particular , with regard to the key issue of the extent to which the authorisation of medicinal products medicines should or should not be completely centralised in the EAEMP , I wish to state that I , like the majority established in the specialised parliamentary committee , am in favour of medicinal products for human use containing a new active substance being able to receive authorisation from the national agencies . I therefore oppose greater centralisation , which would be disastrous .
In other words , I advocate the option of choosing between a centralised procedure and national authorisation , possibly accompanied by a procedure of mutual recognition .
. ( NL ) Medicines are commodities that earn money .
This is why the assessment of their use stirs up so much emotion .
Competing companies and competing methods benefit from legislation that results in companies selling as many of their own products as possible , thus pushing other products out of the market .
They want over-consumption of their own products and the exclusion of alternatives .
Unlike the Commission , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy opposes public advertising for medicines against AIDS , asthma and diabetes , and rightly so .
Producers and users of alternative medicines , including doctors who prefer these products , fear that the proposed rules will , above all , benefit the chemical industry to the detriment of natural products .
Some of these natural products are centuries-old remedies that work well according to their users , but whose effectiveness has never been scientifically proven .
As long as they are not harmful and their composition is known , they deserve to be given the benefit of the doubt .
Harmful and improper products that are only produced to make money should be banned , but there is no reason for granting the pharmaceutical industry a monopoly position .
I therefore vote against the industry 's proposals and in favour of those that are advocated by groups of doctors and users .
We have chosen to support the amendments which make it easier for generic medicinal products , that is to say , cheaper imitations , to be placed on the market more quickly , thus forcing down constantly rising drug expenses .
In Sweden , for example , these rose by 10 % each year during the 1990s .
The registration procedure for generic medicinal products needs to be simplified , so that it is possible to place generic medicinal products on the market directly upon expiry of the ten-year period following initial authorisation of the reference medicinal product .
The manufacture of the generic medicinal products should therefore be able to begin before expiry of the above-mentioned ten-year period .
Therefore , we also voted against the amendments which obstruct the placing on the market of generic medicinal products by protecting small changes in the original medicine .
We are also determined in our view that the present ban on advertising of medicinal products directly to the public must be maintained .
Patients require reliable information from an independent source .
On behalf of the British Labour Delegation , I would like to explain that with regard to the proposals in the Grossetête report concerning veterinary medicines , we believe that the Commission should accept the current practice in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
This allows registered personnel to administer a range of animal medicines without a veterinary prescription in cases where veterinary involvement is not considered necessary for safe and effective use .
This has worked effectively for many years and has not led to any safety concerns in relation to consumers or users of such medicines .
We also believe that the re-validation of all such medicines should be set at five-yearly intervals , rather than given indefinite authorisation .
We do not support the Commission 's view that all new active substances for veterinary medicinal products should be authorised under the centralised procedure .
This would significantly impact on the development of new products for localised species / conditions and would exacerbate problems of availability of such medicines .
Flexibility must therefore be maintained .
Mr President , the pensioners which I have the pleasure of representing in the European Parliament tell me that they are very pleased that I have voted - as I did - for this text , for I feel it is important and am waiting impatiently for Europe to have either a Constitution or a founding Charter with the status of a Constitution to which they can all appeal in order to call for justice whenever they are the victims of an injustice .
I am sad to say that citizens throughout the States of the world are often victims of injustices , both as young and older people , but it is particularly distressing and upsetting for the elderly citizen to feel that he is still a victim of injustice .
The Charter states that the rights of elderly people are to be respected by Europe , and that is why pensioners and elderly people throughout Europe are waiting impatiently for the Charter to become the Constitution of the European Union .
Mr President , I have had a dream in which Mr Fatuzzo 's daughter phoned up my son , who is also studying law , and asked him whether he approved of the way I voted on Mr Duff 's report .
I am unable to give out his response to this , as I awoke with something of a shock .
I therefore want to make it perfectly clear that we voted in favour of the report even though I see some of the problems as being the other way around .
My primary difference of opinion with the rapporteur is that I believe that the possible problem of the supreme courts coming to divergent judgments in matters of basic rights has not been resolved .
As a former supreme court judge , I know what I am talking about .
Despite this , the institutionalisation of basic rights prevails , and so the vote has been in favour of the report as a whole .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Duff 's report .
It important that we incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the existing European Union treaties , but I also hope that the European Convention on Human Rights will be incorporated into the EU as an institution and not simply into the legal systems of the individual Member States .
It is unthinkable to have a modern European Union constitution - which is what the Convention on the future of Europe is looking at - without a binding bill of rights .
If the Convention drafts such a constitution without the Charter it will , in my view , be a disgrace .
Far from giving more rights to the European Union institutions , the Charter limits the exercise of power by the EU institutions because they must explicitly respect human rights .
The Charter should be legally binding and enforceable under EU law .
It is not , as the rapporteur says , a substitute for the fundamental rights systems of the Member States but a complement to them .
It is unthinkable that the European Union should draw up a constitution without first drawing up a bill of rights , which is why the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be given constitutional status and incorporated into the European Union 's constitutional texts by revising the Treaties of the European Union before new members join .
This will give the Charter a legal dimension , allowing it to be cited in both the European and national courts .
I agree here with the position of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ; I do not agree with the rapporteur 's view that the Charter should remain unchanged .
On the contrary , it needs to be expanded and its scope widened , given that it is way behind almost every European constitution when it comes to supporting fundamental rights .
Two years ago , when we debated the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we described it as useless and dangerous , pointing out that it lagged way behind international conventions and the constitutions of several Member States of the ? U. We feared that it was destined to form the core of an imminent EU constitution which would pave the way for federalism .
Our fears are being confirmed .
The ? U is becoming more and more autocratic , thanks in part to so-called terrorism .
It is updating its armoury ( European terrorism law , European arrest warrant , European army , European police force ) so that it can deal with reactions to its policy .
As for the so-called social model , the workers know all about that , with jobs being slashed , unemployment portioned out , the welfare and pension system dismantled and health and education privatised .
Those who support the Charter , including the rapporteur , who feels it is in no need of correction , have totally ignored the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators who have protested at every single summit against the anti-grass roots and pro-monopoly system being set up .
All they want is to exert pressure so that the Charter is incorporated into the Treaties and made binding on the institutions of the ? U and the Member States .
If it is , we shall have an even more conservative and autocratic institutional framework which will render the constitutionally protected rights acquired by the workers useless .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
We voted in favour of the report , as we support , in principle , the incorporation of the Charter in a future treaty ( constitution ) .
Our approval should be seen in the light of the following aspects , however .
The report proposes measures to improve direct access to the Court of First Instance .
We interpret this wording as a right for individuals to plead directly before the EU Court of First Instance on the basis of the Charter 's rights .
It would be an ill-fated measure which ran the risk of opening the floodgates to a legal review of practically all EU decisions ( bearing in mind the extent of the Charter ) .
We would rather see a system like the one which characterises the current right to plead before the Court of Justice of the European Communities : the rights under the Charter are applied indirectly , via the right of the national courts to refer cases to the Court of Justice .
The report adopts a rigid stance on changes to the Charter 's horizontal clauses .
We are of the opinion , however , that it is reasonable to accept changes even to the substance of the clauses , as we find it hard to see how the Charter could otherwise gain binding status and an application in law which works in practice .
We share the opinion of the Convention 's working group on this .
By way of a general observation , we also wish to emphasise that a binding charter in all events must not undermine the model for collective agreements which is applied to the labour market in the Nordic countries .
. ( PT ) We disagree with the report due to its disproportionate ambition for an extremely poor document in the field of protecting fundamental rights .
Examples of this are :
the desire to include the binding incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaties as one of the constitutional provisions of a future ' European constitution ' ;
the ambition to create a legal instrument that would attempt to subordinate the national constitutions of the Member States as far as possible , however much it protests to the contrary ( note its aim of increasing Community competences in various areas ) .
Upholding the content of the report will only make it more difficult to protect the binding incorporation of this Charter into a future ' constitution ' . This content is characterised by a drafting of rights that represent , in practice , a step backwards in comparison with what has been achieved in national constitutions , such as that of Portugal , for example or in comparison with what has been achieved in European conventions to which EU Member States are signatories .
Lastly , we should also disagree with its defence of the future methodology for amending the content of the Charter , enshrining , in practice , the existence of a permanent ' convention ' ( or of the proclaimed new institution - the ' congress ' ) or of other mechanisms for amending supposedly ' constitutional ' content , once again going beyond the current exclusive competence of the States ( governments and parliaments ) with regard to amending the Treaties .
. ( NL ) Everyone is entitled to protection against administrative arbitrariness and against exploitation by privileged parties .
In a society that is based on universal equality , as well as the right to individual diversity , individual and social constitutional rights that are legally enforceable are indispensable .
The EU 's Charter of fundamental rights that was produced in 2000 does not go as far as some provisions enshrined in Member State constitutions , the European Social Charter and the Council of Europe 's European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , which applies to an area greater than the EU alone .
This is why it is wrong to equate a proper arrangement of constitutional rights with a document that is no more than the outcome of a discussion of a convention that mapped out the common denominator of various wishes without taking a vote .
A weightier status for the Charter can lead to two quite conflicting results , namely more scope for propaganda on the part of the EU and , at the same time , fewer guarantees for rights of EU residents .
This is why the suggestion to start accession negotiations to sign up to the ECHR is , in my opinion , the most positive part of this report .
In fact , why do we not adopt the ECHR instead of the Charter straight away ?
. ( PT ) To pursue the reasoning behind my intervention in the debate , I wish to emphasise that this report can only be supported enthusiastically by those who share the basic philosophy of the rapporteur , most candidly expressed when he spoke to us here on this very issue on 14 March 2000 , saying ' The Charter represents an opportunity to construct a modern post-national society ' .
In fact , quite contrary to the statements made in the resolution and during the debate , there is still a serious risk that the Charter , if incorporated into the Treaties and given legal value , will be immediately appropriated in the most imprudent way by a militant and fired-up minority . Next , it will be thrown off course , so as to effectively limit the competences of the Member States to a very considerable degree , precisely where the central core of the sovereignty and self-determination of their peoples are concerned , tending to superimpose itself on the systems of fundamental rights of the Member States and to subordinate them entirely .
A year and a half of its being in force in all but name , with various bodies behaving ' as if ' the Charter were directly applicable , they are proving this in a dangerous way , and it is regrettable that Parliament is willingly moving towards this disaster and is not speaking out forcefully to defend the rule of law and the rules established in the Treaties .
I have voted in favour of the report on the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and its future status .
I am in favour of the incorporation of the Charter into the treaty .
On the other hand , I am against the line of reasoning that it is a prerequisite that the EU be a legal person in its own right or that the Charter would be a step along the way towards an EU state .
Given the way in which the Charter seems to have been able to set its own terms of reference and its own limitations ( or more accurately lack of limitations ) , it is necessary that fundamental questions be answered before it is allowed to develop further .
Whilst it is right and proper that a legislative body such as the European Union should be bound by minimum standards of what is acceptable in civilised society , nothing will be gained if the implementation of the Charter continues to develop along the lines set out in this report .
What is to happen if the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights develop contradictory case law ?
Which will take precedence ?
Who will gain from potential forum-hopping other than litigation lawyers ?
How can a legally-binding document claim that all rights are equal - whether it is the right to life or the right to strike ?
Are not many of these issues really political in nature rather than fundamental legal rights ?
Was not Commissioner Byrne right when he said that questions of education , health and housing provision - and their financial implications - are best left to elected politicians rather than judges ?
The report discusses the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and proposes that it be binding .
A binding charter which is as broad in its application will be a driving force for further integration and supranationality .
The Court of Justice of the European Communities is to be given increased powers to rule on human rights cases .
Having a charter which has the force of primary law opens the way , in principle , for secondary legislation ( regulations and directives ) based on the charter .
I share the opinion of the Swedish parliament in saying ' no ' to a binding charter , and I think that the EU should instead only join the European Convention .
I cannot , therefore , support the draft .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.29 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

- ( DA ) Mr President , when I was asked to make a statement on this topic , we did not know how tragically topical it would become .
We are discussing this subject today in the shadow of the horrific terrorist attack in Bali on 12 October , in which more than 200 people lost their lives .
It was a completely incomprehensible catastrophe , and has also underlined the fact that the terrorist threat must still be taken very seriously .
We must not deceive ourselves - the fight against terrorism will be a very long and arduous task .
The last time I had the honour to speak to Parliament about terrorism was on 11 September this year , when together we remembered the anniversary of the terrorist attack on the USA .
At that time , I emphasised that the USA had been targeted for attack because of its power , because of its insistence on Western-style democracy and on freedom and tolerance ; but it could just as easily have been us who were hit .
The terrorist attack in Bali , coming as it did out of the blue , has shown that no one is immune .
The terrorists have distorted the many advantages of globalisation for the purposes of their inhuman and ruthless game .
The fight against terrorism is a global one , in which close cooperation between the EU and the USA is an essential prerequisite for success .
We have thus far been able to satisfy ourselves that , if it was the terrorists ' intention to break up Western democracies , they have achieved the exact opposite .
We must let this thought guide us all in future .
For this reason , too , the EU 's external role is a very important element in the fight against terrorism .
What , therefore , has the EU been doing since 11 September 2001 , and how effective has it been ?
The EU 's political reaction to last year 's catastrophe was very rapid and dynamic .
First came a firm declaration from EU Heads of State and Government making it clear that the EU would do everything possible to ensure that those responsible were held to account and punished .
The EU also stressed that the US Government and people could count on the full solidarity and cooperation of the EU in the continuing fight against terrorism .
We shall not be moved on this .
The EU did not stop at words .
On 21 September , the Heads of State and Government adopted the plan of action which has become the backbone of the EU 's efforts .
The list of results makes impressive reading .
One of the key points on this list was the strengthening of police and judicial cooperation .
Particular examples are the introduction of a European arrest warrant , the establishment of a common definition of acts of terror , and joint investigation teams .
These are areas in which the EU has taken a quantum leap forward by swiftly adopting the necessary legal acts .
In addition , agreement has been reached on a decision on the freezing of assets and evidence .
This will establish rules on the way in which the Member States recognise and execute in their territories freezing orders issued by a judicial authority in another Member State .
It will also make things harder for terrorists in the Member States .
In addition , negotiations have been initiated with the USA on a cooperation agreement on extradition and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters , and it is expected that an agreement between Europol and the USA on the exchange of personal data will be finalised by the end of the year .
All things considered , it can be said that the EU has delivered all that could be expected of it - and more .
Another main point is putting an effective stop to the financing of terrorism .
The necessary legal acts for the implementation of Security Council Resolution 1373 were adopted as early as December 2001 .
We have thus stemmed the flow of money financing acts of terror , the lifeline without which international terrorism cannot survive .
In addition , a number of important initiatives have been taken with regard to aviation safety .
All things considered , we have reason to be pleased and proud about our handling of the fight against terrorism .
It has become harder to exist as a terrorist and perpetrate acts of terror in Member States and has made it safer and more secure for our citizens .
Can we rule out the possibility of future terrorist attacks ?
No , we cannot , but for this very reason we must continue the fight with renewed energy .
This means not only continuing to round up terrorists , wherever they may be , but also providing targeted assistance in the quest to remove the underlying causes adding fuel to the terrorists ' fire .
Have we put legal certainty for our citizens on the line ?
For us , the politicians , it is a fundamentally political dilemma : is it acceptable to restrict our freedom in order to protect ourselves against terrorism ?
Are our efforts to protect our freedom and safety resulting in the creation of a Big Brother society ?
Where do we draw the line ?
I believe that the famous liberal philosopher Karl Popper gave us some guidance when he said : ' If we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant , then the tolerant will be destroyed , and tolerance with them . '
This is also the line I sense in Parliament 's motion for a resolution , which emphasises that it is necessary to be firm when it comes to preventing terrorists reaping gains from their atrocities .
The Presidency is fully in agreement with the emphasis which the motion for a resolution places on the principle that there must be no rewards for terror .
I believe that we have struck the right balance .
At the same time , the Presidency does not deem it necessary for there to be any further substantial anti-terrorism initiatives within the EU at the present time .
The Danish Presidency has made the fight against terrorism a top priority .
The handling of the fight against terrorism has been mainly oriented towards the EU 's external role .
At the same time , of course , we want to continue to work on the implementation of internal measures .
It is the objective of the Danish Presidency to achieve progress in integrating the fight against terrorism into all aspects of the EU 's foreign policy .
On top of strengthening the EU 's international role by increasing the emphasis EU foreign policy places on combating terrorism and by means of a systematic evaluation of the contribution of third countries to the fight against terrorism , it is our ambition for the EU to become a standard-bearer in the UN and other international fora .
Maintaining the international anti-terrorism coalition and cooperation with the USA are essential aspects .
Other aspects are the conclusion of a general convention against terrorism and the universal implementation of the 12 existing international conventions on combating specific acts of terror .
The Council Conclusions of 22 July 2002 on the EU 's external action against terrorism opened a new chapter in the fight against terrorism .
In its future agreements with third countries , the EU will take more account of the contribution of these countries to the fight against terrorism and conduct a more targeted and if necessary tougher political dialogue with third countries .
It was also decided to identify specific measures with a view to helping third countries to fulfil their obligations under Security Council Resolution 1373 and to concentrate on a smaller number of countries with a view to initiating a pilot project in cooperation with the UN 's Counter-Terrorism Committee .
This will mainly be aimed at countries which have the political will but not the ability to observe UN resolutions .
In the latter areas , in particular , it is hoped that concrete results will have been attained by the end of the Danish Presidency in the form of the launch of one or two pilot projects .
An accurate and comprehensive assessment of the threat is , however , a prerequisite for being able to re-evaluate the substance of contractual relations with third countries from the point of view of entering into agreements , for being able to tighten up the political dialogue if necessary and for being able to assess the possible need for aid to third countries .
It has therefore also been a high priority of the Presidency 's to prepare the necessary analysis of individual countries and regions .
The work is making good progress , and we anticipate that the necessary analytical bases will soon be in place .
We must send the message to our discussion partners in third countries that the way in which they handle the fight against terror will have a considerable influence on their relations with the EU .
I am pleased , therefore , that this idea is expressed in the motion for a resolution .
The EU can certainly be proud of its efforts in the wake of the 11 September terrorist attack .
We have put our own house in order in conformity with the UN resolutions , and we have done this in such a way that legal certainty for our citizens has been respected .
Now it is important to turn our gaze outwards and play the international role which is expected of us .
We have to maintain the anti-terrorism coalition and intensive cooperation with our closest partners , the USA in particular : in this way we have hope of success .
I therefore hope for the continuing support of Parliament for the line taken here and I would thank the two Commissioners for their cooperation in this field .
Mr President , Mr Haarder , ladies and gentlemen , the recent tragic events in Indonesia are proof that terrorism , a mindless and cowardly crime , can still strike and inflict devastating consequences , despite the efforts , over the last year , of the international community in general , and the European Union in particular .
These events can only strengthen our belief that we must relentlessly combat this terror using all the resources available and from a global perspective .
The European Union has a major role to play in this fight , as Minister Haarder has so skilfully illustrated .
Our response to terrorism is based on the determination to rapidly provide the European Union and its Member States with the resources to cooperate more effectively , and for this cooperation to be undertaken with full respect for our democratic principles , with a view to enhance both the protection of fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
Furthermore , it must be noted that the reason why the European Union 's reaction in the wake of the 11 September attacks was so swift is largely due to the synergy between our institutions , namely Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
This synergy was equally evident in the implementation of an inter-pillar approach which was able to respond to the magnitude of the challenge posed by terrorism , whether it be international terrorism or terrorism within each of our Member States .
I do not wish to go back over the benefits that have already been gained from implementing the strategy that we adopted last year .
I shall instead speak about the fact that , following the Commission proposals , the Union adopted a common definition of terrorism , harmonised the penalties applicable to acts of terrorism and created a European arrest warrant .
These instruments are proving to be useful in the negotiations of the World Convention against Terrorism which is taking place within the United Nations .
With regard to police cooperation , considerable progress has been made in strengthening operational collaboration between the national anti-terrorism forces and Europol .
This operational cooperation is sometimes not particularly obvious , but it exists and it has been much improved over the last year .
The Commission can only welcome the efforts made to improve analytical capabilities , especially as far as Europol 's assessment of the terrorist threat is concerned , and particularly as regards the specific measures which have been taken to increase the amount of information provided to Europol , including the exchange between police forces and information services of the Member States , and to ensure that this tool for cooperation and analysis is improved and used more widely .
Following the European Parliament 's initiative , the Commission itself proposed to the Council to finance , from the Community budget , specific activities designed to provide Europol with the additional resources required to strengthen and coordinate the action of Member States in the fight against terrorism .
As far as the fight against the financing of terrorism in Europe is concerned , I note that work is continuing on the development of instruments which facilitate the freezing of assets and block the funds of terrorist organisations , and also in the area of mutual recognition which will make it possible to act upon instructions to freeze assets that are issued by a judiciary authority of one Member State in another Member State .
In 2003 , the Commission will undertake an assessment of the mechanisms adopted against financial crime and , in parallel , will put forward a proposal on freezing and confiscating funds of entities controlled by individuals involved in the financing of terrorist activities . This is to ensure that legitimate activities cannot be used to finance terrorism .
The protection of our external borders has also been the subject of intense work and of some initial innovative proposals , which some consider to be audacious , but which , in my view , are perfect for weighing up the many challenges that the Union must be prepared to face in order to safeguard its stability and domestic security .
Turning to matters beyond our own borders , and without going into too much detail with regard to our actions , as Commissioner Patten will come back to this subject , our cooperation with the United States deserves a particular mention .
The agreement on strategic cooperation between Europol and the United States , which provides for the exchange of strategic information and liaison officers , is a good example of this cooperation .
We are currently working to extend this cooperation at police level by means of cooperation at judiciary level within the framework of Eurojust .
The agreements currently being negotiated , whether they relate to the exchange of personal data , extradition or mutual assistance , will also play a crucial role .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the mandates issued by the Council enforce the guarantee of the full respect of our values and our principles of law through these future cooperation agreements .
Let us reiterate , however , assuming that this is necessary : what is currently at stake in the fight against terrorism is not only the protection of our principles , it is , first and foremost , the protection of our fellow citizens as well as the guarantee , in times of misfortune , that solidarity can be demonstrated .
I will also point out that , last week , the Commission proposed that all victims of crime and terrorism in the European Union will be compensated for the personal injury and losses that they have suffered , and that a minimum standard will be determined with regard to this compensation .
Solidarity and prevention are also at the heart of the very practical initiatives taken in the area of air safety and civil protection in order to improve coordination and cooperation between Member States , including issues relating to public health and the protection of public facilities essential for community life , such as water supply or electricity or nuclear power stations .
For the first time , on 27 and 28 October , a European civil protection exercise will simulate the consequences of a terrorist attack involving radiological and chemical materials , in order to test the new surveillance and information centre established by the Commission .
These considerable efforts must not and will not stop there , however .
The prevention and the fight against terrorism require , more than ever before , the strengthening of the Union as an area of freedom , security and justice .
This is one of the major challenges of our work within the Convention on the future of Europe .
The Commission will put forward proposals for institutional reform so that the Union has all the resources necessary to contend with , in a diligent and effective manner , the challenges we currently face and , above all , the challenges that the future holds .
Mr President , I welcome the chance to contribute to this debate .
As both the President-in-Office and my friend and colleague , Mr Vitorino , have said , recent events in Indonesia show clearly that the threat to the international community from terrorist attacks is still very real - despite the enormous amount of work we have undertaken in the last year in an effort to counter that threat .
Our sympathy and condolences go out to all those who suffered bereavement and horrendous injury in Bali .
We think in particular of our friends in Australia and promise them that we will be exploring ways in which we can work closely with them to confront terrorism in all its manifestations .
We will shortly be sending a high-level troika to Indonesia to discuss the contribution we can make to this campaign .
That troika will be going on to Australia to ensure that we can involve ourselves as fully as possible , working in cooperation with the Australians as well .
We in the European Union have been at the forefront of the international effort to combat terrorism .
Our actions in the immediate aftermath of 11 September demonstrate a point I have made in the context of the debate on the effectiveness of the European Union 's foreign and security policy : when the political will is there , we can take effective action regardless of the institutional architecture .
Within days of the attack on America , a series of concrete measures was tabled by the European Commission .
This led to a Plan of Action adopted , as has been said , by a special European Council on 21 September .
A week later the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 1373 - a truly landmark resolution setting out for the first time a clear set of actions which all Member States must follow to combat terrorism .
And I say ' must ' advisedly .
It is a resolution adopted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter , which means that it is mandatory .
It is a mark of the strength of international outrage following the 11 September attacks that such a resolution could be adopted with universal support .
The European Union 's action plan is not cast in stone .
We have adapted it to reflect new realities , including the adoption of Resolution 1373 .
We have also prepared a ' road map ' setting out the means of implementing the action plan .
We have taken practical steps at Union level to outlaw terrorist organisations and cut off their funding , as previous speakers have said .
My colleague has just outlined the significant steps taken on police and judicial cooperation , border security and other internal questions .
But all such measures to combat terrorism can only be truly effective if they are applied everywhere - if there are no hiding places left for terrorists and their sources of funding dry up .
The new challenge now before us is , therefore , to help those countries which cannot - for reasons of institutional weakness , lack of expertise or lack of financial resources - fully implement Resolution 1373 themselves .
Here the European Union clearly has a crucial role to play .
Much of the work which needs to be done is in areas where the European Union has built up an enormous amount of expertise through its programmes such as Phare , Tacis , Meda and CARDS .
I am thinking here of the work we are already doing , helping our partner countries establish effective law enforcement institutions , improve border management and fight money-laundering .
In addition to the work under way , the European Council conclusions of 22 July asked us to consider what more we could do .
We have just agreed a strategy , endorsed by the Council at Coreper on 3 October , of identifying pilot countries where we judge there is a clear need for help and we feel the Commission has a comparative advantage .
We are looking at the possibilities for action in countries of high importance in the fight against terrorism : in Central Asia , South and South-East Asia and the Gulf .
We hope to send missions to some of these countries very soon to work up concrete projects , notably in the area of terrorist financing .
We have also incorporated the fight against terrorism into all aspects of our external relations .
We are systematically evaluating our relationships with third countries in the light of the support those countries might give to terrorism .
In this context , we are examining where counter-terrorism cooperation elements can be added to , or form part of new agreements , as has been the case in our association agreements with Lebanon , Algeria and Chile .
However , it is worth remembering that our external action goes wider than political dialogue .
The European Union is a massive provider of development assistance .
We provide about 55 % of total international assistance and as much as two thirds of all grant aid .
This is an often forgotten contribution to international security in its widest sense .
Poverty and environmental degradation do not cause or justify terrorism .
Nor are the poor more wicked than anyone else .
But just as poor people are the major victims of crime in rich societies , so political instability and violence are more prevalent in the poorest countries .
Nowhere is this clearer than in failed or failing states .
If we are to deny Al-Qaeda and other terrorist networks the territory from which to plan future atrocities , we must do all we can to bolster weak or failing states .
Our action in Afghanistan is a case in point .
The European Union is the main donor helping to rebuild this shattered country .
The Community alone has pledged over EUR 1 billion from the budget over the next five years , involving a substantial contribution to the operating costs of the new government , including salaries for police , nurses , doctors , teachers and civil servants .
This is what we have done so far in the fight against terrorism .
But I want to close with the thought that we can take a wide or a narrow view of counter-terrorist action .
The narrow view focuses exclusively on terrorists and terrorist acts , on tracking down the former and preventing or punishing the latter .
But there is a wider view too : our actions must be seen in the context of our unswerving support for democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
We have a wide range of instruments at our disposal to tackle the root causes of terrorism , both in terms of poverty and economic development , and of institution building and the rule of law .
It is here that our contribution to the fight against terrorism will have the most impact .
The fight against terrorism is not like a conventional military campaign .
It is unlikely to have a beginning , a middle and a glorious end , with surrender documents and peace treaties .
It will go on and on , in many different shapes and forms , a few thousand terrorists against the whole of humanity .
Earlier the President-in-Office quoted from Karl Popper 's The Open Society and Its Enemies .
I suspect that , for our generation , it was almost as important a document in shaping our attitudes as any by the great political philosophers .
When Karl Popper wrote the words quoted , he was referring to the enemy of totalitarianism - a much clearer enemy .
In response to that , drawing on other political philosophers like Burke , he argued that , to some extent , liberty had to be limited in order to be maintained .
We face a different problem today .
The ability to deliver terrorist assaults on free societies is much easier in open societies .
The only way to make terrorism absolutely impossible is by a sort of global Orwellianism , which would itself provoke from liberals , like the President-in-Office and myself , the sort of assault others might regard as terrorist .
We have a real paradox here .
That is why it is so important that open societies and liberal democracies , without losing their values , work together comprehensively , cooperatively and intelligently .
To prosecute the campaign against terrorism will require international cooperation of unprecedented breadth and depth : political cooperation , economic cooperation and security cooperation .
The European Union must play its part in those efforts - vigorously , generously and creatively - a key partner , I hope , in a well-planned and resolutely pursued campaign of multilateral engagement .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , I want now to put a protest on the record .
These resolutions , to which the groups have now tabled amendments , were prepared by two committees .
I do not think it right or proper that my colleague from the other committee is not also heading the list of speakers .
I ask that the list of speakers be amended to enable my colleague to be given the floor after me , and to be followed by speakers from the groups .
I do not believe that anyone from the other groups has any objection to this .
It is indeed symbolic that the issue of terrorism should be dealt with by these two committees .
The fact that the group 's amendments refer to work we did and presented together makes it clear that we are dealing here with something completely new , the need for the fight against the cancerous growth of terrorism to be the common cause in which internal and external security unite .
No longer can traditional methods of policing and repressive measures within states bring us success , nor can this situation be got round by traditional military means any more .
A new definition of security policy is now called for , one that leaves no doubt that we are dealing here with a problem that knows no frontiers .
No longer does the antagonist stand behind a fixed border ; now he is within our own frontiers .
He is mainly within borders that protect him , because he is there to prepare himself to do something in another country , which means that borders no longer separate us from the enemy but protect him .
It is for this reason that we have to develop new methods , and today we are endeavouring to put forward a number of proposals .
What is in any case quite clear in all this is that there is a need for cooperation in all military and internal security matters on the part of the armed forces , the security services and the secret services , by which information may be gained as to how to take action against terrorism .
It is wholly unacceptable for citizens to be killed in our States through the nation states ' unwillingness to exchange information .
I do think that , however important the steps taken in the aftermath of 11 September , only a part of what was discussed at the time has become reality .
Commissioner Patten made particularly explicit reference to the terrible event in Bali , which has again demonstrated the way in which incidents of this kind will continue to proliferate .
It must be made clear , though , that they can be successfully combated only if we respect the rule of law , including international law .
We may not ourselves respond by breaking the law , but we must be in a position to be ready for action while at the same time guaranteeing the rule of law and international law .
Hence the complicated situation we are in , which has to do with the United Nations and the role played by the Security Council .
The primary and most important function of the Security Council is to be a way ahead in external policy matters , but it cannot be the only way .
I think it right that we should be speaking here in terms of a general convention against terrorism .
I also believe that it has to be made clear that the killing of civilians in terrorist acts can be justified neither by religion nor by poverty nor by anything else .
There can be no excuse for terrorism - no excuse whatsoever !
Mr President , quite apart from whatever the Conference of Presidents may have determined , I would nonetheless like to insist that we should actually stick to the Rules of Procedure .
You said that the authors come first .
The authors are the two appointed by the committees .
Then it says there that these reports are to be replaced by amendments from this or that person .
That is the normal procedure with amendments .
Both the authors are sitting here .
Perhaps a mistake has been made !
Perhaps the bureau , and in particular its officials , are flexible enough to concede such a mistake , so that we can try something really completely new and not let our lack of flexibility show how incapable we are of policy-making .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to insist that the chairman of my committee , Mr Hernández Mollar , speaks ahead of me .
Mr Brok is right : this is a joint motion from the two committees .
As the Liberal Group spokeswoman on the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I wish the chairman of my committee to speak ahead of me .
If the rules do not provide for that , they should .
Let us be flexible enough to accept what should happen .
Thank you , Mr President .
On behalf of my political group , I would like to highlight and record here that the speed at which decisions have been taken by the European Union since 11 September must be a sign of political will and the great things it can achieve .
I would remind you of this because , one year on , we are worried to see that the application of these decisions is not taking place as quickly .
We need political will , but - and I reiterate the words of the chairman of my committee - we also need new procedures that will enable us to fulfil the citizens ' demands .
The Convention needs to address this issue and propose the necessary amendments in order to achieve a single structure that covers the area of internal justice .
And this , which may appear to be incomprehensible Community jargon , means things such as being able to have a coherent legal basis - which we do not have at the moment - to be able to freeze the assets of terrorists operating within the European Union , and being able to resolve matters such as Europol .
I would like to ask the Council whether , once again , we are going to allow Parliament to allocate a Community budget to Europol , and if we are going to allow that budget to remain pro memoria , without spending it , and how much longer we will be able to explain this to the citizens .
I would ask you directly whether you are prepared to work towards an operational Eurojust , towards solving problems such as differing levels of data protection .
I hope that you are and that you will fully involve Parliament in this work , as you did in reacting to 11 September , thereby showing this to be positive .
We also believe that these measures cannot be separated from other measures designed to reinforce our society 's defence .
Defence of the Rule of Law , increased citizen confidence in the institutions , democratic dialogue , great care to avoid racism and xenophobia , respect and compensation for victims - and in this regard I welcome the Commissioner 's proposal - and also a foreign policy based on these principles : strength in the fight against terrorism , strength also in the establishment of conditions that allow us to address at source situations of instability which are extremely dangerous for us all .
In this regard , I would also like to ask you how the negotiations with the United States on cooperation in this field are going .
I would also like to ask you whether you are going to inform Parliament of the progress of these negotiations and their result , and whether you are going to take account of Parliament 's resolution of last December in this regard .
In conclusion , nobody in Europe will understand that words such as unanimity , blockage , pillars , etc . , slow down our cooperation in the fight against terrorism .
We need to ensure greater freedom for our citizens by safeguarding cooperation between the Member States in pursuit of greater effectiveness .
Mr President , there can be no compromise with those who hate freedom and democracy .
There can be no tolerance of the intolerant .
That said , we have more work to do to win hearts and minds in projecting a vision of Europe and the United States as beacons of human rights , non-discrimination , respect for difference and understanding of criticism .
It is a paradox that young people in Africa and Asia gaze longingly at the American way of life while damning the United States as the ' great Satan ' .
We must show , for instance , that we understand the difference between religion that is moderate , reasonable and compassionate and the dogmatic fundamentalism that exists in all religions , not just Islam .
But we must make a special effort to keep up a dialogue with Muslims and include them in European societies .
We must demonstrably treat others as we wish our own citizens to be treated .
Would it not have been a magnificent gesture and morally right to have offered to airlift out all the local victims of the Bali bomb , to show that we were not just looking after rich white westerners ?
Maybe it is still not too late to do something .
The international fight against terrorism inevitably overlaps with the question of combating weapons of mass destruction .
We are all conscious of the present developments regarding Iraq .
The danger is that any pre-emptive action in the form of a war of conquest geared to regime change will leave the United States looking like an imperialist power in the Middle East .
The backlash could create a whole new cause célèbre for terrorism .
We must ensure openness and respect for liberty and democracy in the adoption of anti-terrorism measures , but in the 30-page terrorism roadmap you will only find Parliament mentioned four times .
The Council is negotiating agreements on mutual legal assistance , extradition and exchange of personal data with the United States , involving Europol-FBI cooperation .
In principle , that is fine , but there is no democratic or judicial scrutiny .
Although the subject matter is justice and home affairs , where there is normally some parliamentary input , external agreements are negotiated without parliamentary scrutiny .
This is unsatisfactory and weakens our claim to be defending liberty and democracy .
Mr President , there are many fine words in the report on combating terrorism .
There are many fine words on safeguarding democracy and guaranteeing civil rights , and on the prevention of civil crises .
The truth is , however , that we currently find ourselves in a crucial situation , in which the EU must make up its mind whether it wishes to follow the USA blindly , irrespective of what the latter may come up with in relation to Iraq .
It is also worth addressing some of the concerns which my fellow Member , Baroness Ludford , expressed about pre-emptive strikes .
We start to have a problem if we use these pretty words but act differently , and here I am thinking of civil rights in particular .
The resolution gives its full approval for the EU 's anti-terrorism package , and that includes the EU 's list of terrorist organisations .
We are therefore currently faced with a topical problem , namely that the National People 's Army and the Communist Party of the Philippines have presumably ended up on the EU 's list of terrorist organisations along with their leader José Maria Sison , who is incidentally in exile in the Netherlands .
The problem is that these groups constitute a quite crucial part of the network involved in peace negotiations in the Philippines .
This is incidentally a process which has been under way for many years .
In any event , Parliament has adopted two resolutions which actively support this process , and I think Mr Haarder even voted for one of them .
Now we are in the process of putting a vital player in a peace process on the EU 's list of terrorist organisations .
If that does not go completely against all of the pretty words on crisis prevention , I do not know what does .
We are creating a problem , and I would advise Commissioner Patten and Mr Haarder to re-read their Popper .
There continue to be totalitarian regimes , to which resistance must be offered ; and if we in the EU are unable to tell the difference between terrorists and freedom fighters , it is a very sad world for us all .
I would like a definitive answer to the following questions : is it true that Sison , the NPA and the Communist Party of the Philippines are to be included on the EU 's list of terrorists ?
Is it true that , in so doing , we are busy dooming the whole of this peace process to failure ?
Has anyone given any consideration to how these fine words can be reconciled with the harsh reality ?
Many people - almost everyone , I think - immediately associates terrorism and the fight against terrorism with images of extreme violence like those we recently witnessed in Bali .
Regrettably , this association with violence is justified where terrorism is concerned , but it is not justified , and should not be , when it comes to the fight against terrorism .
I am pleased that Parliament has managed to reach consensus about a predominantly non-violent fight against terrorism .
Let me mention a few elements : terrorism is not a natural phenomenon but also has economic and social roots , and that is precisely where the EU 's programmes could provide value-added .
As Commissioner Patten mentioned a moment ago , the most effective strategy for fighting terrorism is conflict prevention .
Military action can only be legitimised by and via the United Nations .
These are all elements which my group very much applauds because they are the key elements of the non-violent fight against terrorism .
Add to this the concern about the US 's unilateralism and the rejection of so-called pre-emptive strikes , the strong emphasis on the protection of fundamental civil rights and the recognition of the need to lay down minimum standards in the field of criminal law , and I think it is right to say that what is being presented in this resolution is a balanced inventory of causes and possible actions .
As far as I am concerned , this is a European view of terrorism , not necessarily compared to an American view of terrorism , but as a basis for an even-handed dialogue on terrorism between equals .
What we do have to ensure , though , is that this balanced , paper vision is not imbued with a practice that remains governed by oppression and military means .
I am convinced that only if the practice becomes as balanced as and is like this paper resolution , will we manage to fight terrorism successfully without creating new causes of terrorism .
Finally , reference is made in the resolution to Galileo , an intelligence , information and navigation system which the European Union is setting up .
I have also re-read the debate on Galileo .
In it , it is stated repeatedly that Galileo is , in principle , a civil system that is not , or should not be , used to collect military information , and my impression is that certainly the first generation of Galileo is absolutely unsuitable for collecting information of any nature whatsoever that could prove useful in the fight against terrorism .
It is therefore somewhat beyond me , in all honesty , why Parliament is so keen to include this reference to Galileo .
In my view , this mention is either premature , because Galileo as it currently stands cannot serve any purpose whatsoever , or the European Parliament has been misinformed in the past .
Surely , Galileo is a so-called dual-use system , and these are two arguments why , in my view , the reference to Galileo in this terrorism resolution should be deleted .
Mr President , it may be incorrect to say this , but democratisation of the Islamic world is crucial for the security of the Western world .
It is not possible to prevent and combat terrorism effectively while so many million people are living in a hopeless state of ignorance , poverty , political and economic stagnation and lack of freedom .
Unfortunately , this is the way they will stay until the West intervenes .
European leaders , with the exception of Tony Blair and the Danish Government , live in the dishonest belief that the whole problem can still be solved from within if we contribute with diplomatic chatter , by playing ' wait and see ' and criticising the USA in the hope that the terrorists will not really strike in a European city .
No leader in the Arab world has been toppled by a popular uprising in the last 80 years , and nothing will change if we remain passive .
Europe has simply come to where we were in 1938 , when Chamberlain returned from his meeting with Adolf Hitler in Munich and proclaimed that there would be peace in our time .
I can fully understand that the USA may have difficulty in respecting us , as we do not dare back our many fine words up with force .
Europe will not become a player by adopting who knows how many resolutions .
We will only become one by developing our countries ' militaries to the same level as the USA .
The dictatorial regimes in the countries which produce terrorists and pay for terrorism do not enjoy popular support , but the peoples are so oppressed that they are unable to bring about the necessary revolution .
If we mean anything by our professions of freedom and democracy , it is our duty to stand together with the USA in the showdown with the whole clutch of dictatorship states which are responsible for breeding terrorism .
I would thank Minister Haarder for his clear emphasis on the need to do this .
Mr President , on that unforgettable day of 11 September 2001 , I was in Washington with a delegation from this Parliament .
That day is the point of reference for the worldwide fight against so-called international terrorism .
The Islamic driving forces behind the terrorist attack on this black Tuesday have now been sufficiently documented .
This threat is continuing to this day , as is evidenced by the recent attacks in Indonesia and Israel .
There is therefore no doubt as to the urgency of the global fight against Islamic terrorism .
Parliament 's present joint motion for a resolution , however , is proving to be of little use in this context .
First of all , the nature of the Islamic threat is insufficiently highlighted .
The resolution does not go beyond offering possible solutions to counter the spreading of Islamism .
This is not enough .
We should take the nature of this threat much more seriously .
More knowledge about the mental legacy of these terrorists is a primary requirement in this respect .
In addition , the resolution causes confusion .
I would particularly refer to Paragraph 28 of the joint motion for a resolution which recommends the use of anti-terrorism clauses in agreements between the EU and third countries as instruments to fight terrorism .
Who could be opposed to this ?
The point is , however , that an association agreement with the Republic of Lebanon , of all countries , is quoted by way of shining example - a state in which an Islamic terrorist movement , the Hezbollah , is a growing force to be reckoned with .
This is also compounded by the close ties between Hezbollah and Syria and , above all , the Islamic Republic of Iran .
For this very reason I should very much like to hear from the Council and the Commission how the Lebanese Republic fits into the European strategy of a global fight against terrorism .
I am really waiting for a reply .
Mr President , this debate is being held just over a year after the attacks in the United States .
I think this is a good time to take stock of the progress that has been made in the fight against international terrorism , but also of the guiding principles on which this progress should be based .
Recent events , including the terrible disaster which took place in Bali a few weeks ago , show that the threat is still very much present .
The crucial question with regard to the EU 's policy is , of course , to what extent all the combined measures taken have contributed to a decrease in the risk of terrorism .
Would the Commission and the Council be able to comment on this ?
The European Parliament would like to be informed more frequently and more effectively about the implementation of the action plan .
Our grassroots support needs this .
I appreciate that much of the information is sensitive , but a comprehensive overview of the activities does not give us a direct insight into the policy 's effectiveness .
Are we really managing to drive back terrorist networks ?
Parliament 's motion for a resolution devotes a great deal of attention to the role of the United Nations in the fight against international terrorism , and rightly so .
This role is crucial .
We want an international approach to an international problem based on collective security , which means that action should be taken via the UN Security Council and not unilaterally or along with occasional coalitions .
This is not only a question of principle , it is also desirable in view of the need to create the widest possible support for the fight against international terrorism .
Fighting the root cause of terrorism is the most effective way of tackling this phenomenon 's breeding ground .
We would like to see aspects such as the promotion of democracy and the fight against poverty playing a clear role in this .
The policy should not be confined to military or police operations .
The European Union has , like no other , the complete bandwidth of instruments required for this at its disposal .
We are , in fact , talking about a form of conflict prevention , which is surely the EU 's general priority in its foreign policy .
This brings me to the special problem that has already been mentioned by Commissioner Patten , namely the problem of the so-called failed states .
These can mainly be found in Africa , but also closer to home , like Transdniestria , the break-away section of Moldavia , for example .
These countries , or regions , offer an excellent home and operating base for criminals and terrorist activities , two things that often go hand in hand .
The European Union should , I believe , adopt a more pro-active stance , particularly in the case of a few regions closer to home - one of which I mentioned a moment ago - and not leave the solution of the Transdniestria problem , for example , to other countries and organisations alone .
Finally , we are of the view that the European Union could easily be a little more ambitious in its thoughts about its role in the fight against terrorism when it comes to the deployment of the new instruments of the common foreign and security policy in combating terrorism .
In the exceptional circumstances we are facing , we need to ask ourselves whether there are any tasks in addition to those of Petersberg .
This would also fit in with our more general view that our activities to fight terrorism should take place more at EU level than at national level .
If the EU joins forces , this will pay dividends at UN level too .
Mr President , the dread and panic which terrorism spreads is the same regardless of whether the perpetrator is a lone sniper in Washington or large-scale networks such as Al-Qaeda .
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon in itself .
It was not ' invented ' on 11 September 2001 .
On the other hand , global terrorism with a worldwide network , high-tech weapons and apparently inexhaustible economic resources is a new and extremely frightening phenomenon .
The attacks in New York and Bali made it clear to everyone that the fight against terrorism must be carried out at global level , in the form of police and judicial cooperation , intelligence and investigations .
However , it is also important to engage in long-term , preventive cooperation to eradicate , or at least minimise , the causes of terrorism .
Democracy is the best antidote to terrorism .
The international alliance must therefore prioritise massive efforts to strengthen democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
Trade , aid and cooperation in international organisations are also important .
In the fight against terrorism , peace in the Middle East would be an extremely important contribution to the jigsaw .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party fully realises the need for increased cooperation in order to combat terrorism .
A good deal has been done ; a good deal more can be done .
We must , however , bear in mind that the chief target of the terrorists is the open society .
That is why we must not , in our eagerness to combat terrorism , undermine the heart of democracy .
The rule of law must never be sacrificed on the altar of our drive to act .
Special rules , military tribunals and unclear reasons as to why an individual or group has found its way onto a certain list are unacceptable .
It is scandalous that the prisoners at the Guantanamo Bay base are still in legal limbo .
I should like to ask the Council what is being done to obtain a clear picture of , in particular , the situation of the European citizens in Cuba .
Mr President-in-Office , you quoted from Karl Popper 's The Open Society and its Enemies .
We must not become enemies of the open society ourselves .
If we do , the terrorists will win hands down .
Mr President , the attacks of 11 September 2001 , and more recently on the island of Bali , have demonstrated the unpredictability of the terrorist threat , its lethal seriousness and our vulnerability in the face of it .
In the 1960s and 1970s Europe faced the violence of Communist-inspired extremist movements such as the ' Red Brigades ' or the Baader-Meinhof Gang .
Today , it is extremist organisations such as Al Qaeda that represent the destruction of modernity .
They believe themselves to be justified in using violent means to bring down the reigning democratic orders , and believe that they are involved in an all-out war , designed to protect Islam from Western hegemony and to impose it on the infidels , as they call them , who do not share these views , attacking even moderate Muslim countries .
It is true that there are other motives for terrorist activity , of a political , nationalist or separatist nature , even on European soil , which we find equally repulsive but which are today , unfortunately , outweighed by this predominant form of terrorism , which is especially dangerous because it attacks anywhere , uses indiscriminate violence and believes itself to be unfettered by any moral or human constraint .
We cannot ignore the fact that , due to its liberality and its tradition of welcoming political exiles , Europe has become a place of refuge for numerous radical and terrorist groups .
Despite its generous policy , these extremists sow the seeds of hate and take advantage of the facilities made available to them by the democratic systems , organise themselves , find funding , recruit new members and plot attacks against targets on our continent and throughout the world .
The fight against terrorism as a truly transnational phenomenon , which could at any time imperil the rights , freedoms and guarantees that pertain to all of us must , therefore , be subject to a global Union and Member State strategy that , on its own , either within the United Nations or in cooperation with the United States within NATO , prevents and suppresses terrorist acts and , at the same time strengthens the rule of law .
At European level , the strategy of the Member States must be underpinned , as has already been said , by the effective use of all the mechanisms of judicial and police cooperation and information sharing , also strengthening an extended concept of security and defence that takes account of the need to confront this renewed international threat .
We realise that the prevention and suppression of terrorism can also involve the promotion of dialogue between civilizations and the adoption of effective policies to combat social , economic or cultural factors , which , although they cannot by any means justify terrorist violence , are systematically exploited and used by terrorist activists .
It is , Mr President , on the basis of these principles of the unity of ideas in the fight against terrorism , which obviously outweigh the differences we have with some of the conclusions of the joint motion for a resolution that we are discussing , that we shall support this motion and vote in favour of it .
Ladies and gentlemen representing the Member States , I do not wish to use a word first employed by Mr Prodi and which is now being bandied about extensively and describe the Council and Commission 's statements that we have just heard as stupid .
We must admit however that there is something particularly silly about the problem that currently occupies us , an issue known by the expression the ' fight against terrorism ' .
This expression and the very word ' terrorism ' were in fact pretty poor choices to describe an obvious fact , namely that the policy conducted by what we agree to call ' the international community ' , that is , of course , the United States and its accomplices , the imperial powers , is increasingly fiercely contested throughout the world , so that we end up , as do all empires in fact , giving the label ' terrorism ' to something that could just as well be called resistance ; Mr Krivine illustrated this point very well earlier .

Of course , I am certainly not condoning acts which target innocent people , even though , in a democracy , I am aware , no one is completely innocent .
Let us not dwell on that , however .
It goes without saying that I utterly condemn the attacks of 11 September , as well as the recent attack in Bali , just as I condemn the recent attack on a French petrol tanker , or less recently , in 1995 , the attacks on the Paris underground system , and this leads me , once again , to condemn the fact that the person who committed these crimes is able to find refuge , even today , in one of the Member States of the European Union , a country basically acting as if it were an accomplice to these crimes .
This goes to show that nothing is simple .
The fact remains , ladies and gentlemen , and this is fundamental , that we are not a tribunal .
We cannot say what is good and what is evil .
We must take a candid look at the world today , the state it is in and we will not fool anyone for long by suggesting that what passes as the West has only one enemy , Osama Bin Laden , Al-Qaeda and its presumed ramifications .
In fact , those who we call terrorists exist the world over ; their numbers are on the increase and they are becoming more radical even as the empire steps up its increasingly violent domination against the populations whose values and secrets it disregards and which it demonises , even though they are obviously in a different category in military terms .
There will never be peace between rich people who are too rich and too arrogant , and poor people who are too poor and too humiliated .
It is a fact of life , ladies and gentlemen , that any empire which cannot grow and cope with excessive ambitions and the arrogance of power without having recourse to violence will inevitably bring about rebellions ; it is another fact of life that the rebellion of oppressed people is violent , mindless and savage and nothing could be more serious for us , the nations of Europe , who are familiar with history , than to become embroiled in a problem which , under the pretext of combating terrorism , could lead us to feel widespread mistrust towards the developing world which represents , I would point out , three quarters of the peoples of the world .
Mr President , when we consider terrorism , we find that opinions develop fast . This is true in this report too .
In the past , we actually assumed that terrorism was mainly a problem that affected unstable countries rather than apparently peaceful states .
We have had to review our opinions completely , because we now know that terrorism also flourishes in peaceful countries such as mine , the Netherlands - albeit not in a violent manner ; terrorists are careful about this .
Instead , as the Commissioner has already stated , they use the free and open society with its facilities to quietly prepare terrorist acts which they commit elsewhere .
This is why the European Union and also its very peaceful Member States will need to be very much on the alert so as to fight terrorism in their own countries too .
Moreover , not all categories of citizens in the Member States will be faced with a threat of the rule of law .
Sometimes it is only certain categories of citizens who are targets for extortion in our countries by fellow nationals collecting money for terrorist acts in places like northern Africa .
There are certain categories of citizens in the Netherlands and in other Member States who are victims of such extortion , and we must fight for people in that position , so that the rule of law is no longer under threat for them .
The causes of terrorism are often sought in poverty .
I do not actually believe that this is so .
It is a well-known fact that revolutions are not staged by the extremely poor ; those involved are often people of a different type .
This is also the case here .
Those responsible for the serious attacks were well-educated , well-to-do people who were perfectly able to fit into any developed society , including Western society , and could even have achieved high status there .
The problem is often that people 's most vulnerable part , their deepest convictions , are taken advantage of and that the evil seed of violent terrorism is sown in the very growth cell of the social organism .
There is always a handful of people who are susceptible to this .
It is not necessarily down to fundamentalism ; there is a huge number of peace-loving fundamentalists .
A considerable leap is required to resort to violence .
We were all shocked by the attacks on Bali .
We should , in my view , make every effort to ensure that the Indonesian Government receives maximum support so that the state of Indonesia can be sufficiently strong to prevent and fight terrorism internally as much as possible .
Mr President , yet again we are discussing the issue of terrorism in the context of the appalling atrocity in Bali in which hundreds of people lost their lives .
Like others , I want to express my deepest sympathies to the relatives and friends of those who have died .
I agree with most , though not all , of what has been said here .
It is clear what needs to be done : respect for the rule of law , protection of rights , scrutiny of the action our states take to deal with terrorism , democratic dialogue to try and deal with underlying issues and so forth .
All are very necessary .
What more can one add ?
It seems to me that one thing we can add is the notion that we are not going to destroy terrorism by simply killing or imprisoning those who carry out these acts .
Of course , it is not the poor in general who carry out the acts but those responsible for the acts are often poor .
We have to try and deal with the hopelessness that motivates them .
We have to try and overcome the idea that there is one true faith , one true version of history and one version of truth expounded by the chosen ones .
I am not speaking here just of religion but also of politics .
We must try to engage with people , so that we can open their minds and our own to what underlies their hopelessness .
It is not enough to contain terrorism , although I have no doubt of the power of our states to do so .
Not all the European Union Member States have experienced terrorism since the end of the Second World War , but a significant number have .
That is quite extraordinary , considering that we are one of the most stable and peaceful regions in the world .
We need to engage in education in the real sense , to open minds to the fact that the world is extremely diverse and could be a very tolerant and good place to live if we could only live with each other .
Mr President , the events in Bali have underlined that there is a need for a multilateral approach to the fight against terrorism .
We now know , of course , that terrorists can strike anywhere in the world , and it has proved true that we must work together across borders and across the Atlantic to stamp out terrorism .
We acted rapidly in Europe following 11 September : we can congratulate ourselves on this .
We want to live in an area of security , freedom and justice , and the fight against international terrorism is the most important challenge on the foreign and security policy scene .
Anyone who has been following the European debate on relations with the USA in recent months will have started to have misgivings about the imbalance and one-sidedness it has shown .
We share a strong set of values with the USA .
Immediately after the terrorist attacks in September of last year , I am sure many of us saw these as an attack on ourselves and our values .
The USA and Europe are united by the fundamental values and principles of democracy and freedom and justice , of human rights and the right of individuals to achieve their potential .
We must stand firm on this .
Despite our differences of opinion , that which unites us is much stronger than that which divides us .
We must exert our influence on the USA within the framework of a multilateral approach to the fight against international terrorism , something which knows no justice .
Mr President , an interesting debate , but one wonders what the point is of tracts fifty paragraphs long on the subject of terrorism , over and above their value as a medium for a series of internal exchanges of views between the political groups of the European Parliament .
If , however , you turn on the mass media to which the citizens of Europe are listening , you will see that the main terrorist-related issue today is the question of the attack on Iraq , a country which is harbouring or is considered to be harbouring weapons of mass destruction which might be used to support terrorist and other activities .
The European Union has literally become an international laughing stock in this Security Council procedure , what with the British Government secretly making proposals which are then tabled by the United States on the one hand and the French Government refusing to go along with the notion of unconditional intervention in Iraq on the other .
I think the European Parliament should have taken a stand on these issues , but it has deliberately avoided doing so in the vague wording of this motion for a resolution which , I think , responds neither to the interests of the citizens of Europe nor to the demands of the time .
Madam President , I would like to make a few comments on texts that I think are somewhat ambiguous .
Firstly although the largest terrorist attacks in the last year have taken place in New York and Bali , it would be interesting to consider what Europe 's response would have been if the original attack that drew our attention to the scale of terrorism , that of 11 September 2001 , had taken place in Europe ; if the aeroplanes , instead of flying into the twin towers in New York , had flown into the Eiffel Tower , the buildings of the European Parliament or any other major European building .
Perhaps such self-examination would have given us a greater insight into the ambiguities and the difficulties we face in dealing with the phenomenon of terrorism , which we have not yet entirely renounced .
The second aspect that I should like to mention - in addition to praising the Council 's intention to maintain close cooperation with the United States in this field - is that , in fact , and this is an important point , terrorism has little to do with poverty .
Poor people are clearly involved in terrorist actions , but those directing operations are not poor .
And if we look at the world as a whole , the poorest people are not involved in the phenomenon of terrorism : Africa would be the main source of terrorist acts if a correlation really existed between terrorism and poverty .
But this is not the case !
Terrorism is a phenomenon that contains a political rationale requiring the achievement of certain aims and also requires a degree of power .
And this does not , of course , come from the poorest , or at least not directly from the poorest .
Lastly , I should like to refer to something Commissioner Patten said , quoting Popper .
The problem we face today is also one that Popper raised : it is not so much the tension between the need to preserve freedoms and our perception of what the security and defence of free society means , but our inability and unwillingness to believe in the moral superiority of democracy and of freedom .
Furthermore , on the basis of this concept , which is fundamental to our civilisation and which is longed for by the peoples of the entire world , in particular the poor , perhaps we should be able and willing to act against terrorism . Unfortunately , some ambiguities in Europe today are preventing us from doing so .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Haarder - our former colleague and now the President-in-Office - today we are once again debating terrorism and how to combat it .
I think we all agree that terrorism has to be combated and we also all agree that this can only be done at international level , because terrorism has become an international issue .
If we wish to combat terrorism at international level , however , we of course also need to take a critical look at ourselves .
As the Budget rapporteur for the Internal Market Committee , on which we formerly sat together , Mr President-in-Office , it has come to my attention that we are faced with much petty squabbling .
We want to fight terrorism and to do so we need a European police force , Europol , and a successful authority , such as Eurojust .
I now note , however , that although we in the European Parliament have already made as much as EUR 2.8 million available for Eurojust , for example , this money cannot be spent because our European authorities are not able to operate effectively for national , petty reasons .
If the national police forces are not prepared to cooperate with Europol and if the national ministries of justice are not prepared to support Eurojust , then we can carry on getting up on our soapboxes to say how important it is to fight terrorism , but we will never succeed in doing so because it is preventive action that is needed .
To be able to take preventive action we also need functioning authorities , and we will only achieve this if the national countries , the 15 Member States of the European Union , finally make it possible for our authorities , such as Europol and Eurojust , to act .
I should therefore like to ask you , Mr Haarder , and also Commissioner Vitorino , to convey this point repeatedly and clearly to the Member States in the Council ; otherwise success will elude us .
Madam President , when I returned from the mission I was assigned by the United Nations in Bosnia-Herzegovina , I remember visiting Manfred Werner - who was then NATO Secretary-General - in Brussels in the autumn of 1993 .
I strongly asserted that the alliance should prepare itself to intervene in the Balkans or otherwise it would , eventually , cease to exist .
Today , I can easily outline the argument that I put forward at that time .
In the period following the end of the Cold War , the alliance had to be capable of intervening in the major crisis which was unfolding at the heart of Europe , otherwise European citizens would wonder what purpose it could still serve , and whether it was worthwhile continuing to invest a proportion of their taxes in it .
It took two long years and the tragic fall of Srebrenica for this message to be understood .
On 31 August 1995 , however , by supporting the action of the UN reaction force deployed on the Igman mountain to put a stop to the Serbian batteries which had resumed their indiscriminate bombing of the city of Sarajevo , the UN played an essential part in resolving the crisis , enabling the signature of the Dayton Accords and the introduction of a lasting cease-fire .
Since then , UN forces have been successfully deployed in Kosovo and more recently still in Macedonia , helping to restore calm to the area , although it has not resolved all the political problems .
Today , the same debate has started on the role that the Atlantic alliance could possibly play in the fight against international terrorism .
The alliance is in crisis , illustrated by the fact that the Americans did not believe they should call upon its support in the war in Afghanistan .
Does this unilateralism spell the demise of the alliance ?
I cannot believe so , since the Americans themselves would have pointed this out and expressed this desire .
The vocation of the alliance to this day is to intervene in European territory and neighbouring countries , wherever there is a potential threat against its values that Pacheco Pereira has just reiterated .
International terrorism is one of these threats , and it is a major threat .
To this end , the only way of reforming NATO and ensuring its survival is to construct , at long last , a Europe of defence .
The choice is simple , either the European Union continues to leave the Americans to deal with military problems on its continent by being happy to play some minor role in resolving problems that threaten peace , much like the Athenians in ancient Rome , or it finally becomes their equal and shares the burden of defending itself against all the threats , which is what they have been asking us to do since the Atlantic Alliance was formed .
Madam President , terrorism is unacceptable .
We are all agreed on that .
It is our opinions on methods for combating terrorism which perhaps differ .
The approach taken by the EU in developing its strategy for the fight against terrorism is extremely important .
The rule of law and human rights must not be undermined in the process of carrying out this important fight .
The resolution that the two committees are tabling jointly here is , therefore , an important one .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has made its contribution by delineating the main instruments which the EU has at its disposal for the prevention of conflicts , for example the development of democracy , and also trade and diplomacy .
It is of course crucial to get at the fundamental causes of terrorism , such as poverty , violations of human rights and oppression .
Under the shadow of 11 September , there is a risk of fundamental human rights being neglected in the fight against terrorism .
There is also a risk of the only superpower we have today taking unilateral liberties outside the United Nations system .
It is extremely important , therefore , that Parliament upholds the United Nations Charter , and that the right of a state under attack to defend itself is only legitimate if confirmation is given or a decision taken by the UN Security Council .
To start deliberating on the desirability of UN resolutions would directly undermine the United Nations .
I note with satisfaction that we are unanimous in our view that a strategy based on pre-emptive strikes , which the US government wishes to avail itself of , is not an effective way of combating terrorism , and in emphasising that a settlement of the Middle East conflict in accordance with UN resolutions constitutes a very important element of the fight against terrorism .
International law is a crucial element if we are to have a society based on the rule of law .
This applies to smaller states in particular .
Undermining the UN can only end in disaster .
For this reason , it is crucial that the EU stands up for the UN and its charters , even in difficult times , and does not undermine the central role of the United Nations as the world 's peacekeeper .
Madam President , the aim of today 's debate is to take stock of the fight against terrorism one year on from 11 September .
How has the EU reacted to this tragic event ?
It has demonstrated its solidarity and will to support the United States , it has alerted people to the risk of linking terrorism to the Islamic Arab world and has speeded up integration in the fight against terrorism by means of an action plan consisting of more than 60 measures and a series of framework decisions , including the European arrest warrant and police cooperation in the fight against terrorism . It has highlighted the urgent need to find political means to resolve conflicts on which terrorist fanaticism feeds , not least the Israeli-Palestinian question .
The determination to eradicate terrorism and the urgent need to set up new and effective instruments to achieve this cannot , under any circumstances , disproportionately affect individual rights , freedoms and guarantees .
It is the affirmation of the intangibility of fundamental rights that underpins a public authority 's legitimacy to use force in democracies .
By the same token , the relentless fight against the terrorist threat must be definitively limited under international law .
Totalitarian societies hold the primacy of the law in contempt both at national level and in international relations .
The concept of international legality is the invention of democracies .
If the States that have fallen victim to terrorism react to this threat by breaching the rules and principles of international law , they will be giving the criminals an unexpected boost , which would also constitute a step backwards for civilisation .
The fanatical hatred that leads human beings to attack others and to commit suicide is often fed by ongoing situations of injustice or humiliation .
This fact must not be interpreted as any kind of justification for the odious attacks against civilian populations but as a factor that is crucial to understanding this phenomenon of violence .
At the strictly European level , we must here emphasise and condemn the inability and lack of will persistently demonstrated by the governments of the Member States to follow up the proposal to harmonise policies and to create common instruments to combat terrorism that were put forward , in a timely manner , by the Commission .
Terrorism is a threat that requires an integrated and supranational response .
Within European territory , this response is still failing to give sufficient signs of life .
Mr President , nothing justifies the use of terrorism .
Equally importantly , there should be no ambivalence about this evil .
But , regrettably , this is not always the case .
When the United States justifiably initiates a global campaign against organisations responsible for terrorism and the regimes that sponsor it , it is important for us to remind them that they allied themselves to Osama Bin Laden and Saddam Hussein when it suited their foreign policy objectives .
In addition , condemnation of terrorism rings hollow when they fail to take a strong line against the incidences of state terrorism committed by Israel , which have the potential to create future generations of terrorists in that region .
Just as I would criticise the United States , I am not blind to the inconsistency of the EU on these issues - the Council in particular .
For example , during the present global fight against terrorism we have , on occasions , turned a blind eye to the shortcomings of the undemocratic regimes we have enlisted to support us .
Whether for geopolitical reasons , in the case of Pakistan , or giving precedence to trading interests over human rights , in the case of China , we have at times failed to take a strong and consistent line against countries whose very structures of government are based on instilling fear in their citizens .
They flout democratic principles , abuse human rights and ignore the rule of law .
Inconsistency and hypocrisy such as this leaves the West in general open to the charge that it is selective in its definition of terrorism and is primarily influenced by the perceived threat to western interests .
A global fight against terrorism will be successful only if it is free of inconsistency and hypocrisy in its approach and if it tackles the injustices that feed terrorism in the first place .
Madam President , we may be horrified , but we should not be surprised by the nature of recent acts of terrorism .
Terrorists have no power if they do not inspire fear .
The more outrageous , shocking , unexpected and attention-grabbing an attack is , the greater its success .
Yet there are still those who seek to apologise for the terrorists and try to establish some sort of moral equivalency between terrorist acts and , for example , the actions of the security forces of the democracies engaged in counter-terrorism .
Terrorism needs to be addressed by a range of policy instruments , only one of which is military force .
The area where our democracies have traditionally been weakest has been in attacking the legitimacy of the terrorists and fighting them politically in a systematic and well-targeted manner .
This aspect is not well understood .
We never fought the IRA politically , because we were never clear on our own political objectives .
Now we have IRA terrorists in government .
Too often by our actions we enhance the credibility and status of terrorists and thereby encourage terrorism .
The message of recent years is that terrorism works .
That is a fatal message .
The resolution contains some elements that are indisputable , but it is very skewed and contains the usual ingredients of anti-Americanism , excessive concern with the rights of terrorists and extremists and those that support them , and further support for the federalist ambitions of the European Union .
We have heard a lot of this from other speakers as well .
I do not accept the implied condemnation of pre-emptive action in today 's dangerous world where weapons of mass destruction may be made available to irrational and fanatical terrorists .
Deterrence does not necessarily work .
We cannot wait for an attack to take place before we act .
This would be a dereliction of duty by any government .
The reference in paragraph 4 of the resolution to the right of self-defence is incorrect and a distortion of the United Nations Charter .
Article 51 of the UN Charter states that ' nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations . '
There are 12 pages in this resolution and it adds very little , either to our knowledge or our capabilities .
Where is the call for political solidarity and enhanced cooperation among all the democracies ?
Where is the demand for improved military capabilities and greater political will by European states and where are the measures to be taken against those that support terrorism ?
This is what is required .
Madam President , I should like to express my thanks for a long and exciting debate , and I should like to make a couple of comments .
Many have talked about the balance we need to find between the effective combating of terrorism , on the one hand , and consideration for citizens ' rights on the other .
If we wish to create an international community founded on the rule of law , in which states bring matters before the courts instead of taking the law into their own hands , what is also required is the resolve to act - if necessary using force - against those powers which , using violence and terror , try to drain the lifeblood of open , democratic and constitutional states . There is of course a need to be able to cooperate in taking such resolute action .
I do not believe that preventive action can be excluded if there are clear indications of impending attack or of exposure to terrorism or such like .
It may , then , make sense , of course , to prevent such an attack or strike .
With regard to the EU 's role and position , I want to say that we are actively involved in this confrontation with international terrorism .
We want to see the people responsible brought before the courts so that their crimes can be discovered in the course of a procedure that complies with the principles of the rule of law governing fair trials .
In the EU , we are very aware of the fact that the combating of terrorism must not involve infringements of human rights .
Just as the end must not justify the means and can never legitimise terrorism , so the end must not justify the means in our fight against terrorism .
With regard to financial resources , the Council has , as a follow-up to Resolution 1373 , taken steps to freeze funds belonging to terrorists and terrorist organisations .
The first terrorist lists were adopted in December of last year .
Since then , the EU 's terrorist list has been revised twice during the Spanish Presidency , and a further revision is anticipated in the very near future during the Danish Presidency .
It would be wrong to comment on possible changes until the list is ready , so I shall avoid doing that .
As quite a few rapporteurs have also mentioned , the relationship between the EU and the United States is basically rock-solid and founded upon a community of values .
We are each other 's most important partners , cooperating politically , militarily , economically and culturally , and 11 September has bound us together more closely .
We need the United States , and the United States needs us .
What binds us together is more important that what divides us .
At the extraordinary Council meeting on 21 September of last year , we sent a strong signal of solidarity and cooperation to the United States .
It is binding upon us , and it has been a success that will now hopefully be crowned by the signing of an agreement on mutual legal assistance and extradition .
It is the case in this field as in others that , when the EU and the United States stand shoulder to shoulder , there is a lot we can do for justice and freedom in the world .
It is crucial that we maintain the close cooperation with the United States , both in this and other areas , and we must of course constantly work to ensure that the United States chooses to act multilaterally rather than unilaterally .
I would just like to say on behalf of the Commission that I am sure that one can conclude from this debate that the measures that have been taken at European level and in the Member States concerning the fight against terrorism have been adopted with a strict respect for the rule of law and the characteristics of an open society .
Nobody can criticise the measures adopted by the Union or the Member States as being emergency or exceptional rules .
They are fully integrated into our common legal framework .
Of course , they demonstrate that democracy is not weak when it comes to fighting organised crime or terrorism .
A perception by citizens that democracy is not efficient enough in fighting terrorism and organised crime is one possible source of disaffection .
As Commissioner Patten said , terrorism represents a transnational global threat , requiring transnational global answers .
This fact is slowly being accepted by the Member States .
We cannot deal with terrorism as if it was business as usual .
We need to use police and judicial tools , but they are not enough .
We also need to mobilise military and other resources .
We need exchanges of intelligence at European level .
You know from your own national experience how difficult it can be to ensure proper exchange of intelligence between police forces and secret services in your own Member States .
The cooperation between intelligence-gathering services and police forces at European level in the fight against terrorism since 11 September can be successful .
However , we need to recognise that there are two other very important areas .
The first is the fight against the financing of terrorism , which is much more complex .
It requires extra efforts .
The Commission will give priority to this issue in 2003 .
Secondly , multilateral action .
We share Parliament 's view that we should give priority to this .
The United Nations is the first stage .
It is a source of concern that the negotiation of a global convention on terrorism is currently blocked in the United Nations .
We must not forget the important role of the Council of Europe in the fight against terrorism .
I hope that the negotiations in progress in the Council of Europe on a convention on terrorism will be successful .
In the dialogue with the United States of America on the fight against terrorism and on police and judicial cooperation , we should recognise the important contribution the American debate on civil liberties can make to our own European debate on fundamental rights and civil liberties .
We should not minimise the ongoing debate in the United States on those key issues or leave them isolated .
That is why we are engaged in a dialogue with the United States on a mutual legal assistance agreement and an extradition agreement in which we defend our own points of view and our values .
We will also test the political will of the United States to accept and respect our positions .
The test case for Mr Pomés Ruiz in the implementation of the decisions taken at European level will come fairly shortly .
As you know , the framework decision on terrorism will have to be transposed into the national laws of the Member States by the end of this year and the European arrest warrant by the beginning of 2004 .
However , seven Member States have , as you know , committed themselves to adopting the European arrest warrant in their legal systems in the first half of 2003 .
The Commission can only encourage them to stick to those commitments .
Thank you , Commissioner .
To conclude this statement , I have received four motions for resolutions , tabled pursuant to Rule 137 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The recent attacks by Islamic extremists in Bali , Yemen and Kuwait are confirmation that the community of States must now wage a constant battle against the desire and capacity for destruction of a number of non-State actors .
Inter-state cooperation must therefore be carried out more actively , so that Islamic extremists can have no sanctuary .
It seems that the overthrow of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan was only an initial stage in this battle , which must be conducted first and foremost within our own States .
In this respect , Commissioner Patten , who is so generous in doling out advice to non-European countries , should first ask himself about the welcome that terrorist organisations in the British system are given .
Far from advocating increased vigilance and enhanced cooperation amongst our Member States , the motion for a joint resolution sets off in a dangerous direction by recommending greater use of the quartet method , which could eventually lead to the Security Council being bypassed .
And the same resolution becomes laughable when it attempts to persuade us that one of the main challenges in combating terrorism could be the three-pillar structure of the Treaty on European Union !
Any subject , even terrorism , can be exploited in order to advance the federalist cause .

Madam President , with his wise concluding words , Mr Vitorino has not only rounded off the previous debate in the best possible way but has actually also paved the way for the debate we are now to have .
It is well over a year since the European Parliament adopted a decision on the existence of a global system for intercepting private and commercial communications - what is known as the Echelon interception system .
The decision states that there is no longer any doubt about the existence of a worldwide system for intercepting communications .
The decision was based upon a report from the Temporary Committee on the Echelon Interception System .
The report drew attention to a number of arrangements for protecting private individuals and enterprises in the EU .
In my view , this is a very comprehensive and commendable piece of work .
The report has done a lot to contribute to there having been particular awareness of this area in the EU , the Member States and the national parliaments .
As a Member of the European Parliament , I had the pleasure of participating in one of the hearings held by the Committee .
The focus that there has been on the ability to intercept communications with a view to obtaining commercial advantages has also helped the people of Europe and European companies to appreciate the need to protect communications .
In connection with Parliament 's reading of the report , the then Belgian Presidency 's contribution dealt with the basic principles that ought to apply to any interception system .
In this context , the Presidency referred , for example , to the central principles for protecting privacy and the right to free communication , expressed in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 7 of the European Union 's Charter .
I should like to refer to what the then Belgian Presidency said about the matter .
My approach will be a different one .
In my capacity as representative of the Presidency of the Council , I want to focus on the protection of our communications .
Unfortunately , we must of course take account of the fact that technological development has , to a much greater extent than previously , made it technically possible to intercept our communications .
Unlawful interception of private communications or the surveillance of companies for the purpose of distorting competition is naturally unacceptable and a serious offence , and it is therefore important for the Member States , both individually and in a European context , to be aware of the possibility of this form of surveillance and to go on working to achieve the best possible protection of people 's and companies ' communications .
Work is already being done in an EU context to increase the security of communications for the individual .
This has most recently found expression in the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector .
It is the Presidency 's view that , over and above this , efforts should be made to obtain an increased use of encryption , just as there should be a focus upon IT security , both in the EU institutions and in the nation states .
IT security is a top priority in the common European action plan , ' eEurope 2005 ' , which covers , for example , the development of secure communications used for the secure exchange of qualified public information within the Community .
The action plan is also aimed at promoting a security culture in all areas in which work is done on developing and using information and communications systems .
Finally , the action plan also includes the establishment of a Cyber Security Task Force which , in cooperation with the Member States and the private sector , is to operate as a catalyst for initiatives in the security area .
The Danish Presidency believes it is important for the initiatives in the ' eEurope 2005 ' action plan to be put into practice .
Allow me to note in conclusion that the Presidency would also like to work towards a Council resolution 's being adopted , aimed at establishing a common strategy for network and information security with a view to establishing a common European security culture .
The proposal for a resolution calls , for example , upon the Member States to ensure that IT security becomes an essential feature of the individual countries ' rules , just as the Member States should adopt satisfactory measures to prevent and respond to events involving security .
Finally , the proposal calls upon the Member States to encourage partnership between the university world and companies , with a view to bringing about secure technology and maintenance .
Madam President , little more than a year ago we gathered in this House to discuss the outcome of the proceedings of the Temporary Committee on Echelon .
A few days later , on 11 September , the entire world was in shock .
The world changed .
The role of network and information security proved to be crucial .
We also found that European society was increasingly vulnerable to problems related to network and information security .
Before responding to the main concerns raised by the European Parliament , I would like stress , as I did last year , a strong and solid underlying principle : the European Union is founded on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , based on Article 6 of the Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is important also to keep in mind that Member States remain responsible for the conduct and supervision of intelligence operations , unless the Council decides otherwise , as specified in Title V of the Treaty on the European Union .
With the rapid spread of information technology , economic growth , productivity , employment and social equity have come to depend increasingly on the smooth operation of ICTs .
In today 's debate , network and information security is about ensuring the availability of services and data , preventing the disruption and unauthorised interception of communications , securing the confidentiality of data and protecting information systems against unauthorised access .
Full security will never be achievable .
There will always be weak points , attacks , incidents and failures that will generate damage .
This is no different from other technologies or other aspects of daily life .
Society as a whole , as well as individuals , has to learn how to manage the risks involved in the networks and information systems .
Security has therefore become a major policy concern .
Governments have wider responsibilities towards society and are making efforts to improve security on their territory .
This was the underlying objective of the Commission Communication on Network and Information Security , which proposed a number of measures , such as awareness-raising actions and improved exchange of information mechanisms .
One example of awareness raising is the benchmarking of national policies in support of secure e-business .
The newly adopted eEurope 2005 Action Plan aims to strengthen the exchange of information and good practice , to establish a European centre of competence , to create a culture of security and to establish a secure communication environment .
We need to assign responsibilities to all the sectors involved in information and communication technologies in order to create a culture of security .
The Council resolution of 28 January 2002 on a common approach and specific actions in the area of network and information security also developed this concept further .
It welcomes the intention of the Commission to make proposals for the establishment of a cyber security task force .
The European Parliament has dealt with the issue by preparing a report on the Commission 's policy proposal , which was adopted yesterday , calling for a strong European answer to the increasing information security problem .
With the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission advocating closer European coordination , the setting up of a ' security entity ' , as the most efficient way to achieve this objective , is now under consideration .
The proposal being considered at present suggests a number of issues , interests and concerns that are addressed by Parliament .
Based on those concerns , the following measures may be suggested : a centre of expertise should be set up , bringing together competent people that will be trusted by public bodies and national and Community institutions , as well as by the private sector ; will help to establish internationally recognised standards ; and will be able to act efficiently and quickly .
Sufficient human and financial resources will therefore be necessary to enable smooth and flexible operation , as will a coherent approach - including cross-pillar dimensions - since security also touches upon certain issues related to law enforcement and national security concerns .
Let me turn now to data protection .
Article 17 of the general data protection directive contains the principle of data security .
The new directive on the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector was adopted last July .
It will provide a high level of protection for processed personal data .
It includes a provision that requires Member States to guarantee confidentiality of communications and to prohibit any form of interception .
However , Member States can , according to the European Convention on Human Rights , take measures where this is necessary to safeguard national or public security interests or to investigate crime and prosecute criminal offences .
The Commission has launched initiatives to ensure compatibility between data protection and privacy rules on the one hand and law enforcement needs on the other .
With this in view , an EU Forum on Cyber-Crime has been set up .
As far as the interception of telecommunications for criminal investigation purposes is concerned , the Commission believes that the interception rules in the EU Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters constitute , at the current stage , a balanced approach .
The dual-use regulation , which includes export control provisions for information security products and services , in place since September 2000 , guarantees the availability and free circulation of encryption products and technologies throughout the European Union .
Its implementation has been successful , and the Commission is currently discussing the complex issue of export controls with candidate countries .
As for the technology itself , support through the Community 's framework research programme , in particular the information society technologies programme , has improved the conditions for developing top-of-the-range encryption products .
This brings me to the activities undertaken to improve our in-house information and communication systems .
Following the adoption of the regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions , a wide-ranging security review took place .
As a result , a Commission decision has been adopted containing security provisions and extensive rules on IT security .
This decision substantially improves the protection of Commission documents which are not accessible to the general public .
It further defines the various responsibilities of actors , including security clearance of personnel and security briefings .
Furthermore , a Commission-wide technical auditing process has been carried out .
Action to improve the situation is ongoing .
As you see , we have achieved quite a lot already , but there is still a substantial amount of work to be done .
The recently adopted data protection directive , the report from the European Parliament on the proposed information security policy , the eEurope 2005 Action Plan and the plans to establish a European cyber security unit will further lay down the modalities for future work in the area of network and information security .
But enhanced cooperation is also needed globally .
As an example of this cooperation , it is worth mentioning that the Commission was extensively involved in the drawing up of the recently adopted OECD guidelines on the security of information systems and networks .
These guidelines emphasise the importance of applying certain common principles for information security , underpin the work which is taking place at European level and are in line with the ' culture of security ' principle as addressed in the eEurope 2005 Action Plan .
In December , the Telecommunication Council will debate and monitor the status of implementation of the common European strategy on network and information security , an issue the Danish presidency sees as a top priority .
Through these actions by the European institutions and Member States , we hope to sharpen the focus and step up efforts on network and information security as a vital measure to prevent illegal interception or economic espionage , underpinning the smooth functioning of our economies and societies .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to confine myself to making a few comments to the Commission .
As you know , a year ago the Echelon Committee tabled its final report .
The work was also widely praised .
Even when we were still drafting the report , however , it was already clear that the Commission was treating the matter like the famous three monkeys who , in the Buddhist tradition , are supposed to report on mankind at the Koshin festival in accordance with the dictum , ' Hear no evil , see no evil , speak no evil ' .
One year on we might almost add , ' and do not do very much either ' , because so far the Commission has not acted to remedy very many of the shortcomings or implement many of the tasks described in the report .
Commissioner , you will be aware of what we call on the Commission to do in items 27 to 44 of the report .
The question that is still outstanding is : what have you done about informing the public and companies of the dangers posed by Echelon ?
What have you done to ensure that e-mails within the Commission are systematically encrypted ?
And what has been done about training Commission staff in new technologies and encryption ?
It is not enough to introduce new technologies ; you have to provide further training for staff as well .
Your data protection directives , which are very important and very far-reaching , are actually only of limited interest here .
There too the question is : what has happened within the Commission ?
You said that you had adopted a decision .
Nevertheless , I see no evidence that the Commission has in the meantime carried out the security analysis that we requested , which actually also requires the development of a comprehensive system for classifying people and documents so as to protect secrets .
That was clear from what you said .
My question , then , is : who is responsible for this in the Commission ?
I remember very well the time that you sent Mr Perkins to see us .
He was the head of the Commission 's encryption service .
He could certainly tell us how advanced the cryptographic hardware was , but could not tell us anything about general security standards in the Commission .
Clearly there was nobody who was really responsible for this , and - at least this is my feeling - there is still nobody today either .
Or , Commissioner , are you or one of the Directorates-General responsible for ensuring that documents are continuously classified ? Do you intervene in personnel issues and classify people so as to guarantee security in the Commission ?
Nowadays , every national institution has someone who is in charge of protecting secret information and does precisely these tasks .
Do you now have such a person in your Commission , someone who is also responsible for raising awareness of possible attacks by the Echelon system ?
Or are you actually still working with a British fax encryption system , Commissioner ?
I almost fear that the answer is yes , because you did not say anything about this .
That is why we are going to give you a helping hand by adopting a new resolution and , Commissioner , should progress on this continue to be as disappointing as it has been so far , and should our points continue to be almost ignored , then we would also have to reach an understanding on the basis of the forthcoming Commission discharge .
Our instructions to you will be on the table very shortly .
I urge you to act on them !
I should like to concur with the comments made by Mr von Boetticher , which spawned a huge number of questions last year .
Parliament made a host of recommendations to the Commission and the Council to which we have never actually received a response .
I assume that other Members will also be expanding on this point .
I should like to focus on one aspect of last year 's debate .
In the resolution we adopted last year on the worldwide interception of telecommunications , a great deal of attention was devoted to the political importance of international cooperation on the part of the intelligence services .
An important point in that debate was that the vast majority of this Parliament is not opposed to interception per se and that intelligence services are necessary even in a democracy .
In the report drawn up by the temporary committee , it was emphasised that effective intelligence services are necessary in our modern society .
Not only in the fight against terrorism and international crime , but also as a key element in the development of our own European security policy .
If we want to accomplish autonomous capacity in the area of defence and our own intervention force within the framework of the Petersberg tasks , then the ability and capacity to gather intelligence forms part of this .
This is why the European Parliament has called for better European cooperation in this area and better democratic control over the functioning of intelligence services .
According to our report , this aspect too leaves a great deal to be desired in a number of countries .
Under pressure from international terrorism and the events of last year , cooperation between the intelligence services seems to have improved , not only within the European Union but also with the United States .
With regard to democratic control , however , little appears to have changed .
European citizens are entitled to know that the privacy enshrined in their national legislation is also protected in the event of international cooperation between the intelligence services .
European citizens and companies must be able to rely on the confidentiality of their communications being guaranteed in the same way across the EU .
They must be given the guarantee that European intelligence services are not misused to steal company secrets but to fight criminal activities effectively .
Needless to say , we should like to thank Commissioner Liikanen for informing this House about the technical aspects of the worldwide interception of communications on behalf of the Commission .
It is , however , regrettable , that Commissioner Patten is not here to inform us further about the international aspects I mentioned a moment ago .
Without sufficient clarity on this score , EU policy is not only incomplete but also lacks credibility .
Council and Commissioner , Mr Haarder spoke very clearly about the need for protecting communications and also stated that technology allows the communications to be tapped on a large scale .
Not only does this technology make this possible , it is also being done , as was illustrated from our inquiry .
I then ask myself what we are doing about this .
Mr Liikanen mentioned the Charter of constitutional rights , but the Liberal group was quite firm in its belief that a legal framework is necessary in order to curb illegal tapping practices and to clearly define legal interception with effective control at European level .
The Liberal group opted for a dual-track approach in this respect , namely the protection of the rights and privacy of the individual citizen on the one hand , and the safeguarding of the EU 's economic interests by means of measures to prevent industrial espionage on the other .
We also proposed specific measures .
Instead , the Justice and Home Affairs Council is now talking about far-reaching competences of the Member States for data storage of both telecommunications and the Internet .
Who actually protects our citizens against the authorities ?
My next point is that we also asked for very specific measures to stimulate awareness among citizens and the business community .
This includes the development of European encryption software and security analysis .
I would now ask both the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner : what is actually being done about this , what has been accomplished so far and what is in the pipeline on this score ?
I do in fact have the feeling that little is being done about any of our recommendations , and I should like to draw your attention once again to Mrs Flesch 's remark directed at Commissioner Liikanen .
Madam President , until a few years ago , any attempt at dialogue with the Council or the Commission over Echelon would be cut short on the pretext that it was just a rumour in the press on which there was no comment to be made .
After the work of the Echelon committee , the European Union finally acknowledged this interception system exists , and the subject of this debate - as Mrs Flesch rightly pointed out at the beginning of the debate - is Echelon .
Nothing more , nothing less , so let us not beat about the bush .
I have nothing more to say , except that , having heard Mr von Boetticher and all the other Members speak , I associate myself with what they have said and agree with them , for they have already given a comprehensive picture of what was not done after that work had been carried out .
We poured time and human resources into the issue but we have very little to show for it , for , until today , neither the Commission nor the Council have made any effort to protect the citizens .
There is another dimension to the problem : companies and institutions , with all the human and material resources available to them , are quite able to protect themselves , but the real message of the Echelon committee was that the citizens and their privacy need to be protected , that there is a fundamental right to privacy .
Well then , thus far , nothing has been done in Europe in this area and I feel that the failure of the institutions and Parliament itself to take any practical steps regarding Echelon and the matter of interception of communications damages their legitimacy .
The legitimacy of our institutions is truly diminished by this .
If I may be so bold , it is my opinion that the Council and the Commission should , at least , consider drawing up a framework decision protecting the citizens from arbitrary interception of communications and giving them the right to plead their cause before a court , to appeal to a national court for prosecution of these types of interception .
Mr President , like other speakers , I think it is deplorable that nothing has happened since Parliament 's Echelon report .
People still do not feel adequately protected .
The Council should adopt a framework decision which provides protection against the activities of intelligence services of other Member States or third countries .
The very existence of systems for the indiscriminate interception of communications is a violation of Article 6 of the EU Treaty , as the Commissioner himself has recognised .
It is also essential that an agreement should be negotiated and signed between the European Union and the United States , stipulating that each party should observe the provisions governing protection of the privacy of citizens and the confidentiality of business communications .
My group is strongly opposed to the actions taken by the Council with a view to bringing telecommunications interception capabilities into line with the new technologies .
We particularly oppose the adoption of the directive under which Member States may , inter alia , adopt legislative measures providing for the retention of data for a limited period .
The presidency needs to produce some sort of strategy to bring an end to the existence within the European Union of parallel data protection systems and the proliferation of monitoring authorities - for example Schengen , Europol or customs conventions .
They work on the basis of differing protection standards and outside true democratic and legal scrutiny .
Finally , the promotion of encryption cannot be a substitute for efforts to find political solutions - more strict legal guarantees and effective parliamentary control , for example .
To say that encryption will solve our problems is an admission of failure .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has spent a year undertaking an exhaustive piece of work in the Committee which I had the privilege of chairing .
Many experts were heard , many visits were made and countless documents were studied , culminating in the excellent report by Mr Gerhard Schmid , whose conclusions were approved by an enormous majority in this Parliament .
Almost all of our work was conducted in public , with a few rare exceptions in which the nature of the actions or the bodies being heard required this to take place behind closed doors .
We concluded that an ' Echelon ' network must exist , able to intercept and process communications , involving the United States , the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia and New Zealand .
We clearly stated our concern about the low level of protection given to our individual freedoms against this threat , about the security of communications sent and received by our businesses , and even about ' fair trade ' in the international market .
Furthermore , in this plenary , we adopted 44 recommendations intended mainly for the Council , the Commission and the Member States .
My feeling is that everyone has chosen to forget this report and its conclusions . I can , first of all , only deplore the decision by Parliament 's Bureau not to promote the publication of the report .
And , returning to the Council and the Commission , it is time to state clearly that little activity has been seen this year .
Our situation today vis-à-vis the citizens and our businesses is not substantially different to that of a year ago .
We have even seen a trend that we must definitely combat - and on this matter I must highlight the intervention by Mr Haarder in the previous debate - which is to suggest that the fight against international crime and terrorism is necessarily undertaken at the cost of our freedoms .
I must repeat and emphasise that security is a tool with which to protect our freedom , but when security requirements stifle freedoms we are betraying our fundamental values and fall into tyranny .
I hope that , a year from now , we do not have to come once again before the Council , the Commission and the Member States , and repeat what we have said today : that little has been done and that almost everything is as it was before .
Madam President , I feel that Commissioner Liikanen and Mr Haarder have pulled off a difficult operation successfully , achieving a result that we were unable to achieve even during the work in committee - namely , unanimity in Parliament .
I endorse all they have said thus far but I would like to add a specific point of my own .
We are continuing to focus , as Mr Vattimo did in his last speech , on the Anglo-American system of systematic , blanket interception of communications filtered by search engines , but we are continuing to ignore the fact - and we are all responsible for we all know what is going on - that these systems are also being used in European countries such as Germany , Holland and France .
In actual fact , we have a situation where some Union Member States are intercepting the activities of the institutions , citizens and firms of other Member States .
These indiscriminate systems of data and document interception and communication violate the fundamental right of respect for one 's private life which is enshrined in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
As Commissioner Liikanen stated just now , these systems flagrantly violate the European citizens ' freedoms , and thus undermine the concept of free trade and the security of the Union too .
We consider these violations to be unacceptable , and the Commissioner 's words , tossed as they were into the middle of the debate , will only be sufficient if they are borne out by subsequent action .
I would just like to remind the Commissioner and the Minister of item 9 of Parliament 's recommendations , calling for the adoption of a system of democratic control of the independent European intelligence services - to which we have received no response - and of other related intelligence activities at European level .
Basically , we cannot address such sensitive points relating to the interception of communications and the supervision of police and intelligence services without dealing with a key issue which is a source of discrimination - judicial and parliamentary control , or democratic control .
Madam President , it is good that this debate is taking place here today .
After a year 's work , the Echelon Committee tabled recommendations and requests .
It is only good parliamentary control if we enquire , one year on , what has become of them .
Allow me to make a preliminary remark .
A few days after the debate that we held last year , there was the horrific attack of 11 September on the United States of America .
There were two reactions to this .
Some said that this proved that the interception systems were useless and that they ought to be abolished , while others wanted to put the secret services and their activities out to public tender .
Both reactions are wrong !
The majority of this House was convinced that strategic telecommunications controls could be a useful instrument for intelligence services , provided that legal safeguards and a proper system of checks and balances were in place .
What happened on 11 September does not in any way change our demands for clear legal bases , for parliamentary control and for the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights to be complied with .
Of the range of demands that we made , I should like to highlight the essential aspects for whose implementation the Commission is responsible , and will not therefore mention anything in the field of external policy or at international level .
As Commissioner Liikanen stated , the Commission has done a considerable amount of work on IT security .
If you take a closer look you discover that these are initiatives that would have been necessary in any case because of e-commerce and of the need to support the IT industry .
Parliament had made precise demands , which - at least this is my impression , Commissioner - have not been implemented in full .
Firstly , we wanted open source to be promoted as a basis for the encryption software so that we knew for sure what the software did .
We wanted the Commission to help to distribute the open-source software so that we could be sure that no backdoors were being incorporated into the networks .
The Commission is doing too little here .
Incidentally , the Commission itself , to my disappointment , is not using open-source software either , and neither is Parliament .
As far as protecting confidential information in the Commission is concerned , which is something that we have of course also looked at , Mr Liikanen said that considerable changes had been made here .
This is to be welcomed .
When we took a look at this in the Commission last time , they were still using encryption faxes , with some of the ciphers being generated in Great Britain !
It would be good , Commissioner , if the Commission could offer to convince a few Members of the old committee of its current security standards by inviting them to the Commission to see for themselves .
I understand that you cannot reveal any details in a public debate , but it would be helpful to us to know what has actually happened in this respect in a little more detail .
Madam President , intelligence work is important if the open society is to be defended .
That is why many countries have wisely chosen to strengthen their intelligence services in the light of 11 September , and there is , of course , also cooperation between the individual nations ' intelligence services .
I am , however , obliged to say , ladies and gentlemen , that , as things are at the moment , this is a national concern , and the cooperation that takes place between the countries ' respective services is therefore an intergovernmental concern and not a matter for the Council .
One might wish it otherwise , but that is how matters stand at the moment .
I neither wish nor am able , therefore , to enter into a more detailed discussion of the individual requests in Parliament 's decision from last year .
Like the Belgian Presidency , I am obliged to bear in mind the fact that I am a representative of the Presidency of the Council , and I must focus my contribution and what I say upon those states of affairs that affect the Council or the EU institutions .
The Council is able , and would like , to help strengthen cooperation on the protection of our communications .
That is what I concentrated on in my speech , in which I particularly emphasised encryption as a means of protecting communications .
I have naturally listened with great interest to the debate , just as I listened when , as a Member of this Parliament , I attended a hearing on Echelon , chaired by Mr Gerhard Schmid .
At that time , I was a Member of the European Parliament .
Now , I am a Member of , and spokesman for , the Council , and I am obliged to stick to what , for the time being , is the Council 's , and therefore my own , role .
I appreciate that Parliament does not find the EU 's efforts in this field to be sufficient , and that is something of which I have taken note .
It is something I naturally take on board , but I am not in a position in which I can tell my esteemed colleagues that , yes , we shall do this or that .
I do not have a mandate for saying that , and that is something I think Mr Gerhard Schmid too knows even better than I do .
Madam President I wish to reply to two comments , one by Mrs Flesch and one by Mr von Boetticher .
Mrs Flesch , I mentioned Echelon exactly as many times as it was mentioned in Parliament 's resolution .
It was mentioned only once in the resolution because the resolution concentrated specifically on the information network security measures .
As regards the concrete measures , I have a bad habit of adhering to Parliament 's time-limits and I used nine minutes fifty-seven seconds out of the allotted ten minutes .
There are 70 measures .
That means I would have 20 seconds for each .
But as I have been asked , I will go through them all .
I hope you will listen to what we have done .
On paragraph 27 , the Commission 's proposal for a cyber security task force will come in early December or in November , if we are lucky .
This will create a network of experts in the field and also computer emergency response teams .
This applies to both paragraphs 27 and 28 .
Paragraph 29 concerns research work on encryption technology .
I have personally guaranteed that it will have higher priority in the IST programme under the Sixth Framework Programme .
We have just given instructions to our committees .
Open-source encryption software is a higher priority in FP6 .
Thirdly , on the promotion of open-source software , I personally organised an IDA - interchange of data between administrations - conference and Member States were invited to look at how open-source software can be used in public administrations .
It was a great success .
I have one comment to make on open-source .
Remember , if the source code is open for developers then it is also open for interceptors .
So it does not solve all the problems , but I am very much in favour of it .
Paragraph 31 concerns standardisation .
You said that nothing has been done .
You are wrong .
I have tasked European standardisation organisations to work on this issue .
Their working group on NIS was set up in June 2002 .
The aim is to determine the need for new security standards , to improve security policy .
Paragraphs 32 and 34 call for European institutions and the public administrations of the Member States systematically to encrypt e-mails .
There are now a number of measures in the Commission 's strategy which are based on preventing intrusion into the Commission 's internal network , ensuring a good overall level of security .
The sensitivity of the data called for special solutions .
The budget in that area is still limited , only EUR 1 million .
I hope the budgetary authority will be more helpful and increase the allocation .
Paragraph 34 calls for particular attention to be paid to the position of the applicant countries .
We have opened discussions with the specific aim of finding solutions for technology-neutral electronic signature .
We have also initiated research programmes for the candidate countries .
Paragraphs 36 , 37 and 39 concern our internal decisions .
As I said earlier , the Commission has conducted an internal audit to detect any flaws in the configuration of servers , primary domain controllers , personal computers and webservers .
A new decision on the Commission 's security provisions was taken in November 2001 .
Our security directorate has drafted a new information systems security programme .
A specific decision was recently taken on the external delegations , as a result of which we have modernised and extended the cypher system for secure data communications between headquarters and Commission delegations worldwide .
In paragraph 40 , you call on the Commission and Member States to invest in new technologies in the field of decryption and encryption techniques as part of the Sixth Framework Programme .
That will be a major priority .
Paragraph 42 calls on the Commission to put forward a proposal to establish a coordinated network of advisory centres .
That is exactly what the cyber-security task force is proposing .
I am fully prepared to accept criticism , but if you say that nothing has happened , then I must be a very bad communicator .
At any rate I will send Members of Parliament the information in writing .
We are working in an extremely difficult field .
Mr Schmid , who was the rapporteur on this very complex subject , concentrated on general network and information security network issues , not just on Echelon .
I have replied on those issues where you have given the Commission specific tasks . Many tasks have been assigned to Member States and , on those , Member States will reply directly .
Madam President , on a point of order , I appreciate the Commissioner 's answer , which is very clear , but he said that he had organised a special meeting on open software to stimulate the use of open software by the public sector .
My question is what is the Commission itself doing ?
Is it also going to switch to working only with open software , so that for us too there is more protection in this field ?
Madam President , we have taken some action in that area and work is going on at departmental level , rather than on the desk tops .
I will check this with my colleague who is running an in-house computer system and will reply in writing to the honourable Member about the exact situation at present .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0494 / 2002 ) .
We shall hear questions to the Council .
Mr Ortuondo Larrea has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to say that the words of the speaker who preceded me are inadmissible .
They are inadmissible , with reference to a complaint tabled correctly by me with regard to discriminatory treatment , without making any reference to the content of any question , for the discriminatory treatment received by the Members to be mixed up with a situation in the Basque country that , I am sad to say , is due precisely to the narrow-mindedness and lack of democracy we suffer in the Spanish State .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will understand that , despite my origins as Member for the Spanish electoral region , which is an honour , I must speak here solely in my capacity as President of the sitting , in Questions to the Council .
I would probably have liked to take part in this debate , but we do not have that right , least of all me .
And therefore , the President-in-Office of the Council - to whom I apologise for this delay - is going to answer the question tabled by Mr Nogueira Román .
Question No 1 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0606 / 02 ) :
Subject : Milk production in the Commission 's proposed revision of the CAP
For a country like Galicia , which accounts for a large part of Spanish milk production , possesses an agricultural structure based on small family farms ( and therefore ideal for sustainable rural development ) , and has in recent decades made an extraordinary effort to modernise the milk production sector , the CAP reform should encourage increased milk production , with the goal of covering the needs of the Peninsular market at the very least .
While provision should be made for a transition period during which the intervention price is maintained .
Does the Council believe that an arrangement of this type is compatible with the options provided for in the proposed post-2008 CAP reform ?
For countries in Galicia 's position , could these arrangements be brought into force before 2008 ?
Mr President , on 12 July of this year , the Commission issued a communication on the Mid-term Review of the Common Agricultural Policy and a working document on the dairy sector .
Apart from these two documents , the Council has not tabled formal proposals for changing the current rules governing the various common organisations of the market or , therefore , those governing the common organisation of the market in dairy products .
As soon as the Commission , which of course has the right of initiative , has presented the Council with the proposals for which it believes there is a need , the Council will give the matter its full attention and will , in any case , take account of Parliament 's statement before a decision is made .
The Council has taken note of the various reports accompanying the Commission 's communication on the Mid-term Review and , as recently as this month , held a thorough debate on , for example , dairy products .
That debate took , as its starting point , a number of questions put to the Presidency and was aimed at clarifying the key issues .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to say that , were it not for the obstacles put in the way of the Spanish State and of Galicia , my country could achieve a level of milk production similar to that of Ireland or Denmark , whereas today it produces only 1.8 million tonnes .
In any event , it would be able to meet its own requirements and double its level of production .
Bearing this in mind and taking account of the farming structure in Galicia , which is based on family ownership , with a clear focus on milk production , I wish to ask the President-in-Office of the Council : would the Council accept specific measures - that could also be applied to another country - that would enable Galicia to increase its production whilst temporarily maintaining the intervention price system ?
Mr President , it is the Commission that has the right of initiative .
That is why it is the Commission that must come up with a proposal .
Subsequently , the Council will deal with the matter and , as I said , also take account of Parliament 's views before a decision is made .
The fact that Mr Nogueira has raised the matter today may therefore , in fact , have been very useful .
Question No 2 by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0608 / 02 ) :
Subject : Declaration by the EU Presidency concerning the island of Perejil
On 13 July 2002 , the EU Presidency issued a declaration in which it voiced its concern over the situation created by Morocco on the island of Perejil , expressed its full solidarity with Spain and urged Morocco to immediately withdraw its forces .
The Presidency 's action on behalf of a Member State is to be welcomed .
However , I assume the Presidency is unaware that some Spanish historians claim Spain has no right or title to this island , which was occupied by Spanish troops for defensive purposes until the early 1960s , when these forces were withdrawn as part of the winding-up of the Spanish Protectorate of Morocco following that country 's independence in 1956 .
Does the Presidency not believe that the Spanish Government has overstepped the mark in sending a substantial military force to occupy this tiny island , which Morocco considered to be an act of war , and that the best thing for the European Union to do would be to advocate that the International Court of Justice in the Hague should settle the issue of the sovereignty of Perejil ?
Does it not feel that there is a contradiction in Spain claiming sovereignty over Gibraltar from the United Kingdom when it rejects Morocco 's claims over this island and other possessions in Africa ?
Mr President , this is a matter I remember very clearly , for it was first raised at the same time that Denmark took up the Presidency .
At the beginning of July , we all followed with great concern the developments surrounding this small island .
There was no doubt about the current status of the island , which had been agreed .
There was an understanding between Spain and Morocco to the effect that the island should remain uninhabited and without any sign of sovereignty on the part of either side .
When Morocco infringed this understanding and this status , the Danish Presidency issued a statement expressing its concern about the situation , as well as solidarity with Spain .
At the same time , a strongly worded request was made to Morocco to withdraw its forces .
The Council was delighted at the fact that the new Spanish Foreign Minister , Mrs Palacio , who had just come to the Council from Parliament , had met her Moroccan opposite number in Rabat immediately after the episode and that they had confirmed the desire to return to the earlier status quo .
The Danish Presidency is confident that this and subsequent meetings will help promote the close relations between Spain and Morocco .
On behalf of the Council , I should like to emphasise that , traditionally , the EU 's relations with Morocco have been generally sound .
Great progress has been made in recent years , and the mutual cooperation has been extended in many areas , from trade to sensitive issues such as immigration - all on the basis of the association agreement that came into force two and a half years ago .
Mr President , I could not dream of answering that question .
It has nothing to do with what I was asked about and is an issue that the Council absolutely cannot have an opinion about .
Mr President , that is of course what I was suggesting in my first answer .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0610 / 02 ) :
Subject : Dramatic decline in the income of cotton producers in Greece
Owing to particularly favourable weather conditions , cotton production in Greece was abundant in the 2001-2002 season .
Due to the implementation of the new arrangements and the unlimited ' penalties ' provided for in Regulation 1051 / 2001 / EC
Thank you , Mr President , for briefly stating what the question is about .
I often think it must be odd to be listening and not to know what question it is that is being answered .
Thank you , therefore , for that bit of educational guidance .
I should like to draw attention to the fact that last year 's Council Regulation No 1051 came into force , according to Article 23 of that same regulation , on 1 June 2001 .
The Council cannot alter a provision in a legal act without a proposal to that effect having been tabled by the Commission .
I should also like to remind the honourable Member that it is the Commission that is to use the procedure in Article 21 of the regulation I mentioned , and that is something the Commission has already done in adopting transitional measures .
Nor has the Council received any request from a Member State along the lines referred to by the honourable Member .
We have strayed from the point with the Basques and Spain . This is an explosive issue because Greek cotton growers are in absolute despair about this regulation , coming as it does right in the middle of the growing season .
I have listened to the minister 's reply , I have heard that not one government has called for transitional measures and I merely wish to ask the minister if the Council is prepared to approve national subsidies to save thousands of small and medium-sized cotton farms in Greece , if it intends to allow Greece to pay national aid to make up what is , for them , a totally inadequate , ruinous income .
I can safely say in reply that a proposal by the Commission is also , of course , required for a solution such as the one intimated here , and I do not believe that there is any Member State that has requested such a proposal .
More than that I am unable to say .
I should like to follow on from the question put by Mr Alavanos in connection with the 2001-2002 harvest , which is now a fait accompli .
The problem is that this situation does not only affect last year 's harvest , it also affects subsequent harvests .
This year 's cotton is being harvested as we speak .
For the second year running , producers are tearing their hair out because the Greek government has arbitrarily set production at 275 kilograms per decare , whereas output is much higher and no-one knows what will become of it .
In February 2001 , this House voted almost unanimously for an increase in cotton production because the European Union has a 70 % deficit .
Not only has the Greek government made no attempt to push this European Parliament resolution through , so as to protect Greek cotton growers and their produce ; it has , as you have heard , been in an untimely hurry to apply the new regulation and has refused to make use of the European Parliament resolution .
Mr President , I call on you to stand up for us here and I call on the Council representative to take a stand on the Greek cotton farmers ' request for an immediate overhaul of this disastrous regulation in order to protect farmers facing ruin and their product , which has the status of a national product in Greece .
Mr President , I am obliged to refer to what I have just said .
The rules of procedure are quite clear .
It is the Commission that , in particular cases , must put forward such proposals and , as I said , there is no Member State that has requested a proposal .
Under no circumstances am I able to say any more about this , but Members of the European Parliament are of course always justified in raising matters important to them .
I most definitely cannot blame them for doing so .
Question No 4 by Bart Staes ( H-0612 / 02 ) :
Subject : Binding nature of the European Union Code of Conduct on arms exports
In June 1998 , the Council reached agreement on a European Union Code of Conduct on arms exports .
That code is not binding .
Inter alia , Member States are asked , when refusing authorisation , to indicate the country of destination , the merchandise involved and the end user .
Only recently , the FN-Herstal arms company , of which the Walloon Region is a shareholder , delivered 5 500 semi-automatics to an unknown end user .
What steps will the Council take in order to make the agreed Code of Conduct legally binding and to force firms such as FN-Herstal to publish the information required under the Code of Conduct , including in instances where delivery is authorised ?
Decisions concerning the authorisation of export licences are taken individually by each particular Member State , with full account being taken of the Code of Conduct on arms exports and the criteria established in this Code .
The implementation of arms export policies and , therefore , of the Code too continues to be the responsibility of the Member States .
The Council has not been made aware of the situation referred to by the honourable Member in his question .
In any case , the Council is not informed as to the reasons why the Member States either authorise or refuse export licences , and it is not within the Council 's area of competence in any way to set itself up as a judge of these Member States .
At the meeting on 25 January 1999 , the Council discussed a proposal from the Presidency to the effect that the Code should be made legally binding , for example by means of a common position , but there was no agreement about this , and the issue of changing the Code into a legally binding act has not therefore been addressed since .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply .
In September , Belgium 's Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Michel , made a statement to the press in Belgium in the wake of the Nepal crisis , in which he stated that he would ask his fellow foreign affairs ministers in the Council to have the code of conduct , which is indeed not binding at the moment , transposed into national legislation .
Can the President-in-Office of the Council tell me whether Mr Michel 's proposal was tabled in the Council ?
Could he also tell me whether he considers it likely that the Council will commit to transposing the code of conduct into national legislation in each country ?
Mr President , if I had been asked in the question to provide the information that is being requested here , I might perhaps have been able to do so .
The information was not , however , requested in the question , and I cannot therefore offer an answer .
Perhaps the honourable Member could , however , table a written question if it is important to have it answered .
He might also perhaps telephone the Belgian Foreign Ministry , which I think would be obliging enough to give an answer .
Mr President , I should like to answer the three questions together .
I would first of all , however , emphasise that the Council 's conclusions concerning the International Criminal Court do not encourage the signing of bilateral agreements on immunity .
It is emphasised that account must be taken of existing agreements between the United States and the individual Member States .
In our view , many of the American reservations can be disposed of on the basis of the existing agreements .
It will be up to each individual Member State to assess whether its bilateral or multilateral treaty relations with the United States can be considered adequate to make allowances for the American requests .
If a Member State were to find it necessary to change existing agreements or to enter into a new agreement with the United States , this would be done on the basis of the EU 's guiding principles .
If , in their bilateral contacts with the United States , the individual countries keep within this framework that has been set out , the Court will not be undermined .
We would also make it quite clear that , if states that are parties to the International Criminal Court were to enter into agreements such as those now proposed by the United States , this would be incompatible with their obligations in relation to the statutes of the Court .
In accordance with the EU 's guiding principles , any solution should include suitable operational provisions that ensure that people who have committed crimes that come within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court do not enjoy immunity .
Legal proceedings must therefore be taken against them , and they must , if necessary , be punished .
Such provisions should be able to ensure that suitable investigations take place and that , if there is sufficient evidence , the national authorities take legal proceedings against people at the request of the Court .
This guiding principle ensures that people are held accountable if they have committed war crimes , crimes against humanity or genocide .
Moreover , they will be brought to justice irrespective of whether they are Americans or Europeans .
The EU and the United States are agreed that individual responsibility shall apply in the case of the most serious crimes affecting the international community .
For many years , the United States has , in close cooperation with the EU , adopted a leading role when it comes to setting up international criminal courts with a view to bringing criminal prosecutions for such crimes .
Another guiding principle is to the effect that new agreements should only cover people who are not citizens of a state that is a party to the Court .
Moreover , the EU has carefully defined the category of people to whom this might apply .
It is stated , however , that certain persons do not come within the Court 's jurisdiction because they have immunity under international law . Apart from such cases , any solution should , however , only cover those who , because they have been sent there by the sending state , are resident in the country that is being requested to hand someone over to the court .
This is in accordance with the Rome Statute 's very narrow definition of persons who should be included under immunity agreements .
If the alternatives are looked at , the EU approach we have just described is the best way of defending the International Criminal Court .
Any other solution would have caused cracks to appear in the EU 's strong support for the Criminal Court and would have weakened the Court .
A simple rejection of the American proposal would , however , have had very negative consequences for transatlantic relations , and it would have endangered the absolutely vital American commitment to worldwide peacekeeping operations .
If a common EU position had not been established , it would have caused irreparable damage to the Court .
In that connection , I should like to mention that the United States has already entered into bilateral agreements with 12 countries that are unable to take a stand on the EU 's position .
If the EU Member States and others were to be encouraged to enter into bilateral negotiations with the United States without strong EU agreement and without clear criteria governing who is to be covered by the resulting bilateral agreements , the outcome would be a multiplicity of bilateral agreements , and that is something which would most certainly undermine the court .
With regard to what EU citizens , NGOs and legal experts think , I should like to emphasise that the Council did not discuss this subject in a vacuum and that it certainly did not reach the stated outcome in a vacuum .
The Council 's conclusions are based upon extensive consultations between the Member States and upon valuable contributions from the Council 's legal service and from the Commission .
The Council has also taken account of the points of view expressed by the NGOs affected .
Throughout the whole process , there have been contacts with third countries that are parties to the Court , and the Presidency has also had exploratory talks with the United States .
It goes without saying that the Council has also taken full account of the views expressed by the elected representatives in the EU , both in the national parliaments and in the European Parliament .
With regard to which Member States may possibly enter into immunity agreements with the United States , I am not , unfortunately , at the moment in a position to provide information , but I should like to answer questions about Romania 's bilateral agreement with the United States , signed on 1 August 2002 .
In that connection , I should like , on behalf of the Council , to draw attention to the common position , adopted on 11 June of last year and amended on 20 June of this year .
It was a position supported by the candidate countries .
The Council remained in close contact with the candidate countries during all of the preparatory work on the position , and the Council intends to maintain these contacts in order to keep the candidate countries fully informed about further developments .
The Council has noted that Romania has still not ratified the agreement in question and hopes that it will take account of the position established by the EU after the agreement had been entered into .
I should like to emphasise that a solution has been found that does not undermine the International Criminal Court .
This solution will be of great help to , for example , the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe which have been in some doubt as to what they should do .
A solution has also been found that does not impair existing agreements .
I really do think that this is , all in all , quite a good result .
The EU cannot monitor the whole world .
We have ensured that the International Criminal Court is protected from being undermined , and I cannot say anything more about the matter .
Mr President , I was not of course asked about this in the written question .
I shall merely point out that we are concerned here with a common position .
Everyone , including all the candidate countries , is expected to uphold the common position .
I should be surprised - astonished , in fact - if they did not , so I think the honourable Member can be quite certain that they will do so .
Mr President , I hear what the minister says ; I accept that the guidelines are better than nothing and I congratulate the Danish presidency on at least achieving them .
But the legal advice given to the EU institutions was that a contracting party to the Rome Statute that concludes bilateral agreements outside the tight scope of Article 98 acts against the object and purpose of the Statute .
Is it not true that the guidelines are really too weak to shut the door to impunity arrangements ?
I heard the minister refer to a common position .
I would like to know whether the guidelines legally constitute a common position .
Whether they do or not , will the Council at least seek to strengthen these rather vague guidelines of 30 September which allow loopholes contravening the Statute ?
That would give us a strengthened common position delivering additional safeguards . These should include : oversight of national pledges by the ICC ; guarantees that the US will investigate and prosecute its own nationals accused of committing ICC crimes ; a requirement on the US to update federal laws to ensure that its courts exercise jurisdiction over all ICC crimes - which is not the case at the moment ; agreement to confine the scope to military personnel or closely allied civilian personnel - and not , for instance , mercenaries ; inclusion of a sunset clause and the submission of the agreements for scrutiny by the relevant national parliaments .
With reference to the very last point , I think it is very clearly apparent how restricted a category of people is covered .
With reference to the first question asked , I want to say that a common position is a common position .
There are no punitive measures for countries that might disregard a common position , but we are normally accustomed to complying with common positions in the EU , and I believe that the candidate countries too will be so .
Mr President , I have to say that the answer by the President-in-Office of the Council shows signs of there being considerable elasticity of interpretation but , as we say in Denmark , it requires a very firm character to sell elastic by the metre .
It can be stretched in all directions , and I do not think that the President-in-Office is tackling the fundamental issue of whether we have an American strategy that urges other countries to enter into bilateral agreements whereby such countries undertake not to hand over American citizens .
This is in line with the fact that the United States has persistently and continually refused to ratify the International Criminal Court Treaty .
It strikes me as self-evident that the Council has a credibility problem when , on the one hand , it states that it fully supports the setting up of the International Criminal Court and regards its establishment as a building block of international legal cooperation and , on the other hand , turns a blind eye to , and accepts , America 's blackmailing of third countries .
The President-in-Office said that a solution had been found to the blackmailing of Romania .
The only practical questions I want to put are the following : what is the gist of this solution , and is it a solution that the Council finds acceptable ?
If the answer to the latter question is yes , there is still a credibility problem .
Yes , in response to the last question I can say that a solution has been found that , in my view , will ensure there are no other candidate countries that enter into agreements corresponding to that entered into by Romania .
I should also like to add that , to my knowledge , Romania has still not ratified that agreement .
Regarding the first point , I would say in reply that , were the United States to exert the pressure referred to by Mr Krarup , it would be just as well that we have obtained the common position , which is easy to support and through which any such possible pressure can be withstood .
In my view , it is one of the great virtues of the common position that it gives very clear support to countries in the event of their being subjected to pressure .
I am not aware of this happening , but the honourable Member says that it does . Were this in fact to happen , it would , as I say , be just as well that we have this position , to which the new Member States can also adhere .
As the author is not present , Questions No 8 lapses .
Question No 9 by Efstratios Korakas , which has been taken over by Mr Alyssandrakis ( H-0623 / 02 ) :
Subject : EU-USA agreement on deportations , secret police operations and communications surveillance
Statewatch claims that the EU and the USA are planning to conclude an agreement on combating terrorism and matters relating to public criminal law which will include joint police operations , surveillance of communications , the location and seizure of the proceeds of crime , simplification of deportation procedures for Europeans and non-Europeans , and restrictions on applications for asylum .
What is the Council 's position , particularly in view of the claim that the Danish Presidency is drawing up a plan for communications surveillance and the fact that such repressive and persecutory measures are totally contrary to respect for human rights and inconsistent with previous statements that the EU will not conclude any agreement which provides for deportation to countries , such as the USA , where capital punishment is in force .
The states will , of course , enter into such agreements in accordance with the national rules . Where the European institutions are concerned , this will take place in accordance with the European Union 's rules .
Mr President , it is of course clear from the documentation produced by Statewatch that negotiations concerning these agreements were embarked upon as early as last autumn and that they have been conducted in the greatest secrecy .
The request by Tony Bunyan of Statewatch that the documents be made available for scrutiny has been met with partial rejection because the negotiations concerned were secret .
The fact is , of course , that , according to the Treaty , Parliament is not entitled to be consulted on these matters , and the question therefore arises as to why it has not been publicly stated that these developments are part of the anti-terrorist measures that are being worked on .
My first question is about why the Council is holding its cards so close to its chest when these are matters of very broad general interest that are at stake .
My second question is about how far these agreements extend .
Looking at Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union , it is apparent from Article 24 that , when it is necessary to conclude an agreement with one or more States etc in implementation of these Titles , agreements may be entered into on behalf of the Council without Parliament 's being consulted and without any public debate .
In the view of the President-in-Office of the Council , how far do these powers extend and why has Parliament not been informed ?
I should have liked to have given Mr Krarup an answer , but I have not read what Statewatch says .
Nor do I know if what it says is true . Moreover , I am charged with answering questions that have been put in advance , and these questions have not been put in advance .
I am sorry , then , Mr Krarup , but perhaps it would be an idea to submit a written question or put the question next time .
As the author is not present , Question No 10 lapses .
Question No 11 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0626 / 02 ) :
Subject : New opportunities as regards relations with Libya
How does the Council view the latest statements made by the Libyan head of state Colonel Muammar Gadaffi , the U-turn in his policy , and the tone of his televised address on the occasion of the 33rd anniversary of his accession to power ?
What opportunities does this new situation open up for relations between the European Union and Libya ?
The Council has not discussed Colonel Gadaffi 's speeches .
As far as the Council is concerned , it is , however , still prepared to allow Libya to become a fully fledged participant in the Barcelona Process as soon as the country has accepted the Barcelona rules fully and without reservation .
Libya has still not given an answer where this issue is concerned .
Until it does , it will continue to be invited as an observer to the meetings of the Euro-Mediterranean Committee and to the meetings between the high-ranking officials with responsibility for political and security issues .
Libya participated in the ministerial conference in Valencia as the Presidency 's guest .
There seem at present to be two main trends in Libya . The first prepares the way for a rapprochement with the EU and clearly signals a break with the past , while the second reflects the fact that Libya 's ambitions on the African continent are incompatible with participation in the Barcelona Process .
The relative weight of the two Libyan points of view naturally depends upon Colonel Gadaffi 's ambitions .
In the EU 's view , a strong role in Africa and participation in the Barcelona Process complement each other very well indeed .
The Euro-African partnership , whose next summit is planned to take place in the very near future , is testimony to this .
The Council also applauds the fact that certain political prisoners in Libya have been released and emphasises that , if Libya asks to do so , it will be able to participate in the Barcelona Process as soon as the outstanding issues have been resolved clearly and satisfactorily .
Such participation in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership would also mean that Libya , in common with the other partners , would enter into an association agreement and be covered by the MEDA regulation .
Mr President , I really do think that my answer was fairly clear .
If Libya can give clear and satisfactory answers in connection with the outstanding issues , it will be able , upon request , to participate in the Barcelona Process , even if it has ambitions for a rapprochement with the African continent .
I said quite specifically that those things are not necessarily in conflict with each other .
There would appear , however , to be two conflicting trends in Libya .
That is not something I was just trotting out , but something that we have observed in Libya .
Question No 12 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0629 / 02 ) :
Subject : Neighbouring country status for Ukraine
At the EU-Ukraine summit held in Copenhagen in July 2002 , Ukraine was offered EU neighbouring country status .
This is a new concept which now needs to be given substance .
What does this status entail in practical terms ?
Will conditions be the same for Ukraine as for Belarus , for example ?
Will the same status apply to all countries that border the Union after enlargement ?

Mr President , I am very happy to answer Mr Sacrédeus 's question concerning Ukraine .
At the EU-Ukraine summit in Copenhagen this summer , Ukraine was informed about the Council 's decision in April to highlight the opportunity of strengthening relations between the future enlarged EU and its new neighbours .
Both sides emphasised the importance of taking account of the fact that relations between the EU and the countries concerned vary in character and are at different levels of political and economic development .
The EU and Ukraine were agreed that the enlargement process creates new opportunities and challenges in various areas .
Both sides confirmed that Ukraine could best make use of these opportunities by stepping up its efforts to adjust its legislation , norms and standards to the EU 's .
It was also agreed to step up the relevant partnership and cooperation bodies ' discussions of the effects of enlargement on , for example , trade-related issues , visas , the movement of persons and the promotion of regional and cross-border cooperation .
The EU recognises Ukraine 's European aspirations .
It is important for Ukraine to become better at fulfilling its obligations if these aspirations are to have real content .
The EU will continue to support Ukraine in the reform process , including the strengthening of the judicial system , media freedom , human rights and civil society .
The Danish Presidency feels duty-bound to step up EU-Ukraine cooperation .
The working plan for implementing the EU 's common strategy for Ukraine has been presented to the Council , which examined it on 22 July of this year .
The Presidency believes that it should be the EU 's overall objective to make the dialogue and cooperation with Ukraine more focused and results-oriented .
The priorities in this working plan are as follows : first of all , the consolidation of democracy , the rule of law and public institutions ; secondly , support for the economic transition process , including Ukraine 's integration into the European and world economies , and for regional cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries ; thirdly , cooperation on strengthening stability and security within and outside Europe ; fourthly , the strengthening of cooperation in the environmental and energy fields and in the context of nuclear safety ; fifthly , support for reinforced cooperation in connection with enlargement of the EU ; and sixthly and finally , the development of cooperation on legal and internal affairs .
The development of an overall EU policy towards the EU 's new neighbours , with full respect for the differences between the countries involved , will help in achieving the overall objectives .
On the basis of a common contribution from the High Representative , Mr Solana , and from Commissioner Patten , the Council discussed relations between the enlarged EU and its Eastern neighbours at the meeting on 30 September .
The Council reiterated its conviction that EU enlargement will offer a good opportunity to strengthen relations between the EU and its new neighbours with a view to creating stability and narrowing the gap in prosperity at the EU 's new borders .
I should like sincerely to thank Mr Haarder and the Danish Presidency for that detailed and excellent reply .
It is my personal belief that it was of great strategic importance when , during the Swedish Presidency , Swedish Prime Minister Göran Persson , on his last trip away on foreign policy business , actually visited Kiev and met with the Ukrainian government .
I view the line taken by the Danish Presidency as a continuation of that policy .
I should like to ask a couple of follow-up questions .
Firstly , is it conceivable that , in the relatively near future , Ukraine could be offered a special agreement , which could be an Eastern European variant of a special economic relationship , that is to say , a form of Eastern European EEA Agreement ?
Secondly , I wonder how you feel that relations between the EU and Ukraine have been affected by the claims concerning military cooperation with Iraq on the part of Ukraine .
I should like to thank Mr Sacrédeus for the great interest he has shown in Ukraine .
It is important for us to remember Ukraine , which is a very important country in Europe .
I should like to compliment Parliament on the report on Ukraine which - if I remember correctly - was adopted approximately a year ago .
I am able to add that the Danish Presidency expects the Council , again this year , to request the Commission to submit proposals for the development of an overall EU policy towards the EU 's new neighbours , and it can safely be said that Ukraine is a very important nation among these neighbours .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you specifically for mentioning the fact that you are also working on nuclear safety in the Ukraine .
I would be interested to know whether it is actually intended to use the standards of the International Atomic Energy Agency as a basis for guaranteeing safety there .
Mr President , with the historical background of which we are all of course aware , there is no doubt at all that the subject of nuclear safety will be part of any discussion between the European Union and Ukraine .
Question No 13 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0631 / 02 ) :
Subject : The EU and Macedonia
What is the Danish Presidency 's assessment of the present situation in Macedonia , and is it planning action to give a fresh boost to the Stabilisation and Association agreement , e.g. through additional financial assistance or by abolishing visa requirements ?
The Presidency is delighted that the parliamentary elections on 15 September in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia passed off in such an orderly fashion .
At its meeting on 21 October , the Council expressed satisfaction with the agreement concerning the new government in Skopje .
The Council encouraged this new government to lose no time in putting full implementation of the framework agreement and stabilisation and association process at the top of the agenda and emphasised that it is looking forward to close and fruitful cooperation .
The EU will maintain its strong commitment to Macedonia and will actively support a government amenable to reforms .
The Council is also looking forward to the planned census being held in accordance with international standards .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement has not come into force because it has still not been ratified .
Until such time as it is , an interim agreement on trade aspects , which came into force just over a year ago , has been entered into .
As part of a multi-annual programme for the years 2002-2004 , the European Community has appropriated EUR 130.5 million to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in order to support the country as it prepares to fulfil the obligations associated with the interim agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The issue of the visa requirement for Macedonians was discussed at the most recent meeting of the Macedonia-EU Cooperation Council , held on 1 and 2 July of this year , and , on this occasion , the Commission reminded the authorities in Macedonia that they must make a number of practical arrangements before the EU will be able to consider cancelling the visa requirement .
The Member States and the Commission are following carefully the progress in fulfilling these criteria that is being made by the authorities in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for that very good , detailed reply and for your formidable knowledge of the situation , which of course explains why we hold you in such high regard .
I should just like to ask a brief supplementary question .
It is a delicate issue , I admit .
You also once spoke of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We are seeing that the term Yugoslavia in expressions such as ' the former Yugoslavia ' and ' the remains of Yugoslavia ' has actually disappeared and is to be replaced by the term Serbia-Montenegro .
The word ' Yugoslavia ' would then only continue to exist in the official name of Macedonia .
I should like to ask you whether it might not be possible , in the long term , to find a diplomatic solution to the name issue , because it certainly places a strain on this country , which , while it may not threaten its existence , does have profound psychological consequences .

Precisely because of the deep psychological significance of this issue , so rightly pointed out by Mr Posselt , I do not intend to express any opinion at all on it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that in Macedonia 's case it is particularly important to consider how the support that we provide can most effectively bring stability to this region .
Small and medium-sized enterprises obviously play a pivotal role here .
That is why I would be interested to know whether within this support programme that you mentioned , which will provide EUR 135 million for the period from 2000 to 2004 , funds are also available to promote small and medium-sized enterprises .
I cannot say offhand that there are funds for the middle class .
Aid cannot , however , be given for economic development without this being of benefit to the middle class , and I am convinced that it will be of benefit to small and medium-sized enterprises .
As far as I know , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has no other kind of enterprises , so I do not think the honourable Member needs to worry .
Moreover , I should like once again to express my delight at the developments in Macedonia , especially the political developments , which I find reassuring in view of how black the outlook was just over a year ago .
Question No 14 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0634 / 02 ) :
Subject : Abduction of Mr Ali Khanbiev , a doctor , in Chechnya
At around 3 to 4 a.m. on the morning of 4 September , masked men abducted Ali Khanbiev from his home in the village of Benoi ( Chechnya ) , where he had continued to work as a doctor in the local hospital .
Mr Khanbiev , who was born in 1958 , is the brother of Umar Khanbiev , Minister of Health in Aslan Maskhadov 's government .
What information does the Council have concerning Mr Khanbiev 's abduction ?
Is the Council aware that it has all the signs of an abduction by Russian military and paramilitary forces and , consequently , there is every reason to fear for Mr Khanbiev 's safety ?
What initiatives has the Council taken , or does it intend to take , to urge the Russian authorities to make every effort to secure Mr Khanbiev 's immediate release ?
The Council has not received any information about this abduction , but I am able to tell you that the Council is still very concerned about the situation in Chechnya and that it can only condemn the many abductions that exacerbate the already very difficult humanitarian situation in the region .
The Council emphasises that it attaches exceptional importance to full compliance with human rights and also to the efforts to find a political solution and to improve the humanitarian situation .
I am well aware that Mr Dupuis would like me to say more than that and state that more will be done , but that is all I can say at the moment .
I should also like to thank Mr Dupuis for the commitment he has shown for many years - especially when it comes to the humanitarian situation in Chechnya - for as long , in fact , as he has been , as I was , a member of this Parliament .
The agenda for the EU-Russia Summit that is to take place in Copenhagen on 12 November has still not been prepared .
With regard to this abduction , I can only repeat that the Council has not received any information about it . As I said earlier , however , the Council is well aware that many abductions have taken place and it has , in common with Parliament , regretted the fact time and time again .
Unfortunately , the situation is such that what Mr Dupuis says is probably right , but the Council has not yet received any information about the incident .
Mr President , I should like to ask a question .
We have often had occasion to discuss with Commissioner Nielson the possibility of his visiting Chechnya to assess the humanitarian situation there in more detail , and we also wish to send a parliamentary delegation to Chechnya .
At this EU-Russia Summit , could you not put on the agenda the fact that the European institutions wish to visit Chechnya to see the situation there for themselves ?
Perhaps you could also discuss this with Commissioner Nielson - while Denmark has the Council Presidency you can of course also do that in his mother tongue .
But that apart , it is important that an official visit takes place .

I should like to thank Mr Posselt for his commitment and also for the proposal he has put forward .
Naturally , I cannot , here on behalf of the Council , say what the answer will be , but I want to say thank you for the proposal and am also able to add that the Council is , of course , deeply engaged with the issues mentioned here .
Question No 15 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0638 / 02 ) :
Subject : Human rights
According to the 8 July edition of the Financial Times the Iranian authorities in Teheran told Mrs Laurette Onkelinx , the Belgian Deputy Prime Minister , that they defended the practice of stoning women ' with the aim of safeguarding the inviolability of the family ' and punishing adultery .
Can the Council say what impact the advocacy of this practice has had on relations between the European Union and Iran , particularly in view of the priority which the Council has repeatedly claimed it gives to human rights ?
As a matter of principle , the Council never comments on press reports .
When comments are issued , it is the Presidency that issues them .
With regard to the visit in question , I should like to make it clear that , during her visit , the Belgian Deputy Prime Minister , Mrs Onkelinx , expressed her condemnation of stoning .
Moreover , she repeated the European Union 's position on the matter in order to dispel any misunderstanding of what had been said during the discussion in question .
Human rights issues - and , specifically , the use of cruel forms of execution such as stoning - have always been high on the agenda of the comprehensive political dialogue that takes place at the half-yearly meetings between Iran and the EU .
At the most recent meeting in Teheran on 10 September 2002 , a number of specific human rights issues were also discussed .
Furthermore , the EU makes regular overtures in connection with such matters .
We are at the moment aware of three cases in Iran in which people have been sentenced to death by stoning .
All three sentences have been appealed against , so the judgments are still not final .
There must be no doubt at all that the Council will follow these cases very carefully .
More generally , I can inform you that the EU has discussed an initiative aimed at establishing a formal human rights dialogue with Iran on the basis of the guidelines for dialogues with third countries approved by the Council in December of last year .
Not until this month did European and Iranian human rights experts meet for a series of exploratory talks in Teheran .
I should also like to add that human rights are one of the four essential areas in which the Council has stated that it wishes to see progress , now that the EU and Iran are in the process of developing close trade relations .
On 21 October , that is to say a couple of days ago , the Council emphasised that it considers it very important that a human rights dialogue should offer an opportunity to achieve practical improvements regarding respect for human rights .
It decided therefore to embark upon such a dialogue on the basis of the conditions , timetable , subjects , benchmark points - that is to say , objectives - and choice of interlocutors discussed in the course of the EU 's fact-finding mission to Iran .
It was also decided that the first meeting within the framework of this dialogue should take place as early as this year in Teheran .
Finally , the Council has , on the basis of an initiative by the Presidency , very recently brought up a number of matters in quite a few different countries , including Iran .
On the basis of this initiative , the Council adopted , on 30 September , a declaration on the death penalty and , in particular , cruel forms of execution .
In its declaration , the Council again emphasises , clearly and unambiguously , that the EU repudiates the death penalty and , in particular , execution by stoning .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I offer you my sincere thanks for your direct answer .
I should like , however , to inform you that precisely on the eve of a mission to Iran by EU experts in October , a series of five public executions took place in Iran , which were reported in the world 's press . I hope , incidentally , that the President-in-Office of the Council is not going to say that he was unaware of what was being said in the press .
Such actions clearly demonstrate the position of the Iranian authorities , which is not to budge one inch in their approach to human rights . The number of executions reported in Iran has trebled in the last three years and , given these circumstances , the question is this : is the European Union going to conclude a trade agreement with Iran in the wake of these systematic breaches of human rights or not ?
This is what I wished to find out from you .
Mr President , I did not say that I - and the Council - do not read press reports and newspapers .
I said that the Council never comments on press reports .
That is something quite different .
My esteemed colleague is undoubtedly right that , in Iran , the death penalty is not just something that exists in theory but also something that is practised .
That is deeply tragic , but the Council has devised a strategy for nonetheless being able to embark upon human rights dialogues with countries that impose this penalty .
That is , in my view , perfectly in order , moreover .
It is of course a dialogue involving , on the one hand , vigorous condemnation and , on the other hand , simultaneous efforts of persuasion to bring about improvements .

Mr President , a question such as that cannot be answered in general terms . If , however , something along the lines of an answer is desired , it can often be a good idea to ask the democratic forces in the country concerned .
As the author is not present , Question No 16 lapses .
Question No 17 by Konstantinos Alyssandrakis ( H-0648 / 02 ) :
Subject : Promotion of police-state mentality and informer culture in EUROPOL text
A report in the newspaper Rizospastis claims that a EUROPOL document entitled ' European Best Practice for Handling Informers ' gives guidance and instructions for the ' recruitment and handling ' of informers .
These instructions include methods of payment and amount , as well as certain forms of immunity to be granted - informers are not to be arrested ' when they commit offences within prescribed limits ' and they are also allowed ' to take part in criminal activities ' after ' authorisation from an authority established in accordance with the guidelines ' .
Does the Council approve of this EUROPOL text , which is flagrantly contrary to respect for human rights and human dignity itself ? Will it take immediate measures to call a halt to this slide towards a police state mentality , authoritarianism and spying on the private lives of citizens , their political , trade union and social activities and their collective organisations ?

Mr President , I am sorry , but I seem to be repeating myself here , for the Council does not comment on statements in the media , either . I can nonetheless confirm , however , that there is a Europol document concerning the subject we are now talking about .
This document describes best practice for handling informers with a view to helping the police authorities in the Member States . The document is not binding , and it has been prepared on the basis of Article 3 ( 2 ) ( i ) of the Europol Convention .
It is based partly upon the Executive Committee 's decision of 29 April 1999 on general principles governing the payment of informers and upon the Decision of the Central Group of 22 March 1999 on general principles governing the payment of informers .
These decisions have therefore been integrated into the European Union 's prior regulatory framework , cf. the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European Union , and both have been published in the Official Journal of 22 September 2000 .
Police use of informers , including questions of payment and immunity , naturally depends upon the state of the national law in the Member State concerned .
Mr President-in-Office , I am astonished by the clarity of your reply ; it is something we are not used to from you .
At the same time , I shudder at the thought that we are surrounded by a network of informants and I wonder if the purpose of such clarity was perhaps to remind us of this and warn us that our slightest misdemeanours are under constant surveillance .
As Europol appears to be giving informants official status , I wonder whether a scale of pay has been set and whether there will be invitations to tender and then at least some of our young unemployed could apply for the job .
Mr President , Europol is a cooperation body that deals with some of the very worst crimes , against which democracies must protect themselves .
I do not therefore think it is fair to talk about an informer state .
That is an expression I should like to repudiate .
Europol was of course set up and has had its powers extended partly at the request of Parliament and of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
One reason for this is that Europol 's task is not of course to cause people trouble but to protect them .
As the time allotted to questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 18 to 37 will be replied to in writing
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this difficult time for the civil aviation sector , whose future we debated recently in this Chamber when we discussed the single European sky rules , the European Commission has proposed a new regulation on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding .
The liberalisation of the air transport sector has brought numerous benefits for passengers .
Competition has arrived on many routes , causing a fall in prices and a great increase in the choice of routes and destinations .
In spite of this , however , consumers have valid reasons for dissatisfaction .
Denied boarding and cancellation of flights provoke strong resentment , and the assistance provided during the excessive delays all too often leaves something to be desired .
We in this House fly so often that many of us have experienced such inconveniences , and it is therefore very easy for us to put ourselves in the shoes of the citizens in this case and understand that new , effective legislation is needed to protect their rights across the board .
Faced with the shortcomings of current legislation , the European Commission proposes to take a different approach , introducing , on the one hand , a call for volunteers , as per the effective US system , and , on the other , a dissuasive system which compels airlines to provide greater compensation to passengers for damages .
In addition , protection is considerably increased , as we will see in a moment .
We must not , however , lose sight of the overall context of this proposal .
We have had the opportunity to pursue an extremely constructive debate in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , exploring all aspects of the question .
As the Commissioner has just pointed out , overbooking , the principal cause of denied boarding , is a negligible consideration when seen against the backdrop of the annual flow of air passengers in the Community area .
We cannot risk penalising the entire spectrum of travellers with a potential blanket price increase in order to provide greater protection for a very small number of passengers .
We must be very careful and identify precisely the best solutions for achieving the objective without causing repercussions , bearing in mind , not least , the economic impact .
In this context , Commissioner , I am afraid I must complain of the lack of statistics provided by the Commission in support of the proposal .
We do need practical statistics and facts on which to base a decision , and the lack thereof has certainly made it quite difficult for me to draw up a report .
I will now outline the principal points on which we have worked to produce the final document .
The first is the definitions .
In terms of methodology , I believe it is essential to define all the actors involved and terms used more precisely , to avoid any confusion which might affect either passengers or airlines .
To this end , a number of amendments have been adopted seeking to make the provisions of Article 2 more detailed .
The second point concerns tour operators .
Passengers who have bought a package holiday are already more than adequately protected by Directive 90 / 314 .
The Commission 's proposal is therefore in danger of creating confusion over the reference text , to the detriment , principally , of the passengers , and it was therefore necessary to restrict the responsibility of tour operators in the context of this regulation to seats only , as we have done .
Lastly , the most controversial point : the provision of compensation to passengers in the event of denied boarding .
The Commission 's proposal has given rise to a great deal of debate and much concern .
Neither the criteria established for the definition of the new compensation amounts nor the impact assessment satisfy the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
As far as we are concerned , the important thing is to preserve a balance between protecting passengers and the vitality of a major economic sector such as the air transport sector .
We have therefore proposed a three-category division on the basis of distance and a reduction in compensation amounts .
Indeed , we must remember that we should be concentrating more on implementing the system of calls for volunteers than on compensation .
In addition , I believe it is entirely inappropriate to extend the provision of compensation to excessive delays , for a number of reasons .
First of all , because it is not easy to identify the cause of the delay quickly enough , and , secondly , because this would create a chain reaction .
We therefore feel it is entirely appropriate to equate denied boarding with cancellation , but we feel it is inappropriate to treat excessive delays in the same way .
Rather , we must ensure that a proper , systematic system of assistance in the event of delays is in operation , particularly where people with disabilities or minors are concerned , as regards both the provision of information and logistics , and we have adopted a number of amendments to this end .
I would just like to say , by way of conclusion , a quick word about the amendments tabled .
They show that the debate on compensation amounts between those who would like them to be higher and those who would like them to be lower is still ongoing .
Certainly , at the moment , the only reaction is a certain amount of dissatisfaction regarding our proposal on the part of both airlines and consumers , and this , Commissioner , allows me to hope that , precisely because no party is satisfied , the compromise we have reached is the most balanced and most intelligent solution .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Lisi on his report .
While he was drafting it , he attended the discussions on my opinion in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and incorporated many of the points raised .
Our differences are really minor , but I will return to them .
As Mr Lisi said , Members pontificate here on many subjects about which they have an imperfect knowledge , but we all regard ourselves as experts on the problems of passenger travel .
They dominate our working lives .
So there was a warm welcome for Commissioner de Palacio 's proposals to move ahead from the 1991 regulations , not just on denied boarding but on delayed and cancelled flights as well .
There is no dispute that what we call the hierarchy of remedies must apply , starting with compensation levels proportionate to the distance travelled .
I think most of the airlines have responded well to this debate , with the air service passenger commitment as a gesture of intent .
I would say to those maverick airlines that ignore all that - and we know where they fly to , if not always where they live - that they would be wise to heed the public mood .
No frills should not mean no concern .
In our opinion , we are offered an amendment to Article 7 which called for levels of compensation to be based on specific impact assessments , so that it could not be argued that they were frivolously levied .
I must say that the levels of compensation in Mr Lisi 's report are well beyond what we wanted under Article 7 .
We wanted mandatory compensation of between EUR 300 and EUR 1 500 , subject to distance and review .
That has fallen to between EUR 200 and 600 , but I accept that in itself is progress for the consumer .
I am still concerned that this does not necessarily apply under Amendment No 31 , which refers back to Article 9 and not Article 8 .
Perhaps the Commissioner can assure me that those amendments will actually apply .
Otherwise , Mr Lisi and his committee have advanced the consumer cause and have allowed us to move forward to a system of airline ranking .
If only this applied to all airlines , all flights and all problems .
Every day further horrors come to light .
On a British airline , a woman had to endure an 11-hour flight next to a 23-stone woman who sat on her , not next to her , throughout the flight .
She was left with serious injuries and initially offered GBP 15 compensation .
You might say that the airline began with one handicapped passenger and ended with two .
Our journeys should be reducing handicaps , not increasing them .
I welcome this report as a step in that direction .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking my colleague , Mr Lisi , for all his hard work on this report .
I would like to support the comments he has made .
As a general observation , and taking issue with the Commission position , I would like to continue by saying that this report came as an unwelcome surprise , not least because , last year , a report on air passenger rights was taken through committee by Mr Collins , with Parliament overwhelmingly supporting a voluntary approach .
In addition , there has been no industry consultation on this issue and no business impact assessment of value .
There is no data on the projected costs to carriers ; no assessment of the impact on competitiveness - between both EU and other carriers ; and no information on the direct and consequential impact of this legislation .
The voluntary air passenger service commitment agreement was signed in February in Strasbourg .
Virtually all the European airlines were party to it .
It included references to a number of points contained in this proposal on delays , cancellations and diversions , special needs passengers , reducing the number of involuntary denied boardings and so on .
So why did Mr Collins and our committee go to the trouble of taking his report through Parliament when the Commission clearly had a legislative proposal in its back pocket ?
The voluntary agreement has not failed ; it has not even had a chance to work .
Here we are again with the Commission knocking another nail into the coffin .
The proposal is flawed in several key areas : it fails to recognise fundamental differences between scheduled and charter operations ; it ignores , for example , the package travel directive covering the rights of charter passengers .
In particular , it concerns proposals on cancellations and long delays , hence the inclusion of the tour operators , as supported by our committee .
The proposal also ignored the proportion of events due to failures within the monopoly providers such as ATC and airports , and the inability of airlines to obtain compensation from them .
Given that the ticket price has gone down in the last ten years , the increase in compensation levels proposed for denied boarding by the Commission is an incredible 400 % .
Left at those levels , this regulation would cost the scheduled carriers somewhere in the region of EUR 1.35 billion .
The many regional and low-cost airlines would be more critically affected , as their margins are much smaller .
In addition , none of these rules will apply to third country airlines .
We in Europe will again suffer the consequences of an unlevel playing field - another example of the Commission taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut .
Finally , under the leadership of our rapporteur , we have achieved a more sensible and realistic conclusion .
I live in hope that the Commission will listen to Parliament and act accordingly .
The public quite rightly expects and deserves good customer service but this proposal is a step too far .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to the rapporteur .
In our view , the compromise that was struck in the committee constitutes a significant step towards greater consumer protection .
At long last we have legal security on additional issues and not just voluntary commitments from the airlines .
Moreover , the regulation is of course also being extended to cover severe delays and flight cancellations .
I was not infrequently the victim of cancellations by the former airline Sabena .
No doubt other Members have had similar experiences with other airlines .
Last but not least we are doubling the current levels of compensation , which will also be more subtly differentiated than hitherto and divided into three bands .
Clearly , the issue that we most need to discuss is the level of compensation .
The objective of the regulation cannot be to abolish the practice of overbooking , but it can be to ensure that this procedure is used in a more reasonable , customer-oriented way .
Of course , we could also eliminate overbooking , as the low-cost carriers have done , if , on the other hand , flights were non-exchangeable and a no-show meant that a flight was automatically forfeited .
But this is neither consumer-friendly nor justifiable on environmental grounds .
Consumers need flexibility when they are planning their journeys and half-empty planes make no sense at all from an environmental point of view .
The economic argument is even more persuasive .
If overbooking were abolished , air prices would inevitably rise and we cannot expect either consumers to put up with this or indeed the airlines , which are up against international competition .
A further reason why we can support the compromise struck in the committee on compensation levels is because we think it is important for consumers to benefit from these improved and binding rules as quickly as possible and not have to wait for them for years because the legislation is , as is so often the case , still sitting in the Council .
In the interests of consumers , my group will be voting against part of Amendment No 29 , because we think that compensation only for flights that are cancelled up to 48 hours before departure is unreasonable .
At least two weeks is required here and this should be negotiated afterwards with the Council and the Commission .
In addition , we think that the inclusion of package tours in the Commission proposal is unnecessary , because they are covered by the directive on package tourism .
The fact that the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has advocated the introduction of a scheme to rank airlines by user-friendliness is a strong vote in favour of the consumer .
A ranking system of this kind , as is quite usual in the USA , can help to stimulate competition between the airlines on quality and on which provides the most consumer-friendly overall service .
I hope that this proposal is also upheld in the plenary .
Against the background of the current situation , this report represents a determined step towards greater consumer-friendliness .
Many a consumer dream may fly on , but they are hopelessly overbooked .
I am broadly in agreement with the rapporteur , certainly with regard to the Commission 's original proposal .
It was high time to draw up better regulations , particularly with regard to overbooking .
In my opinion , however , the Commission proposal is seriously lacking when it comes to flight cancellations and delays .
In this context , the airline companies are being held responsible for a problem that is overwhelmingly caused by air traffic control and the aviation authorities .
My objections are based on the following reasons .
The Commission proposal is not based on a proper evaluation of the economic effect , and it has not considered the consequences of the measure for the sector and in particular for ticket prices .
Although it provides increased protection , the proposal will limit the consumer 's free choice .
The definition of a superior power or force majeure , given by both the Commission and our own Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , does not contain enough certainty to be able to properly distinguish between delays and flight cancellations which fall outside the responsibility of the airline companies .
It can be argued that the airline companies ought to recover the damage from the appropriate party themselves , but that is not feasible in practice .
Where we are talking about regional or low-cost airlines , it would probably be preferable to let consumers themselves choose whether to pay a premium above the price of the ticket .
They could probably then cover themselves against flight cancellations .
This option could easily be introduced by the sector itself .
I have a couple of remaining questions for the Commission .
Can the Commission confirm that it intends to carry out a thorough economic analysis of the consequences and the effects of its proposal , of the increasing costs for the airline companies and of the new flight tariffs in the different segments of the aviation market ?
Can the Commission confirm that it intends to investigate the real reasons for flight cancellations and delays , so that we can have a better understanding of which causes are indeed the responsibility of the airline companies and which are not ?
Has the Commission also considered other policy measures which might ensure better rights for passengers than the ones presently included in their proposal ?
Travel insurance aimed specifically at flight delays and cancellations might be a possible solution .
We have had further debates and further discussions here in Parliament .
My amendments are a necessary supplementary measure intended to provide a decent balance between ticket price and compensation .
The first amendment relates to denied boarding and flight cancellations .
I propose a supplementary measure to the sound compromise , i.e. that there should be a different arrangement for an additional category of tickets below EUR 200 .
This applies to both denied boarding and cancellation .
The other amendment relates to incoming flights , to which Mrs Foster referred and does exactly what she wants .
This is exactly what my amendment is about , and I look forward to your support tomorrow .
Mr President , it is , of course , splendid that prices have dropped following liberalisation , but never before have passengers had to suffer cancellations , denied boarding , long delays , lost luggage etc. to this extent .
Being squashed into an aircraft like sardines is also a fairly recent phenomenon .
I therefore think that you are right to say that measures need to be taken urgently .
I personally would like to see all these malpractices banned , but I realise that such drastic action is not practicable .
In any case , the compensation the companies have to pay must be high enough to act as a deterrent - particularly where the airlines can rely on a system of volunteers , which should not really be so appealing as to encourage overbooking .
I hope that you will take another look at our amendments , which aim at increasing the actual compensation sums and introducing a system of classification .
I can only remind you of the number of times we seasoned fliers have all arrived at our destination after a flight only to find our luggage is not there .
What company is still customer-friendly in such circumstances ?
If this cannot be done in a separate amendment , I should like to ask Mr Lisi whether he might be able to include this classification in his report , although that will be every 5 years .
I hope that this type of compensation will eventually be introduced for train passengers as well , and indeed for all individuals who are the victims of high prices and poor service .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to confirm first of all that the majority of the PPE-DE group of course supports the Commission proposal , along with the essential proposals to improve it that have been made by Mr Lisi .
The proposal has a clear two-pronged approach .
It firstly calls on the airlines to use the volunteering principle , whereby the airline makes offers to individuals to identify those who do not urgently have to take the next flight , but could also take the one after that .
It is true that experience in America with the volunteering system has been positive .
If there are not enough volunteers , however , and everyone wants to go home or to their business appointment and passengers are denied boarding , then they must have some legal redress .
They have booked a flight , they have an OK on their ticket and they therefore have a right to board .
If the airline overbooks in its own economic interests , because it knows that there are a lot of no-shows , then it must pay if it cannot uphold the booking .
It is as simple as that .
Because if passengers have an OK on their ticket they have the certainty that they can travel , and if they cannot then the carrier has to pay .
Commissioner , you were , of course , a little harsh about the level of the payments .
My colleague , Mrs Foster , with whom I do not always agree , said something that is very true .
Air prices have fallen in recent years and that is why the argument that we should set compensation very high , so as to take account of recent cost increases , is clearly flawed , because air prices have fallen .
Most of us in any case are familiar with the ingenious system of special tariffs , which mean that you can easily fly at more reasonable prices than those prescribed .
With this in mind , please understand that we have reduced the compensation to a level that we deem to be economically fair .
Our view is that if excessive compensation is paid to passengers who are not taken on board , the carriers will pass on these costs to all passengers , and then general price levels will rise , which will affect more people than those denied boarding .
I say to Members of the Liberal Group - we usually see eye to eye , but today , exceptionally , we do not - that we have to set a flat rate of compensation for two reasons : firstly , the prejudice suffered by anyone who is denied boarding is always the same , whether they have paid EUR 150 , EUR 500 or more for their ticket .
They have been given a guarantee that they will fly and they are left behind .
It is completely irrelevant how much the ticket cost .
Their confidence has been damaged , and more besides .
That is why I believe that the low-cost carriers , which actually do not have any problems with overbooking because they do not accept more passengers than have booked , should also compensate passengers for any injury caused if they cancel a flight for economic reasons , and they obviously do this from time to time .
We need uniform tariffs so as to make the job of the poor airport staff easier .
You see , if a passenger is denied boarding or a flight is cancelled , we want the compensation to be paid at the gate .
You really cannot expect the poor flight attendant to calculate thousands of prices and people to wait until she has calculated the individual compensation entitlements .
I therefore believe that our proposal is quite sensible .
With your permission , on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten , who is unfortunately unable to speak this evening and who has asked me to make some points for her , I should like to refer once again to the split vote that we are proposing on Article 3 ( 2 ) .
This states that the regulation does not apply to passengers travelling at a reduced fare which is not available directly or indirectly to the public .
We fear that this wording is very vague .
We should state quite clearly that a passenger travelling at a reduced fare also has a right to full compensation .
I believe that it is very important that the provision is interpreted in this way .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you one more question .
As you know , Mr Lisi has made a very good proposal on Article 13 , namely that the Member States have to ensure that if a carrier pays compensation and is not in actual fact responsible for the delay or cancellation it may have recourse to those responsible , whether it be air traffic control or other bodies , including state-owned systems .
With a view to ensuring fair burden-sharing , can you assure us that , if we make the airlines responsible for paying compensation in the first place , they will also be able to have recourse to any state-owned organisations that have caused the delay or cancellation ?
You would assist us greatly if you were to support this portion of our amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the liberalisation of air transport has brought countless advantages for passengers .
Nevertheless , lower prices and greater demand have not put an end to consumer complaints , as we all know .
As some Members have already said , we are seeing cancelled or delayed flights , passengers being denied boarding , problems with baggage and so on .
This is unacceptable !
In order better to protect consumers , the liberalisation of air transport requires better market management and rationalisation .
The harmonisation of current legislation is becoming crucial in light of the new state of affairs .
It also makes perfect sense to involve operators in this sector , forcing them to adopt rules for the protection of citizens , enabling authorities to intervene in the event that the guarantees for protection that have been announced should prove to be insufficient .
I also believe the intervention of the authorities is extremely important .
The operators ' involvement of passengers by appealing for volunteers , involving them directly in the negotiation and acceptance of alternative arrangements , is a good approach that will make the management of reservations more flexible and will contribute to passenger protection , improving the efficiency of the operation .
I would reiterate here the issue of the competent authority : the proposal for a regulation reveals the importance of Article 14 , which deals with the obligation on the part of the authority in this field to inform passengers of their rights .
Basically , this reincorporates an amendment adopted by Parliament in its response to the Commission 's 1998 proposal .
Passengers must be informed clearly and transparently about how to contact the competent national body - of which they are often , even usually , unaware - responsible for dealing with complaints about the regulation .
I would also emphasise the importance of Article 17 , concerning implementation , which obliges Member States to designate the body responsible for the implementation of the regulation , to provide them with information and to force them to comply with measures ensuring that passengers ' rights are respected .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all of us here in this room spend far more time than we would like on planes and at airports .
These issues affect us all too often , either because we ourselves are affected by delays or cancellations , overbooking and the like or because we experience at second hand what happens to other passengers and that is not always pleasant .
Often it is even very unpleasant .
In this situation , the European legislator has to act in the interests of consumers , but also in the interests of the air transport sector as a whole .
Much has already been said about the rules that we are examining here at first reading and on which we will vote tomorrow , about how best to tackle the problem of denied boarding , and about reasonable rules in the case of delays .
Naturally , all these rules and regulations bring the industry little joy , particularly in the current difficult economic climate .
But this is of course not only about the airlines ; it is also and above all about the passengers .
They in any case are repeatedly and increasingly frequently finding themselves to be the weaker party , and we need to protect and support them with European law .
There is one other player that we should consider here ; I refer to the airport operators .
They have been experiencing many problems recently because of increased concerns about terrorism and security .
They have resolved a number of them , but in some cases their activities have become extremely expensive .
There is another problem that remains unresolved : how passengers are treated .
Nowadays flying is a massive business ; there is no doubt about it .
This should not mean , however , that passengers are treated like herds of animals .
Perhaps we could also address these aspects of flying in the foreseeable future and regulate them accordingly .
Passengers will thank us for it .
The next item is the report ( A5-0316 / 2002 ) by Mr Khanbhai , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on sustainable agricultural policy , agrarian reform and rural development for self-reliance in developing countries ( 2001 / 2274 ( INI ) ) .
.
Mr President , Mr Khanbhai sends his sincere apologies for not being here to present his report .
Unforeseen circumstances have forced him to return to the UK this evening .
I would like to stress that this is his report , and I thank him for his work and his willingness to cooperate with other parties .
It is perhaps appropriate that Mr Khanbhai drew up this report , because he was born in Tanzania , where his family have lived for 170 years .
He and I have travelled extensively in rural Africa and we share many views on the eradication of poverty in developing countries .
It is therefore a pleasure to stand in for him today .
It is unacceptable that even today , more than one billion people are living on less than a dollar a day in rural areas of developing countries .
They have no access to water , sanitation , electricity , health services or education .
The poor are hungry , have no jobs , and fear disease .
More than 40 years of international aid have not eliminated poverty .
Many of these poor countries have huge debts , and their people are worse off than they were 25 years ago when Lomé assistance started .
The EU is the largest donor in the world .
Why have we not identified the country-specific problems , so that we can focus our aid on attacking the causes of poverty ?
I have been travelling in the ACP countries for over 20 years .
The major cause of poverty is the lack of investment in rural areas . We need to invest in helping the rural population to have a stake in their local economies .
These people need infrastructure , technical skills for farming and animal husbandry , and vocational training to establish small businesses in the agro-processing , engineering , IT and service sectors .
They need the kind of support provided by micro-finance schemes such as the Gramine Bank in Bangladesh , and I strongly support Mr Khanbhai in this matter .
A ' bottom-up ' approach is the only way to regenerate rural areas .
Asian countries like China , India and Bangladesh were food-deficient and net importers 20 years ago .
Subsidies to farmers , selecting appropriate seed , irrigation , micro-finance for small farmers , establishing food cooperatives and other rural investments transformed the agricultures of these countries .
Today , they grow enough food for their huge populations and have surplus for exports .
There must be a lesson here .
The EU and the US offer substantial subsidies to their farmers .
Without such subsidies , there would be no economic prosperity in countries like Spain , Portugal , Ireland , Italy and France , which have all benefited from European subsidies .
Without investment in Europe 's rural infrastructure , the EU would not function as it does today .
Sadly , international aid for rural areas in sub-Saharan countries has dropped from EUR 14 billion in 1988 to EUR 8 billion in 1998 .
This has resulted in a sharp decline in food production .
It has been aggravated by natural disasters , both drought and floods .
A decade of famine and malnutrition has precipitated disease , fear , social tension and civil war in many poor countries .
The EU needs to encourage land reform , the efficient and fair utilisation of water resources and the transfer of technology for the rural populations of poor countries .
We need to teach them to grow their own food , create their own employment and sustain their own economies .
The poor do not wish to beg for life ; they value their self-respect and dignity in the same way as we do .
They do not want our fish .
They need to learn how to fish and feed themselves .
I agree with Mr Khanbhai that this is the spirit within which the EU should reassess its policy on aid .
Agriculture , agrarian reform and rural economic development should be top priority areas for EU assistance .
This will help production , employment and the sustainable management of natural resources in developing countries , enabling the poor to be self-reliant and break their dependence on our aid .
I hope that the House will accept this report .
Mr Khanbhai has agreed to over 75 per cent of the amendments that have been tabled .

Mr President , the Commission would first like to thank Mr Khanbhai - and Mr Corrie as his stand-in - for their work in bringing an issue as important as sustainable rural development to this debate .
Poverty and food insecurity in developing countries will not be eradicated without substantial investment in rural areas .
The Commission fully shares the main thrust of the report on the importance of rural and agricultural development for poor people in developing countries .
Beyond rural development , the report also addresses issues related to EU trade and agricultural policy .
It underlines the importance of improving trade opportunities for the rural poor , which we fully share .
In this respect , the World Summit on Sustainable Development reconfirmed the commitments made in the WTO Ministerial Declaration in Doha - the so-called Doha Development Agenda .
These include taking into account the specificity of developing countries in the trade negotiations and putting in place flanking measures such as capacity building and trade-related technical assistance .
The Commission has recently sent to the Council and Parliament a communication that will provide the policy framework for this type of assistance .
The Commission wants to highlight the positive trade agenda promoted by the European Union and adopted in Johannesburg to complement the WTO process .
It is also worth recalling that the Union is committed to providing to least-developed countries , through the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative , full duty-free and quota-free access to the European market .
We hope to see similar initiatives adopted by other developed countries .
As regards agriculture , the Commission supports the emphasis on the multifunctionality of agriculture , a concept of particular relevance for developing countries .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the reference made in the report to the dumping of European agricultural production .
The Community provides an export refund , which reduces the difference between the higher Community price and the world price .
Technically that cannot be called dumping .
Ceilings on export subsidies , in quantity and value , are regulated by the WTO , and these ceilings have been reduced between 1995 and 2000 .
The Community has constantly reduced its use of export refunds , beyond WTO obligations .
These positive efforts should be recognised .
But rural development is the main focus of the report .
For many donors , including the European Commission , rural poverty is a multidimensional issue .
To address it , it is necessary to combine interventions at different levels .
At national level , we need to improve incomes , reduce inequality in access to productive assets and services , combat the degradation of natural resources and reduce vulnerability to risk .
At an international level , we need to improve the coherence between developed countries ' domestic policies - in particular trade and agriculture - and their development objectives .
In developing countries , addressing such a complex set of issues requires coherent and balanced national strategies tailored to local needs , resources and institutional settings .
Although there is no ' one size fits all ' solution , the Commission , in its recent communication , ' Fighting Rural Poverty ' , has identified some key principles to be applied in all rural development interventions .
They include the importance of promoting gender equality , maximising the impact on poverty , supporting national strategies and the participation of stakeholders , as well as mainstreaming environmental protection .
Support for pro-poor land reforms , capacity-building , improved access to financial services , agricultural research , infrastructure and services are all areas whose importance is underlined in the Commission strategy and in which the Community 's development programme is heavily involved .
Similarly , the Commission also broadly shares other , more specific recommendations , such as the importance of supporting the development of arts and crafts , rural training centres and domestication of wildlife .
However , the level of priority of such interventions depends on local circumstances and on their relevance for poverty reduction .
Support for such activities will therefore have to be addressed on a case ? by-case basis and in line with the priorities defined in national strategies .
Rural development is also primarily about decentralisation and local governance .
Resources will only reach the rural poor if they can be managed effectively and planned in a participatory way , with the active involvement of local communities .
The most disadvantaged sections of societies - particularly women - must be effectively represented and participate in these processes .
Reinforcing and democratising local institutions is a key challenge for governments and donors alike .
The report rightly emphasises the importance of good governance for the sustainability of all development efforts .
Once again I thank the rapporteur , Mr Khanbhai , and Mr Corrie .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Mr Khanbhai very much for drafting his report and also for making it possible for us to cooperate so effectively with all colleagues .
Agriculture and rural development are of central importance in the EU and developing countries alike .
That is why I support and welcome the fact that ' food security and sustainable rural development strategies ' is one of the six priorities listed for EU development policy .
The multifunctional agricultural model and its underlying philosophy is , I believe , also the only right way forward for developing countries .
We should continue to support the approach of making sustainable management one of the non-trade concerns .
Let me remind you that the EU is by far the world 's largest importer of agricultural products from poor countries .
The Commissioner has already pointed out that the EU has substantially increased market access for the poorest countries in recent years .
I hope that other industrialised countries will also follow the EU 's example .
The agripolitical measures in the developing countries should not focus exclusively on exports , but must above all guarantee the food security of the domestic population .
The war on poverty must continue to be the overriding aim of development policy .
An important precondition for this is to improve the infrastructure for supplying energy , for transport , for water supply and distribution and for health and education .
Above all , however , improved governmental and administrative systems as well as democracy and the rule of law are necessary , as has already been said , to enable robust policy-making .
Appropriate land reform and access to water and productive resources can enable the rural population to increase their standard of living and help to boost economic development .
To support the process of building appropriate capacities in the developing countries , the European Community should provide more technical help for farmers and also pass on technical know-how , for example on renewable energies and in many other areas .
A further essential aspect is , in my view , policy in rural areas , so as to stop migration to the slums , and it is also important that there be proper recognition of the work carried out by women .
Mr President , agriculture , support for rural development and the protection of rural communities are at the heart of Mr Khanbhai 's report and he addresses many of the fundamental inequities which feature so prominently in the lives of the rural poor .
Clearly , as other speakers have said , the European Union and its Member States have a very important role to play .
I think we need to show much more understanding of the real reasons for the so-called urban drift from rural areas and of the effect of the systems and structures which conspire to destroy the livelihoods of millions who live by the land .
The European Union is , of course , part of the solution .
As the biggest trading block , we have an important role to play .
I have to say that it is sheer hypocrisy to continue to protect our own agricultural competitive position with higher resources , while at the same time forcing developing countries to liberalise .
Rapid opening of their markets threatens food security and sustainable livelihoods in developing countries .
The parallel negotiations which will be going on at the WTO and between the ACP and the European Union must be used as an opportunity to show that the European Union clearly understands that trade and market access and tariff levels are directly and inextricably linked to our understanding of how we meet those critical millennium development goals .
The paradox is that , in a time of global plenty , farmers in developing countries are abandoning the land and agriculture .
They simply cannot compete with heavily subsidised food flooding into their markets and dumped on their markets .
The report describes the effect of the dumping of milk on Jamaica and the dumping of beef on West Africa .
In Uganda , for instance , the coffee growers are suffering enormously .
One hundred and fifty Ugandan shillings are what a grower gets for a kilo of the coffee he grows .
If you go down to the Sheraton in Kampala , you pay one thousand Ugandan shillings for one single cup of coffee .
With growers receiving such a poor reward for their efforts , it is not surprising that Oxfam describes this as a situation that affects health and education and the whole rural community .
So small farmers from Haiti to Mexico and Mozambique to Tanzania are simply selling up and selling out .
They are unable to compete with the rich agricultural barons .
That is the reality we are facing , one which Mr Khanbhai deals with very well indeed .
He also gives us a very timely reminder in his report that 75 % of the 1.2 billion living on less than one dollar a day are in rural areas .
That certainly is a call to action .
Mr President , I support this report wholeheartedly , but I wonder , Commissioner , if we do not manage to do what you so rightly say , and if we do not manage to do what this report says , whether we will be part of the problem or part of the solution ?
Our wealth means that we ought to be part of the solution .
When I read in the report that investment in rural economies has almost halved over the last ten years , then we should not be surprised that the income of the rural population has also dropped .
When I toured Africa I was ashamed ; throughout the rural areas of any country , people living in remote rural areas have nothing , they scarcely have a chance of survival .
For this reason , I want to ask that we set priorities .
That from now on we should declare that we will stop selling products from our markets that will cause problems for local producers .
We should set honest prices .
I agree with what has been said about the price of coffee .
I would like to propose that we now start by abolishing unnecessary subsidies on exports ; that we set up a phased plan in which we demonstrate that we want to help rural economies , rural culture , the men and women - as you correctly stressed - who live there , to produce their own food by their own efforts , with our specific help , using environmentally-friendly methods and new forms of energy without being dragged into a system of agricultural production which has proved disadvantageous for our own countries .
Mr President , we have a long way to go before successfully bridging the gap between Third World poverty and living standards in the developed world .
The proposed enlargement of the European Union reminds us of the inequalities between existing Member States and the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
While I am not suggesting that our efforts should be concentrated on assisting these countries in preference to Third World countries , the more we consolidate the economies , particularly the agricultural economies of the proposed new Member States , the more successful we will be in achieving our goal for Third World development .
It does no harm to remind ourselves - and I do not say that for any selfish reason - that the EU 's commitment to sustainability of family farming , both in existing Member States and for new entrants , is facing considerable difficulties .
While the Commission proposals for a further reform of the CAP are likely to be more compatible with Third World development needs , I fear that our aspirations to protect Community farmers , particularly those on the margins , are not going to be easy to achieve .
The fact that 1.2 billion people living in the rural areas of developing countries live in poverty is a shocking indictment of the developed world , but equally the long-term development and sustainability of Third World economies depend on our efforts and - hopefully - success in helping them to develop and add value to their natural resources , with corresponding measures to assist with market access for their products .
It should not , however , go unnoticed that the EU is the world 's largest food importer , with 53 % coming from developing countries thanks to the CAP compatible trade concessions .
I agree with Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture 's viewpoint that uncontrolled free world trade has had devastating effects on the development of food crops in developing countries and their entitlement to protect producers by tariff barriers .
As regards agricultural and rural development , the EU and developing countries have the same objective of developing a multifunctional form of agriculture with increasing emphasis on rural development and the sustainability of rural communities .
It is wrong to place all the blame for the problems of developing countries on the common agricultural policy , particularly for the reasons I have stated .
I support the continuing access of products from developing countries to Community markets but believe the transition must be gradual and carefully planned in tandem with CAP reform .
I abhor the term ' dumping ' in so far as it refers to food produced in excess of market requirements .
It makes no sense to overproduce a food product for which there are no consumers and even less sense to offload that product in a manner which disrupts the agricultural economy of developing countries .
Farmers and processors must be discouraged from seeking over-access to the markets of developing countries as a substitute for poor marketing and product diversification within the Community or other developed economies .
Mr President , I heartily agree with the aims of the Khanbhai report , which deals with the issue of how to reconcile European agricultural methods with the development of agriculture in the developing world .
I should like to make three observations about this well-balanced and explicit report .
First of all , a proper anti-dumping policy is necessary in order to bring about more reasonable world market prices .
Dumping product surpluses onto world markets at extremely low prices in many cases makes world market prices drop to very low levels .
This makes it almost impossible for farmers in poor countries to participate independently in world trade at market prices .
The European Union is , however , still guilty of dumping in return for export subsidies .
These subsidies account for 8 % of the agricultural budget , which runs to EUR 40 billion .
The rapporteur ought to have highlighted the abolition of export subsidies more clearly .
Secondly , the situation for poor countries can be improved by giving them greater access to the European market for products that are essential to them .
Access to the European market is hindered by tariff barriers and , more particularly , by non-tariff barriers such as health and environmental requirements .
Increased access is especially crucial for countries that are only active in one product category , such as bananas , sugar or cotton .
The rapporteur recognises the need to diversify exports and indeed makes practical suggestions .
Finally , the trading position of poor countries is helped most by targeted development cooperation .
The report correctly refers to the need for facilitating support .
Structural aid for basic infrastructure comes primarily from the Member States .
The report should therefore leave the setting of priorities with regard to spending this money to the donors and recipient countries themselves .
Overall , the report contributes towards achieving a productive relationship between the agricultural sectors of Europe and the developing countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report contains some very important statements , particularly where it recognises that mechanisms to protect EU farmers through the common agricultural policy are competing with the interests of farmers in developing countries , where it calls - as Members have done repeatedly - for the progressive elimination of trade and tariff barriers and increased access to markets for producers from developing countries and regrets the EU subsidised produce dumped on developing country markets .

The report contradicts itself on this matter , predicting devastating effects of free trade which I am sure will not come to pass in the agricultural sector , but the central concern , which , I repeat , has been mentioned several times in this evening 's debate too , is - and , at European level , must be - the barriers which the European Union continues to erect to access of goods , including agricultural produce , from developing countries .
We must bear in mind that farm subsidies in wealthy countries amount to USD 350 billion per year , which is seven times more than the USD 50 billion which the same countries appropriate each year to external aid .
In this connection , we could recall what Oxfam pointed out too , namely that , in actual fact , thanks , purely , to trade barriers , the aid we give to a continent such as Africa , for instance , is less than the value of the trade opportunities we provide for these countries .
There are two things I would like to say to the European Commission . I believe that we need to reflect on the characteristics of an agricultural policy which would be sustainable for the developing countries and , therefore , on the fact that the Community agricultural policy is unsustainable .
I believe we must start to take the line that the CAP has to be abolished , albeit gradually , for there are no longer any economic , social , national , European or international grounds for preserving the CAP system .
The reform proposal put forward by the Commission is inadequate in this sense , for it preserves the amount of aid completely intact . The report helps us to understand the devastating impact of this on the developing countries .
The Commissioner mentioned the Everything but Arms initiative , and rightly so , but I would like to remind her and the House as a whole that the Everything but Arms initiative itself provides for the deferral of the definitive abolition of tariffs on three major products - bananas , rice and sugar - to 2009 .
I feel that this does us no credit at all .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Khanbhai for his excellent report .
Despite the moderate tone of the report , he makes some criticism of the European Union and the CAP , which I feel is , in some cases , unfair .
Firstly , the report does not acknowledge the fact that the EU is today the largest market in the world for agri-food products from the poorest countries .
We need only remember that the EU is the world 's largest importer of agricultural products and that imports from developing countries stand at more than EUR 27 billion per year , in other words , more than all imports from these countries bought by the United States , Japan , New Zealand , Canada and Australia put together .
Secondly , the EU and its Member States are by far the largest supporters of these countries , providing , for example , around USD 28 billion of development aid , compared to the USD 11 billion provided by Japan or the USD 9 billion from the United States .
Thirdly , we should remember that , in negotiations at the World Trade Organisation , it is the European Union that has pushed hardest for positive discrimination in favour of developing countries and that it is the EU that is responsible for the most important initiative for the world 's 50 poorest countries : the ' Everything but arms ' initiative , which proposes allowing the main products of these countries onto the Community market free of any tariff and without these countries having to accept any reciprocal measures in this area .
Lastly , I should like to point out that , fundamentally , farming in the EU complements farming in developing countries , since these are major importers of products from temperate zones , whereas the European Union is a major importer of tropical products .
The conflict is often seen more from the point of view of the interests of certain companies operating in these countries than from the point of view of the interests of local communities .
Mr President , in this year 2002 during which the international community has met successively in Monterrey , Rome and Johannesburg , setting as a priority the challenge of leading two-thirds of humanity out of the situation of hunger , poverty and under-development that affects them , it seemed that the European Parliament was obliged to consider and adopt a position on how the European Union can support agricultural and rural development policies that contribute to the development of the countries of the South .
The numerous amendments , which the rapporteur has shown flexibility in accepting , mean that we are faced with an acceptable and balanced motion for a resolution .
But there are principles that we should take more account of when assessing the different policies of the European Union and also , of course , Community agricultural policies .
In fact , for many years the Socialists , when judging any Community policy , have used the yardstick of what that policy offered in terms of social cohesion .
To this end a particular policy was considered by us to be positive insofar as it offered added value in terms of the cohesion of our societies and negative insofar as it increased inequalities between the Europeans .
Well , in the global world we are becoming involved in it is clear that solidarity cannot be an exclusively internal , or intra-European , value .
And therefore , every Community policy deserves our support insofar as they contribute not only to social cohesion within our borders but also to reducing inequalities at world level .
For us , the common agricultural policy was something to be welcomed , since it supported our farmers , so that they would not be left behind in a process of prosperity which was benefiting other sectors of society .
But , later on , when it comes to evaluating the Community 's agricultural policies , it will not be sufficient to measure whether they contribute to maintaining or improving the situation of our farmers and breeders .
Furthermore , we should consider whether subsidies to our producers also contribute to improving the situation in the Third World , or whether they actually devastate it , increasing the chasm separating it from our developed world .
In this case , those policies will not be acceptable and , however difficult the exercise will be , others will have to be found which are good , fair and provide a balance for the North , while being good and fair for the South , and providing a balance in terms of relations between the South and the North .
From this viewpoint we will vote in favour of the Resolution proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation as a conclusion to the report presented by Mr Khanbhai .
Mr President , the problem of food security and famine faced by 20 % of the world 's population is , without doubt , a blot on the copybook of modern civilisation and proves that capitalism is unable to resolve even basic problems .
The salient features of this report are a hypocritical interest in the people and farmers of developing countries , wishful thinking and contradictions and its ultimate purpose is to offer those responsible for the problem an alibi so that they can continue with the very policy which is exacerbating the problem .
The objective of the proposed draft is to resolve the food security problem and it sets an interim date of 2015 for halving the number of people forced to live on a dollar a day .
This objective is cancelled out by CAP reforms , which cut Community agricultural output in order to bring it into line with the international market , as defined by the WTO rather than mankind 's food requirements . Why ?
Because , according to the prevailing view in the European Union , food is not a commodity that meets various needs , it is a commodity that guarantees huge profits for the food industry and multinationals .
With its endless reforms of the CAP , the European Union is becoming more and more product-deficient , ruining farmers and , at the same time , forcing developing countries , with extortionate agreements and price mechanisms , to sell their agricultural produce at knock-down prices , tightening the noose around the neck of their people and protecting the multinationals ' profits .
The solution is not to abolish subsidies in developed countries , ruining their farmers and bringing them into line with farmers in developing countries , but to maintain a parity in international trading relations between developed and developing countries in practice , so as to improve their standard of living , reduce their foreign debt and increase their overall domestic output .
The wishful thinking and contradictions in the report reach the height of hypocrisy in the proposal to fund genetically modified crops for developing countries , to be supplied by various multinationals and never mind the consequences .
We know from experience that famine is a political and social problem , not a technical problem .
We have the productive potential and wherewithal to feed the entire world and still take care of the environment and public health , but not under the current social system , by which I mean the prevailing capitalist system .
This report keeps to the standard formula and offers no positive suggestions to mitigate the global food problem .
On the contrary , the measures it proposes will exacerbate the problem , which will be compounded by serious risks to the environment and public health and the dependency of developing countries on multinationals in the developed world .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should first like to thank my colleague , Mr Khanbhai , very much for his own-initiative report .
As a member of Parliament 's ACP delegation , I have been concerned with this issue for years .
Sustainable agricultural policy , land reform and rural development are important political challenges with a view to the developing countries being entirely independent .
Why , with our considerable financial aid , have we not been able to make a more decisive contribution to improving the situation in the poorest countries ?
I constantly ask myself what Europe is doing wrong .
What are the rich countries doing wrong , but also what do the poor countries gain by stepping up their own efforts ?
I think that we will have to get much tougher on these issues because we can see - and have examples to prove it - that the world population is not prepared to put up with this injustice any longer .
As European politicians working on agriculture , we know only too well that the European Community 's common agricultural policy regularly comes in for harsh criticism for the impact that it has on agriculture in the poorest countries and this has again been the case this evening in a number of contributions to the debate .
It is true , however , that the critics often think that the answer is too easy , because it is wrong to think that a greater opening up of trade will inevitably lead to better development of the food sector in the developing countries .
Many have said it : the EU is already the largest importer of food in the world and against this background the agricultural problems in the vast majority of developing countries will not be resolved solely by more intensive trade and agricultural deregulation .
It is actually wrong - and here too I am addressing Mrs Kinnock - to call for total liberalisation and an abandonment of national quotas in developing countries .
This would lead to merciless distortions of competition , which small farmers would have absolutely no chance of withstanding .
In conclusion , allow me to mention three facts : we need production for domestic consumption and for export on the basis of a reformed system of land tenure ; we need better employment ; we need sustainable management and we should consider new ways forward .
Mr President , we could go on all night discussing rural development , agricultural subsidies , gender equality , land reform , increased ODA as part of rural development and so on , but I am sure you would not want us to , even though those serious issues deserve our full attention .
The debate will continue , and we have only touched upon these most sensitive and important issues .
Agricultural reform , as outlined in the review , goes in the right direction , but that will certainly not be enough in the long run .
I was happy to see that the fight against poverty was at the forefront of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg .
That will help our forthcoming discussions .
This report provides valuable input in the implementation stage and in the follow-up to the summit , as does the communication on rural development presented by my colleague , Mr Nielson .
I thank you for this very important and interesting debate .
Subsidies to large agricultural holdings in Europe are restricting agricultural production levels from small holdings in Europe and also those from developing countries which are not capable of contending with such competition .
The CAP must be revised in this area by including all the measures that are likely to enable these countries to develop a competitive agricultural industry with respect to production costs , and also product quality .
We will therefore ensure respect for the environment so that its degradation does not lead to the degradation of farmland , particularly compared to intensive farming , the intensive use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides , the pollution of agricultural produce by GMOs .
We will therefore be able to safeguard a healthy and organic production .
Particular attention will be paid to these issues , especially by means of collaboration with the common research centre .
The preservation and rational use of water resources are also of the greatest importance for these countries .
The Short and Medium-Term Priority Action Programme ( SMAP ) and MEDA programme and all the other programmes to enhance cooperation between the European Union and third countries could also be developed in this area .
Mr President , the protection of biodiversity is one of our most important , but also one of our most difficult , tasks .
Time and time again we find ourselves in a situation in which it seems that now is not the time to opt for biodiversity .
Time and time again there are good reasons to abandon , for the time being , strict and specific measures for the protection of endangered species .
This is the case now .
I am talking specifically about African elephants .
I believe that there are good reasons for not imposing a total ban on the ivory trade .
Firstly , in accordance with scientific advice , the African elephant simply does not fulfil the criteria ; the elephant population is growing and is healthy .
Secondly , I am not convinced that a total ban would mean that poaching would cease .
A ban might lead to a fuelling of illegal trade and push up the price .
That will not help any elephant .
Thirdly , the idea of the destruction of ivory meets with considerable resistance .
Destruction goes against every notion of sustained use .
Why should we have to destroy a natural , valued and valuable material such as ivory ?
Finally , I am convinced that protection does not work without commitment from the local authorities and local population .
We can try and prescribe laws for others from our ivory towers here in Strasbourg .
We can preach morals from our ivory pulpit , but we have to realise that it does not work like that .
Five countries in southern Africa have presented alternative plans .
They have gained experience and have also had some success .
We ought to take their arguments seriously at least .
Conservation is not something that can be imposed by the international community , and we should not want that to be the case .
There are , therefore , good reasons not to transfer the African elephant to Appendix I tomorrow .
However there are also good reasons to do so , and that is sending a political signal .
The signal that the European Parliament takes the protection of biodiversity seriously .
That the European Parliament is now committing to going all out to preserve biodiversity within the European Union .
To summarise , I can reluctantly approve the resolution , but , as far as I am concerned , it must incorporate a political pledge - the pledge that we ourselves will also do something about biodiversity .
That we must try to find a solution that will also work for the African peoples .
I would also like to speak about the elephants .
Five countries in southern Africa want to sell their stocks of ivory .
That would be very wrong .
The previous CITES conferences took the decision to stop protecting the elephant .
Unfortunately that was approved by the Commission with the majority of the fifteen EU governments , but against the wishes of the European Parliament .
This has proved disastrous .
Illegal elephant poaching is now taking place on a much bigger scale , also in southern Africa .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes unanimously to give elephants full protection once more .
The Commission must abandon its cowardly , half-hearted position .
MIKE ( monitoring of illegal killing of elephants ) does not work .
Let us use European money - EUR 10 to 15 million would be enough - to buy up and destroy southern Africa 's ivory stocks , and if the majority of the European governments will not agree to that , then the NGOs will have to collect enough money to stop all the elephants being sold off .
There are only 10 000 elephants left in Asia and 300 000 in Africa .
Twenty years ago , in 1981 , there were as many as 1 500 000 .
Whoever maintains that elephants are in a strong position is mistaken .
I do not approve of the culling of elephants ; it is uncivilised .
I am curious to see who will vote for culling tomorrow .
Mr President , I do not think that any of us here are contesting whether or not there should be an ivory trade : of course there should not .
But that has nothing to do with the fact that southern African elephants should not be moved back into Appendix I.
I do not know whether you have seen the letter we received this week from the European Sustainable Use specialist group .
It reminds us that such a decision would be directly contrary to the scientific advice given to the parties by IUCN , who are the official advisers to the CITES conference on species listing proposals .
This advice points out that the elephant populations of the southern African countries mentioned do not meet the criteria for Appendix I , but meet the criteria for Appendix II .
So , scientifically we have absolutely no reason to move them .
Nor should we if we want to maintain the populations because it is quite clear that the use of wild living resources , if they are sustainable - and they are in southern Africa - is an important conservation tool .
The social and economic benefits derived from such use provide incentives for people to conserve them .
As it is , if we were to take them back into Appendix I , it would send the wrong signal to those countries that have a small elephant population .
It would say to them that if they try to invest money in preserving their elephants , they will not get back any revenue .
So they will pay out for the elephants , instead of paying for schools or hospitals .
What kind of incentive to preserve elephants does that give to countries with small elephant populations ?
It is a pity that more of you were not at the presentation by the Minister of Wildlife and Tourism of Botswana .
She said that they loved their elephants .
They want to preserve them and the way they can best do this is to keep them in Appendix II .
Mr President , I am going to comment on paragraph 3 of this motion for a resolution and , specifically , on the species with the scientific name of Dissostichus , which is known as the Patagonian or Antarctic toothfish .
The Dissostichus is of great commercial value ( it is known as ' black gold ' ) and its balance is very delicate .
The Committee on Fisheries , of which I am a member , has produced three reports on this resource and I am rapporteur for the one which relates to the creation of a system for documenting catches .
Today I would like to argue to the House that it should not be included on the CITES list , for the following reasons : we cannot forget that there is already an international organisation - the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources , which from now on I will refer to by its initials , CAMELAR - which , for twenty years , has been successfully dealing with the preservation of this and other species in the Antarctic Ocean .
The Community is a contracting party to this Convention .
The proposal to include Dissostichus in the CITES Convention did not come from us but from Australia .
Neither we nor - as far as I know - the Commission oppose this ; we simply believe that it would be more useful for CAMELAR itself to take this decision at its annual assembly , which is taking place this week and next week in Chile , and in which the European Parliament will be represented by Mr Stevenson , the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries .
Following tough negotiations , CAMELAR has now incorporated Canada and Mauritius with the status of associate members .
Together with the United States , Canada is the main commercial destination of the species Dissostichus and Mauritius , a significant place of transit .
Their entry into CAMELAR gives this international organisation control of 98 % of the world trade in Dissostichus .
For us , CITES would be useful as a complement to CAMELAR .
But we must be cautious , because - if our decision-making moves faster than the natural course of events - we could unintentionally cause unwanted contrary effects , weakening an organisation that , during its long life , has done a great amount of good work with regard to the Antarctic marine environment , which is extremely delicate .
We must concentrate our efforts , not disperse them , and we must increase our presence in multilateral fisheries organisations , which is the only way to respond to the challenges that the preservation of fish species confront us with on a world scale .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you - and also my fellow Members - have already said , the issue of elephants will once again be discussed at the forthcoming CITES meeting .
If we move elephants back into Appendix I , at the request of India and Kenya , will this be enough to prevent these animals from tragically becoming extinct in some countries of Africa , even though their numbers are on the increase in other countries ?
Opinions are divided .
The MIKE system that has been set up , which is highly sophisticated , has not yet provided , and will not provide , according to a number of specialists , a satisfactory answer .
It has , in fact , absorbed a substantial amount of funding which could have been put to better use , had it , for example , been spent on ways to combat poaching or on the training of keepers .
Elephants are poached for their ivory and their natural habitat has been considerably altered and reduced .
Even if their use is authorised , whatever the precise and restrictive framework that might be decided upon , there is a danger that poaching will once again become widespread and that this , in the long term , will led to elephants becoming extinct in some countries of Africa .
The European Union must therefore very firmly reject any unlawful resumption of the trade in ivory .
At the same time , what lesson could we have to give the local populations who would levy a reasonable tax on their fauna , when we ourselves , in France for example , are incapable of providing adequate conditions for the survival of bears in the Pyrenees or rare wolves in the Alps ?
By way of comparison , we welcome the gesture made by Cuba , which has withdrawn its request for the use of turtles and , in parallel , the European Union has a duty to reject the request , submitted by the Cayman Islands to breed green turtles in captivity , which could facilitate the illegal trade in these animals .
The desire and the need to safeguard biodiversity on the planet requires the adoption of tough and proactive decisions which must not allow any loophole for traffickers of any kind , whilst enabling the local populations to use their natural resources , including fauna , in a sustainable manner , even if this may sometimes be akin to attempting the impossible .
Mr President , I would like to conclude with two short remarks on elephants and toothfish .
First , I would like to reassure you that the Commission remains opposed to any measures that could increase the illegal killing of elephants .
I have already stated that we are opposed to the resumption of the commercial ivory trade until it can be demonstrated that this will not lead to an increase in poaching .
At the same time , I acknowledge the excellent record of a number of southern African countries in managing their elephant populations .
It is easy to understand why these countries sometimes feel they are penalised rather than rewarded for their efforts .
If their concerns are not addressed , there is a real risk that these countries will be unable to maintain popular support for elephant conservation or for CITES in general .
We should avoid measures such as the proposed stricter classification for elephants in CITES which will only serve to polarise the debate , without achieving any real additional protection for these animals .
On toothfish , we must respect the competence of CAMLAR and other fisheries organisations , at the same time taking a constructive approach to any proposals that might achieve better protection for commercial fish species .
Accordingly , if CITES listing can strengthen and complement CAMLAR 's current management of toothfish you may rest assured that it will have my support and that of the Commission .
To conclude the debate on this statement I have received a motion for a resolution B5-0527 / 2002 , pursuant to Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the joint debate on two reports by Mr Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy :
( A5-0291 / 2002 ) , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals ( COM ( 2001 ) 803 - C5-0320 / 2002 - 2002 / 0026 ( CNS ) ) ,
( A5-0290 / 2002 ) , on the proposal for a Council decision approving , on behalf of the European Community , the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade ( COM ( 2001 ) 802 - C5-0095 / 2002 - 2002 / 0030 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have before you two Commission proposals concerning the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent ( PIC ) Procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade .
One is a decision to ratify this Convention on behalf of the European Community ; the other the regulation required in order to implement the Convention in the Community .
The decision on ratification hardly needs further elaboration .
The Commission proposal for an implementing regulation reflects the position of both the Commission and the Member States : that the provisions should go beyond purely incorporating the Convention , which was the result of a compromise between all of the parties to the negotiations .
The Community called for stricter provisions in certain respects but did not manage to push them through .
The Commission considers that the proposals are well balanced and that they will contribute to the achievement of the Community 's objective of improving the protection of human health and the environment in importing countries - especially developing countries - from hazardous chemicals , without preventing the smooth application of the Convention .
The Commission is grateful for the support the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has given to the proposals .
It wants the Community to ratify the Convention early on , in accordance with the spirit of the conclusions of the Johannesburg Summit .
The Commission hopes , therefore , that agreement can be reached as soon as possible on the implementing regulation , which it considers to be a prerequisite for the work on ratification to continue .
In this connection , the Commission wishes to stress the efforts of the Council and Parliament in making progress with the work on the proposals , above all , the compromises reached as the basis for a possible agreement between the Council and Parliament at first reading of the proposal for an implementing regulation .
By way of conclusion , I wish sincerely to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , something which I should have said right at the start .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I do not often get 10 minutes of speaking time but I hope I will not need it all .
We have before us two reports regarding the import and export of chemical products .
The first report supports the approval of the Treaty of Rotterdam in respect of specific hazardous chemical products and pesticides in international trade .
I propose that we do this as quickly as possible , given that the Treaty can enter into force from the moment that it has been ratified by sufficient parties .
The report concentrates mainly on the following three points :
First of all , parties to the Treaty can only export chemicals included in the Appendix to another party to the Treaty if they have obtained prior approval from the importing country .
This is called the PIC procedure - Prior Informed Consent .
Secondly , new products may be added to the Appendix to which the PIC procedure applies .
Thirdly , a party exporting prohibited or strictly regulated chemical products must provide information to the importing party .
Moreover , all products listed in the Appendix to which the PIC procedure applies , must be labelled .
These matters have already been more or less laid down in a regulation dating back to 1992 .
The chemical industry also began to implement the Treaty of Rotterdam voluntarily in April of this year .
There is therefore no longer any reason to delay the ratification of this Treaty any longer .
The second report aims to implement the Treaty of Rotterdam through a regulation .
This regulation goes further than the Treaty of Rotterdam on a number of points .
It is somewhat stricter , more precise and broader , and this can be seen as an improvement to the legislation .
More has also been done in respect of providing information to third countries , especially developing countries .
A more difficult issue is that in the original proposal by the Commission , the Commission itself wanted to impose a monopoly on the procedures .
This is not sensible , as Member States do not all have the same legislation with regard to chemical products .
I am referring particularly to pesticides and biocides .
As you know , it will take another five to ten years before we have Community legislation on this area .
It is also possible that , even after this period , Member States will make use of exceptional provisions .
It is therefore a good idea to leave some leeway for the Member States in this regulation .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted 15 amendments .
The legal basis for the regulation has been amended from the internal market to the environment .
This means codecision for the European Parliament .
More freedom has also been created for the individual Member States , meaning that individual Member States can pass more far-reaching measures .
This will be evident from the fact that individual Member States may also make proposals with regard to adding new products to the list to which prior informed consent applies , as there is still a group of products for which there is still no harmonised European legislation , such as pesticides .
Another improvement is that the lists of hazardous products will only have to be updated each year at the most .
It is very important that persistent organic products are added to this regulation .
The arrangements made as part of the Treaty of Stockholm are included in the list of prohibited products .
As it seems that the Council had a similar vision to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , as rapporteur I have tried to complete the legislative process at first reading .
For this purpose I was given the mandate by the parliamentary groups .
The talks on this area were most satisfactory .
The Council adopted most of the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and the Council 's mostly technical adjustments were easy to incorporate .
This led to 42 new amendments , which were signed by most of the groups .
The Council sent a letter which promised that if the European Parliament accepted the total package of compromises , the Council would lay down the common position accordingly .
This means that we could complete matters by the end of the first reading , saving a considerable amount of time - at least a year .
I am really pleased to hear from Mrs Wallström that the European Commission is also able to endorse the measures wholeheartedly .
I would like to request that special attention be paid to Amendment No 22 .
With regard to the scope , it has been agreed with the Council that the rules will in any case apply to amounts exceeding 10 kg .
This will be very sensible in practice for feasibility and control purposes .
This is also part of the whole package of measures .
Mr President , the package of compromises before you is a very satisfactory result that I can heartily recommend to Parliament .
The voting slip comprises 4 blocks .
Block 1 covers the compromise amendments with the Council .
If block 1 is adopted , block 2 will no longer apply .
Block 3 comprises the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy which were approved by the Council , so we must vote in favour of these .
Finally block 4 comprises 3 amendments which must be rejected by Parliament , based on the total compromise .
Finally , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Danish Presidency for their proper , constructive cooperation .
Mr President , there is not a lot more which needs to be said , because most of it has been said by Mr Blokland .
I would like to start by agreeing with the last speaker .
This is a good report and the rapporteurs have worked really hard on it .
A first-reading agreement , though it is not absolutely certain yet , is what we would like to see .
We think that by and large the amendments are sensible additions to the text .
We are a little concerned about the proposals on Member States including chemicals in the PIC procedure and think that everyone should be properly consulted if that is going to happen .
We need this measure without delay .
It will help to improve our public health and environmental protection , both inside and outside the European Union .
We are anxious to go through with it and we will be supporting the vast majority of the amendments and following the rapporteur tomorrow .
We would like to see a solution as quickly as possible .
We need more international agreements like this and we need speed .
Many pieces of chemical legislation have taken too long to be properly implemented in the past .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am tremendously pleased that we have reached this compromise , which means that we will now also be able to arrive at a compromise with the Council at first reading .
I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , the Danish Presidency and the Commission for making a real effort to arrive at a solution which is satisfactory and acceptable for us all , even if not all of our amendments have been adopted .
The intentions of the Rotterdam Convention are important , and it is also important that it be ratified as quickly as possible , because it concerns the trade in extremely hazardous chemicals .
I also think that it can be said that the Commission did an excellent job in presenting this proposal for a regulation , which is to replace the present legislation on hazardous chemicals and pesticides with the rules of the Rotterdam Convention .
The proposal actually goes beyond the Convention , for example in proposing that the export notification procedure , too , must be extended to cover articles containing so-called ' unreacted ' forms of chemicals and that the export of certain chemicals must be banned outright .
I am extremely pleased with the proposal , therefore .
The aim of this whole exercise and of the Convention is to improve the control of the trade in hazardous chemicals and to place joint and increased responsibility on importing and exporting countries .
It is about protecting human health and the environment .
For this reason , I also believe that it is reasonable and fair that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , with the help of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , has changed the legal basis from Article 133 to Article 175 , which means that the European Parliament has codecision powers and , at the same time , enables the Member States to have stricter rules .
I really hope , therefore , that we obtain a large majority , perhaps unanimity , in favour of this report tomorrow .
I believe that we have every reason to congratulate ourselves .
Mr President , I shall make short comments on some of the amendments tabled for the vote tomorrow .
Most relate to the draft implementing regulation .
Firstly on the legal base , as the Commission has already made clear in the Council , it believes that Article 133 - not Article 175 ( 1 ) - is the correct legal base .
The Commission has to reserve its right to make use of the legal means at its disposal .
Given our position on the legal base , the Commission cannot accept that national regulatory actions taken by Member States should only fall within the scope of the regulation and be subject to the procedures for export notification and PIC notification .
It follows that the Commission cannot accept Amendments 3 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 20 , 26 , 33 and 34 .
On the other hand , the Commission recognises that Community import responses for PIC chemicals should , additionally , give us as complete a picture as possible .
The Commission can therefore accept Amendments 11 and 18 .
On the Commission 's role as regards Community participation in the Convention , given its position on the legal base , the Commission cannot accept Amendment 28 .
Article 14 of the Commission proposals provides for the possibility of an export ban for certain chemicals to be listed in Annex V. The Commission knows the wish of Parliament and the Council to add the chemicals subject to the POPs Convention to Annex V , in accordance with the provisions of the relevant annexes to that convention .
However , the Commission can accept Amendment 56 , as drafted , together with the associated Amendments 41 to 46 , 48 , 50 and 53 .
The remaining amendments are technical , mainly aimed at giving greater precision to certain provisions .
The Commission can accept all these amendments .
I now turn to the draft ratification decision .
Three amendments have been tabled and , for the reasons I have already explained , the Commission cannot accept the change of legal base proposed in Amendment 1 , nor can it accept Amendment 3 that stems from it .
Finally , the Commission can accept Amendment 2 which reintroduces the principle of a key Commission role in the Community 's participation in the different bodies implementing the convention .
I shall hand over a summary of the Commission position on oral statements , if that is acceptable to you .
Finally , once again I thank Mr Blokland for his hard work on a constructive and valuable report .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing the thanks of the Commission to the rapporteur , Mr García ? Margallo y Marfil , for his work and for his extremely forthcoming attitude .
I would also like to express our appreciation of the fact that Mr García ? Margallo y Marfil has decided not to retable the amendments which played a role in the first reading of this proposal .
I have listened with great interest to what Mr García ? Margallo y Marfil has just said .
Many of the matters that he discussed are important but , at the present time , the Fiscalis programme is more restricted than he would have liked .
However , it is important that the programme should be adopted before the expiry of the current Fiscalis programme , which ends on the 31 December of this year .
I am therefore very pleased that this proposal has secured the support of the European Parliament at second reading .
I would therefore like to welcome , in particular , the positive contribution of the rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mr García ? Margallo y Marfil .
As you may be aware from the Commission 's communication to Parliament on the Council 's common position , the Commission has expressed its satisfaction that the Council endorsed the general approach adopted in its original proposal .
The Commission has noted that the Council has supported the continuation of the actions currently carried out under the existing Fiscalis programme .
In particular , the Commission has welcomed the Council 's support for extending these actions to the area of direct taxation .
Nevertheless , the communication regretted the reduction in budget from the Commission 's original proposal of EUR 56 million to EUR 44 million .
I am satisfied that an agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission has been possible , so that the new programme may be adopted shortly .
For that support , I would like to thank Members of Parliament and , in particular , as I said , Mr García ? Margallo y Marfil .
Mr President , I also welcome the progress made in this report on the Fiscalis programme for the next five years .
I would particularly like to welcome and draw attention to the statement in the common position .
As the rapporteur has already mentioned , it points out that this is not a political programme , but one designed to enhance administrative cooperation between Member States ' tax officials .
It is important that we are clear about this objective .
We are talking here about improving administration , and not in any way about tax harmonisation .
When it was first proposed that the extension of the programme was going to be aimed at direct taxation , there was a lot of concern , particularly in the UK , that this might lead to measures to introduce harmonisation of direct taxes .
We therefore welcome the fact that the common position clearly states this will not happen .
If I may speak on behalf of the UK once again , we particularly welcome this because we have been among the most active users of the Fiscalis programme over the last few years .
We think it is very valuable , so I would certainly be concerned if anything happened to detract from the programme and make it more difficult for certain Member States to take part in it .
The programme has much to offer .
It has introduced exchanges of officials ; it has introduced seminars on tax issues of common interest ; it has provided multilateral control exercises , it has developed professional training , such as audit skills ; it has improved language training and it has maintained and developed communication and information exchange systems .
That is all very good stuff and to be welcomed , continued and improved upon .
What we are always trying to do in these sort of situations is improve the way that the systems work and get things to work better .
Certainly , that has been one of the achievements of the Fiscalis programme .
Therefore , it is to be regretted , as the Commissioner said , that we are seeing a cut in the budget .
All we can hope is that the budget , as it now stands , will be adequate to take the programme forward .
So , on the whole , I welcome the common position and the fact that it looks as if we are going to be able to achieve an agreement and get the programme extended .
I also welcome the fact that we are very clear now that this is not about tax harmonisation in any way , but about administrative systems .
Mr President , the absence of an institutional agreement would lead to a delicate situation as the rapporteur has already acknowledged , given the urgency of adopting a new Fiscalis framework that is operational on 1 January 2003 .
It is a shame , however , that the Council 's agreement with the positions adopted by Parliament has been established only for a minimum period .
It is significant , incidentally , that whilst acknowledging that the aim of the Fiscalis programme is not to harmonise tax legislation , the Commission has welcomed the fact that a statement to this effect has been included in the minutes .
Even though it may be acceptable to classify the Fiscalis programme as a mere tool for strengthening administrative cooperation , the European Parliament will nevertheless have to concern itself with the political effects of implementing this type of programme .
Although it is true that tax evasion and fraud have a national dimension specific to each country , they also and increasingly have a supranational dimension rooted in the use of sophisticated techniques and schemes .
At a particularly delicate time for the Union 's public finances , these factors cannot be ignored and much less can we fail to take advantage of the opportunities arising in order to change and improve the tax situation .
It should be added that the EU is on the threshold of an historic round of enlargement , which means that , with the entry of new countries and different tax policies , new and hitherto unseen problems will also arise .
In fact , the new programme extends the scope of the programme to cover not only direct taxation , but also the candidate countries .
Improving the functioning of tax systems in the internal market is , in itself , a praiseworthy objective , but combating tax fraud and evasion as well as launching bases with a minimum degree of harmonisation are also opportunities that should not be wasted .
I therefore regret the fact that the Commission has invoked Article 95 of the Treaty with regard to this matter , and has not dared to invoke Article 93 .
With the reserves that have been created and bearing in mind the need for the new programme to get off the ground , I support the rapporteur 's recommendation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Welcome
I would like , on behalf of the House to give a warm welcome to the delegation from New Zealand , who are led by the Speaker of the House of Representatives , Mr Jonathan Hunt , and who are seated in the Distinguished Visitors ' Gallery .
Mr Speaker , we welcome you !
The delegation from New Zealand consists of five members of the country 's House of Representatives .
The Tenth Interparliamentary Conference between the European Parliament and New Zealand started yesterday and several meetings have already been held .
Further meetings are scheduled for today .
New Zealand and the European Union are closely joined together by common values , faith in democratic institutions and the decisive role played by parliamentary democracy .
We are glad that you are visiting our House here in Strasbourg and hope that you will have good dialogues during your stay here and that the bonds of friendship between Europe and New Zealand will continue to flourish .
( Applause )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0343 / 2002 ) by Mr Robert Goebbels on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Council common position ( 9359 / 6 / 2002 - C5-0384 / 2002 - 2001 / 0118 ( COD ) ) for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on insider dealing and market manipulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive on market abuses is important for several reasons .
It is the first directive to be adopted under what is known as the Lamfalussy procedure .
This is a piece of framework legislation that will be supplemented by implementing regulations .
The Commission will pass this secondary legislation on the basis of proposals by the Committee of European Securities Regulators , known as CESR in English .
The CESR will draft its proposals on the basis of broad public consultation .
The Commission will also adopt the implementing regulations in a transparent way .
The Ecofin Council and the European Parliament will monitor the Commission .
Parliament will have a deadline of three months in which to deliver an opinion .
If , within that period , Parliament adopts a resolution , the Commission will have to re-examine its draft measures .
This , therefore , provides a guarantee that secondary legislation will be democratically monitored .
For the future , in order to provide the possibility both of giving secondary legislation more regulations of a technical nature and of providing colegislators with final decision-making rights , a ' call-back ' procedure , amending Article 202 of the Treaty , absolutely must be provided for .
The aim of the directive is to lay down the same rules for all financial products throughout the Union , in order to combat all forms of insider dealing and market abuse .
At first reading , Parliament adopted 77 amendments .
The Council accepted 60 of these in full and 10 in part . This is clearly a success for Parliament .
I wish to pay tribute to the Belgian , Spanish and Danish presidencies and to the Commission staff , who have always proved willing to reach workable compromises .
I also address my thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , especially Mr Thomas Mann .
Because the Commission and the Council have declared their agreement on the five amendments accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs following second reading , the directive could be implemented quite rapidly .
The new rules will certainly help to restore confidence in the integrity of the financial markets .
Since the bursting of the speculative bubble over the stock markets and the financial scandals that have hit both the United States and Europe , many investors are hesitant .
Since the beginning of 2000 , more than USD 7 trillion of virtual stock exchange profits have also been wiped off the market .
In Europe , several thousand billion euros have also gone up in smoke .
This situation destabilises economies , penalises savers , weakens investment funds and lowers the value of pension funds .
In order to restore the confidence of investors and small savers in the financial markets , we must combat all forms of criminal connivance , forcing companies to be as transparent as possible .
In recent months , we have seen numerous revelations about the pally form of capitalism operating amongst company directors , accounting companies , investment banks and financial analysts .
This entire group , which on the surface , appears to be quite respectable , operated in such a way that it could milk stock market exuberance for their own profit .
As a result of the market 's lack of transparency , there have been conflicts of interest within accounting firms .
Many financial analysts have been both judge and accused .
Auditors and analysts duped the market players that placed their trust in them .
The reason for this was the practice of stock options and other personal bonuses to be received in line with the financial results of their employers .
The sums in question sometimes defy belief .
One example is that the CEOs of the twenty-five largest American companies to have declared themselves bankrupt in the last 18 months had awarded themselves , in the three years preceding their company 's bankruptcy , packages totalling around USD 3.3 billion .
Although we should not generalise , the golden years of the financial sector have nevertheless led to a sort of ' financial mad cow disease ' - the ' mad finance syndrome ' .
Just like the clean-up of the meat market , the need for and the establishment of a rigorous monitoring system and the clean-up of the financial markets will require precise rules to combat all insider dealing and all market manipulation .
The sole aim of the directive is to better regulate the financial markets .
It is not seeking to regulate the profession of journalism .
Unfortunately , some parts of the press , especially in the United Kingdom , have launched a sometimes incredible campaign against the Commission 's proposals , suggesting that the very freedom of the press was at stake .
The freedom of the press has not been in any danger and nor will it be .
The first article clearly states that no journalist can be held responsible for disseminating false or misleading information , unless that journalist is gaining any advantage or profit from divulging such information .
I am starting from the premise that all journalists attempt to do their job correctly and that they check their sources .
If a journalist is wrong , they will not be held responsible , unless he has touched money in the manipulation that has occurred .
Some recent scandals , from the Daily Mirror to the Magazine des actionnaires , show that no profession is entirely honest .
Parliament wishes to encourage the establishment of codes of good conduct and self-regulation for journalists , not least with regard to potential conflicts of interest , but the best form of self-regulation in the world will never exempt legislators from having to remain vigilant and from intervening at regulatory level if , perchance , self-regulation should prove to be inadequate or unworkable .
This is why I ask you to reject the two strangely identical amendments tabled on this matter .
It is simply unacceptable that a profession , even one as respectable as journalism , should attempt to exempt itself definitively from a European regulation that concerns it .
Once again , it is not the CESR that will establish the rules but the Commission , under the democratic control of the Council and Parliament .
I can assure you , Mr President , that I shall be the first , and not the only one , to oppose any attack on the freedom of the press or against any unworkable over-regulation .
European law must , however , be the same for everyone .
Every democrat and , consequently , every journalist worthy of the name should welcome this crucial principle .
I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Goebbels , for all his efforts .
As we all know , he has been working under heavy pressure .
This is a very complex and sensitive issue .
I applaud the fact that he has resolutely defended the aim of the directive , which is to enhance the integrity of European financial markets .
I should also like to thank the shadow rapporteur and Members of this Parliament and , in particular , of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their readiness to proceed as quickly as possible .
After all the discussions we have had on comitology in the past , let me highlight the successful cooperation between our institutions in drawing up this directive , the first to apply the Lamfalussy approach in full .
I believe that today 's text will provide a good basis for effective cooperation between the European Commission and the European Parliament in the future .
As Mr Goebbels knows , the Commission is in favour of amending Articles 202 and 211 of the Treaty to bring the positions of Parliament and the Council into line .
I hope that will become even clearer in the contribution the Commission is preparing for the Convention , which , I hope , will be finalised by the end of November .
Mr Goebbels , his colleagues and the Commission think alike on that topic .
I assure this Parliament that the European Union has no truck with greedy financial cheats - certainly not with the equivalent of financial mad cows , as Mr Goebbels called them .
That is a very vivid phrase which the Commission finds very apt .
We want stable , transparent , integrated and efficient European markets for every consumer and investor .
The directive will indeed enhance investor protection and make European financial markets more secure and attractive in future .
It will dispel the international concerns expressed over the last few years about insider dealing and manipulation on European markets .
As we are all aware , recent events have shown how important these issues are .
Scandals like Enron and other household names show clearly the need for strong rules to make markets more transparent and safe , to ensure that they remain free of abuse and free of fraud .
The smooth functioning of financial markets and public confidence in them are essential to sustained economic growth and the creation of wealth .
Abuse of markets leads to companies paying more for the finance they need ; investors will stay away and the economy will suffer as a result .
We must do everything to stamp this out and to restore public confidence in our markets .
The directive aims to do just that .
Since there has been an in-depth discussion about the application of the directive to journalists , which Mr Goebbels referred to , let me say a few words on that subject .
Firstly , may I make it clear that under no circumstances do we want to add to the burdens of journalists .
The directive does not do that .
Journalism is a difficult profession ; the pressure of work is great and we do not want to add to that .
The directive guarantees freedom of expression and the liberty of the media .
That is clearly expressed in the recitals , and the text of the directive itself introduces several safeguards for journalists , including the possibility of self-regulation .
However , recent scandals in several Member States have shown how recommendations by journalists to buy or sell a specific share can influence its market price to their advantage .
What we do not want is to exempt from transparency obligations the small category of highly specialised financial journalists who recommend investment strategies .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments 6 and 7 .
It would not seem justified to exempt this rather small category of persons from basic market integrity standards which apply to all the other market participants .
In addition , completely or partially excluding journalists from the scope of the directive would mean harmonising the definition of ' journalist ' at Community level , not a very easy task and something we do not wish to do .
Therefore , Amendment 5 is a compromise proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for today 's plenary .
It is fair both to journalists and to the public interest , and therefore acceptable .
I strongly hope that Members of this Parliament share the view of Mr Goebbels and of the Commission on this point .
After all , financial journalists who specifically recommend a certain strategy to the investing public should declare any conflict of interests they may have .
I do not see why that should not be a useful aspect of this directive .
So the Commission can agree with Amendments 1 to 5 , but we cannot agree , for the reasons which I have already explained , to Amendments 6 and 7 .
Should Parliament adopt the common position together with Amendments 1 to 5 and reject Amendments 6 and 7 , for which I am now making a plea , I hope the Council will be able finally to accept this text in the next few weeks .
Adoption of the directive before the end of the year would be a major step towards the integration of European financial markets by 2005 that we all aspire to .
I recommend adoption of this directive to Parliament and I hope that all who take part in the debate will agree with Mr Goebbels and myself .
Ladies and gentlemen , it now gives me great pleasure to call Mr Thomas Mann .
Before you speak , Mr Mann , let me most warmly congratulate you on having the Federal Cross of Merit conferred on you yesterday by the German Federal President .
Congratulations , Mr Mann !
Let me also take the opportunity , as he is present in the Chamber - and please allow me this - to also congratulate the leader of the group , who is sitting in front of me .
He was , indeed , invested yesterday , by the Federal President , with the Federal Grand Cross of Merit !
Warm congratulations to both Members !
( Applause )
Mr President , I feel especially honoured that it is you who are presiding when this important report is presented .
The American and European financial markets continue to be hit by successive scandals , which make it clear that the actors in them include many black sheep , who lack professional integrity .
Balance sheets are being falsified , funds embezzled , and false information deftly fed to the public .
Securities are first talked up in price , then offloaded at a profit , and shortly afterwards the price falls rapidly .
Many small investors have suffered as a result of market abuse and insider dealing .
This makes clear rules and confidence-building measures necessary .
As the PPE-DE Group 's shadow rapporteur on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , I had a hand in a number of the amendments .
At first reading , Parliament submitted 77 amendments , to the quality of which the Council paid tribute by adopting almost 60 in their entirety and giving partial approval to 10 more .
At the time , I congratulated Robert Goebbels , the rapporteur , and I would like to reiterate those congratulations now that we are at second reading stage .
We have come to agree on important matters .
The points at issue include ' frontrunning ' , in which , on the basis of a client 's being of sufficient size to affect the market on its own , brokers trade on their own account even before they carry out the client 's orders .
This is to exploit insider information and is already prohibited .
A ban should apply to all the markets within the scope of the directive .
The question of how financial journalists who recommend investments to the public should be obliged to disclose their conflicts of interest - to which Commissioner Bolkestein has just referred - provided substantial material for debate .
We are not dealing here with objective financial information , but exclusively with recommendations to the public .
There are journalists who succeed in using their own publications to manipulate the prices of securities for their own benefit .
Yet it should be in the interests of journalists themselves to make a distinction between their reputable and less reputable colleagues .
It is surely not acceptable that a small element in a single profession should get some sort of derogation .
I have proposed , by way of compromise , taking Mrs Kauppi 's amendment as a basis for taking into account journalists ' professional rules of conduct , including self-regulation , when arranging the technical details .
Mr Goebbels and I have jointly tabled an amendment providing for this idea to be incorporated in Article 6 ( 10 ) , which covers this area .
This was supported by a broad majority on the committee .
I am of course acquainted with the criticisms of CESR , the Committee of European Securities Regulators , and with the open letter from journalists ' associations concerning its work , but I want now to point out that it has no legislative authority , and cannot , therefore , impose binding rules on the way journalists work .
The Commission called on it , as an independent institution , to play an advisory role .
The Commission will then elaborate the regulation , which will be submitted to the European Securities Committee - including representatives of the Member States ' finance ministries - and also to us in Parliament .
I cannot imagine that the Commission will disregard the principles of press freedom and journalists ' right to free expression of opinion .
After all , they are anchored in the recitals of this directive .
As the PPE-DE Group 's shadow rapporteur , then , I am seeking support for the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee 's resolutions dating back to early October , which , slightly altered , now form Amendments Nos 1 to 5 .
Commissioner , on that you have my forthright support .
Under these circumstances , there is a good chance that the Commission and the Council will give their assent at an early stage .
The directive could enter into force at the beginning of 2003 .
That would represent a decisive move towards greater integrity in Europe 's financial markets , with greater confidence on the part of investors resulting in increased investments .
I believe we have a good chance of ensuring that we win broad support for this important piece of comitology .
The recommendation for second reading on a directive on market abuse , which we are considering today , is both timely and appropriate .
It is timely because confidence in the integrity of market participants has been seriously damaged over the last two years as a result of various cases of market abuse , chiefly in the United States .
It is appropriate because the common position addresses the need for regulatory authorities to have sufficient enforcement flexibility to be able to detect market abuse and sanction its practitioners on a consistent and effective basis .
Also covered is the right of market participants to enjoy reasonable legal certainty that their actions will be considered appropriate .
The key is to be able to deal with market abuse in a consistent manner .
Those who have intent and knowledge of market abuse - and knowledge includes journalists - or who act recklessly will be punished .
Those whose actions are innocent but have unintended effects will not , however , be penalised .
The fact that we now have a debate with so few amendments tabled nearly 18 months after the initial proposal , when the financial services industry initially questioned whether there was any need for such a proposal , owes much to the skill and patience of our rapporteur , Mr Goebbels .
I would like to congratulate him .
We have obtained an appropriate definition of market manipulation and of financial instruments whose use falls within the scope of the directive .
Nevertheless , Member States must increase the resources available to their regulators so that they can be effective in their investigation and pursuit of market manipulators .
Mr President , I will begin with the controversial issue in this directive .
It should clearly cover financial journalists , and Article 1 of the directive does just that .
If journalists profit from the dissemination of information , they will fall within the scope of the directive and they can and will be prosecuted .
The controversial question is different .
Should journalists be subject to new regulations that may be established by the Commission and financial regulators , as currently proposed under Article 6 ( 10 ) ?
Currently , Member States must ensure there is appropriate regulation so that persons who disseminate research or other information , i.e. news organisations , take reasonable care that such information is fairly presented .
Commissioner Bolkestein would have us believe that it only concerns journalists if they recommend shares .
That is not what the directive says .
It actually gives the Commission and financial regulators a role in determining whether information is fairly presented .
You do not need much imagination to see how this provision could undermine press freedom .
It is extraordinary to suggest that the financial regulators , the most criticised public institutions in most Member States - they always get the blame when banks fail - should help determine whether information has been fairly presented .
This is why the ELDR Group has retabled an amendment we tabled in committee seeking to exclude bona fide journalists from this regulatory provision , not from the whole scope of the directive , and to do so without opening up any loophole that would allow financial analysts to parade themselves as journalists .
Do we really want today to set such an extraordinary precedent ?
Do we really want to introduce the first ever European regulation of the press ?
Do we want to ignore the objections of news organisations like Handelsblatt , Reuters , Agence France Press and the Financial Times , all of which live by their high reputations ?
Do we really want to take this terrible first step of regulating the press without a proper discussion of the potential consequences ?
I urge you to back the ELDR Group amendment and reject this ill-thought-through attempt to introduce media regulation by the back door .
Mr President , I would say that our Parliament has worked extremely well and that we should congratulate our rapporteur , Robert Goebbels , on his excellent work .
We should , in particular , welcome the fact that the pressure to incorporate the concept of intent into the definition of offences , a concept which is usually impossible to prove , has been rejected , and also the fact that we have strengthened obligations of transparency in the field of insider information and in cooperation between market surveillance authorities .
We are therefore in the process of breaking in the Lamfalussy procedure which has got off to a good start , I believe , with fine cooperation between our three institutions .
Nevertheless , I feel that it is perhaps regrettable that the Commission asked , at 6 p.m. , to begin its work on the regulation 's implementation before it is even adopted by Parliament and the Council .
In any event , this was merely an excuse to redouble the pressure exerted by the lobbies of financial journalists who want , in fact , to create a general exception in their favour in the field of comitology ; I am talking about self-regulation full stop .
In our view , financial journalists must indeed comply with all the provisions concerning transparency and the veracity of information and , with regard to the progress that can be made in the field of comitology , this will fall under a future revision of Article 202 .
This is why we fully reject the two amendments tabled by the Liberal and PPE-DE groups and support Amendment No 5 , adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which further strengthens the guarantees concerning that profession .
To conclude , I wish to say that , in light of the extremely serious shortcomings revealed by current developments , we are simply trying to take the first step , particularly where insider dealing is concerned .
What is at stake is the entire production and consumption of the financial setup .
Consequently , with regard to the harmonisation of accounting procedures , government reform of businesses , the organisation and the supervision of audits , of financial analysis and credit rating , we call on the European Union and the Commission in particular to rapidly draw up new regulatory and legislative initiatives .
Mr President , the concept of trust is a key one to any discussion about the economy .
Our whole economic system is based on trust .
And as long as trust is not betrayed , the economic system functions as we expect it to .
Expectations of the financial markets are closely linked to the way in which legislative institutions , such as the Council , the Commission and Parliament , deal with unexpected circumstances .
The financial markets expect to have regulations , but these should be unambiguous regulations , which are not open to many different interpretations .
The concept of interpretation , in particular , plays an important role in the debate about prior knowledge .
After all , what is prior knowledge and when do we talk about prior knowledge which has an actual effect ?
Article 1 of the directive mentions having ' a considerable influence on the prices of financial instruments ' - a concept which ought to be explained , however , on the basis of the effect of the directive in practice .
It is not possible to draw up one unambiguous rule which would apply to all situations .
Events which have taken place in practice within Member States have led to regulations being drawn up in order to prevent or sanction fraud and insider dealing .
This practice shows that in many cases an assessment of the facts is required based on a given situation .
In my opinion , journalists are very much in a position to determine from specific cases in practice whether prior knowledge applies .
After all , in their day-to-day work they have to judge whether something is ' news ' or prior knowledge .
The reason for which information is gathered or disseminated forms the basis for the assessment of whether prior knowledge applies or not .
It is for these reasons that I will not support Amendments Nos 6 and 7 .
It is unsatisfactory to declare that technical modality does not apply to journalists in the exercise of their profession .
Considering that an assessment takes place on the basis of facts and situations , reference should be made to existing rules and self-regulation within this professional group .
It is also the case that an appeal to this professional group constitutes a question of trust .
Although I believe that a number of matters should be regulated at Member State level , the arguments for harmonising the rules at European level are convincing .
National legislation falls short within the international context of the financial markets .
I support , therefore , the recommendation for a second reading by Mr Goebbels .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Goebbels , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has done an excellent job on this directive .
I do feel , however , that there are a number of things we need to bear in mind .
We are all quite familiar with the Enron question and other financial scandals , but the important thing is not to be under the illusion that a new law , a new regulation , a new authority will resolve the problem of market abuse and insider dealing .
It may be that the situation is gradually improving , but we must be under no illusion - I reiterate - as to whether the new law , the new directive , the new authority will resolve once and for all the issue of transparency and the need to prevent abuse in the financial markets .
Then we have a number of particularly serious concerns where the regulation affects the mechanisms through which information reaches the market - principally the work of the media .
Here too , in the past , the most effective tool for preventing the exploitation and manipulation of confidential and other information has proved to be the market , which confirms the reliability and validity of methods of producing and disseminating information .


I agree with what Mr Huhne said and with the amendment tabled by Mr Huhne and Mrs Villiers , and I believe that we must avoid introducing specific , rigid legislation , which would , inevitably , ultimately lead to some sort of regulation of the freedom of the press and the freedom to exercise the profession of journalism .
We must therefore reject the illusion that we can use the law to regulate and guarantee the veracity of the information provided by economics and financial journalists .
Moreover , we would be running the risk of it having little or no effect because , if a person wants to put the information in their possession to an inappropriate use , they will find a way to do so whatever we do , whatever the law governing the matter .
Mr President , it is vital to have tough rules to prevent insider dealing and to punish those who abuse the market , including journalists and market practitioners .
It is vital to protect consumer investors from the misconduct of market insiders .
I would like to put on record my thanks to the Council , the Commission and the rapporteur for taking on board a number of issues in relation to accepted market practices , commodity derivatives and Chinese walls at first reading .
But this draft directive leaves a number of very significant problems .
It is of very serious concern , as we have heard , to a whole range of journalists and media organisations across the European Union - media organisations that live or die by their reputation for integrity and a high standard of public conduct .
I agree that journalists should be subject to market abuse rules .
I agree that journalists should be subject to rules that prevent conflicts of interest .
I agree that we should have tough enforcement mechanisms to enforce those rules .
However , I do not agree with the rapporteur that the Committee of European Securities Regulators is the appropriate body to do this .
In the case of journalists , the rules should be enforced by specialist media regulators , who know how the media works and understand the issues that relate to journalists .
CESR does not have the expertise to regulate journalists .
It has already demonstrated that it does not understand how the media works .
The proposals in its consultation paper would have been impractical and unworkable .
Special constitutional issues apply to journalists because of the demands and importance of that vital constitutional issue , freedom of speech .
It is vital that we respect those constitutional issues .
It is at least arguable that , in some countries , giving CESR this role would be unconstitutional and contrary to the principle of freedom of speech .
The free flow of information to the markets is absolutely vital in preventing market abuse and protecting consumer investors .
If we disrupt that free flow of information to the market , we will be playing into the hands of market abusers .
That would be the consequence of allowing CESR to regulate journalists when it does not understand the media issues .
Throughout the first reading , MEPs believed that Article 6 ( 5 ) was not targeted at journalists .
Despite this understanding , CESR has indicated it will regulate journalists .
This is a test case .
This is the first time we have used the Lamfalussy process .
We need to use our codecision power to send a clear message to CESR that we will stand up for the prerogatives and powers of the only elected EU institution and support Amendment 7 .
Mr President , there are still too many obstacles in the way of smooth provision of financial services across national boundaries .
The draft directive on market abuse that we are discussing today is one step in the right direction .
Investor confidence is crucial for the successful development of our financial services markets .
The integrity of European markets has to be safeguarded .
Common and efficient standards to combat market abuse have to be established and thoroughly implemented .
Clearly , actions that intentionally manipulate financial markets , including those by financial journalists , have to be penalised .
Like some other colleagues , however , I am worried about some proposals whose basic intention might be good and respectable but whose effects would be devastating .
I believe that there must be tough rules in place to prevent conflicts of interest among financial journalists . But these need to be rules that are sensitive to the media context .
Free speech is one of the cornerstones of democracy .
In many countries , for example in my country and in Scandinavia , it would be simply unconstitutional to subject journalists to the sort of heavy-handed regulation that the CESR put forward in July .
Under the draft guidelines , a report by a journalist that merely records accurately a recommendation made by an investment analyst - for example , Merrill Lynch has upgraded its rating on Nokia - would require a public disclosure of personal interest on the part of the journalist .
This would be impractical , unnecessary and disproportionate .
The European Parliament did not address the issues raised by Article 6 ( 5 ) at first reading because it was widely believed that the Article was targeted at financial analysts employed by investment firms where well-publicised abuses have occurred .
The publication by the CESR of its draft guidelines in July revealed that it has another plan .
The aim is to cover an extensive range of routine financial journalism where standards have remained high and existing governance mechanisms have proved adequate .
As explained above , the recent amendment to Article 6 ( 10 ) by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is insufficient , as the CESR would still be able to override or amend these mechanisms .
The feedback we have had from the European financial journalism community is clear .
The proposals would have an adverse impact on media freedom and on journalistic independence .
Financial journalism contributes to one of the key objectives of the directive , that is to ensure market transparency .
This is especially important for small retail investors .
They are the investors in the European Parliament should be trying to protect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking those Members , from all the groups , but especially those belonging to my own , who worked on this report in our committee , and who demonstrated commitment , expertise and passion - which have also been apparent in this debate - in tackling this important topic .
This is an important and necessary directive , it is one that we want ; we want an agreement with the Council , and we want the directive to enter into force at the beginning of 2003 .
This directive is the first under the new comitology procedure .
I see it as being founded on seven points .
The first is that the insider-trading directive , which has provided the framework , is thirteen years old .
A lot has happened in the meantime .
It is based on the results of the Lisbon Council and on the conclusions of the Stockholm Summit .
It forms part of the action plan on financial services .
It is a response to 11 September , because the directive is what the Member States want in order to be better able to take counter-terrorist action .
It is a response to Enron , Microsoft , and the EM.TV trial ; today 's information society makes it easier to engage in insider trading by exploiting the many sources of information available .
We have to build up confidence in the financial services sector , in the financial markets and in the economy .
This directive helps to do that by safeguarding the integrity of the European financial markets , establishing rules for combating market abuse in Europe , and strengthening investors ' confidence in the European financial market .
I would like to say , though , that we have not made it easier for ourselves , as this debate itself shows .
Between the Goebbels Report as it was at first reading , and what we have before us today , there are two more extreme standpoints .
Let me point out , though , that this is not a directive on journalists , but one on insider dealing and market manipulation .
This directive is not to exclude anyone , but it does have to deal with the differences in quality .
We should not expect this House to come to a decision that promotes censorship and infringes fundamental rights and freedoms .
That is the basis of our political work .
Because we want to get both sides together , combining the arguments of Mr Huhne , Mrs Villiers , Mrs Kauppi and those of the parties affected , the committee came up with a compromise motion , and I believe that it , and perceptiveness , have enabled us to find a very good and broad compromise on the basis of the special role of journalists and of the possibility of self-regulation .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many of those involved in this business used to wonder whether regulation is needed - they still do .
It is my belief that the answer to this question should be an unambiguous ' yes ' , even though many of the actors take the opposite view .
I am , in principle , opposed to the proliferation of rules .
I hope that the future will see politicians , policies , and even the Commission , judged on the basis of what rules and directives they have abolished or unified , rather than the opposite .
This situation , though , is rather different .
This is about honesty , about trust ; this has to do with the prevention of theft , insecurity and , in the final analysis , fraud .
I am glad that there is to be an increase in controls and , it is to be hoped , that there will be more sanctions in future .
If I may turn to the subject of journalists and media freedom , I cannot but agree with what Mr Karas has said about the principle that we stand up for freedom of opinion and oppose any sort of censorship .
I do , however , see it as inadequate to take the view , as some in this House do , that the good name of certain media and media organisations that have been referred to guarantees that abuses will be prevented .
I was myself in that line of business and am , alas , all too well aware that publishers and journalists are human , but that there is a very , very narrow dividing line between honesty and respectability on the one hand and debatable conduct on the other .
It is for this reason that I believe a good reputation does not at present offer a sufficient guarantee , and that there is a need for regulation .
Arthur Andersen also had a good reputation until that business was struck by disaster .
I am in favour of these interests being disclosed .
I believe that we owe a duty to the public to address problems and find approaches towards a solution even in sensitive areas .
It will be for the future to show whether we have been able to do that properly in the first stage , with all the nuances involved .
We will then have to make any adjustments that turn out to be necessary .
( Applause )
Mr President , I have asked to speak again on this subject because of certain remarks made by Mrs Villiers , Mrs Kauppi and Mr Huhne .
Both Mrs Villiers and Mrs Kauppi said that freedom of speech is under attack .
With all due respect to those Members of Parliament who have spoken and whom I have just mentioned , that is a caricature of the aims of this directive .
Financial journalists are free to write whatever they wish .
There is not the slightest doubt that they can write as they please .
The only thing the directive says is that , when they recommend to the public certain stocks in which they themselves have invested , they must state that fact .
In other words , if financial journalists advise the public to buy shares in a certain company and if they themselves own shares in that company , they must declare how many shares they own .
I do not understand why that should be an attack on the freedom of the press or , as Mr Huhne said , regulation of the press or of the media by the back door .
Why should the rule of transparency apply to all and sundry who engage in dealings on the stock market but not to financial journalists ?
After all , we are simply asking them to be transparent about their investment in stocks they are recommending the public buy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0324 / 2002 ) by Mr Ward Beysen , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision ( COM ( 2001 ) 775 - C5-0111 / 2002 - 2001 / 0311 ( COD ) ) on amending Decision No 1254 / 96 / EC laying down a series of guidelines for trans-European energy networks .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the particular importance of this report is clearly apparent right from the Commissioner 's introductory explanatory comments .
As a result of congestion and insufficient joint activity , certain Member States can now only profit to a limited extent from the advantages of the open markets , meaning that competitive advantages for consumers are becoming increasingly smaller .
The European Commission is therefore right to propose a reform of the guidelines for Trans-European Networks in the energy sector .
The revised proposal takes account of the liberalisation of the energy markets , the increasing external dependence on energy and the stricter requirements to get sustainable sources of energy accepted .
These are the objectives which have been emphasised by the political leaders on the European Councils of Stockholm and Barcelona .
Concentration on a new list of priority projects forms the core of this proposal .
Member States will give special support and attention to these projects .
The maximum percentage for co-financing will be increased from 10 % to 20 % and from now on the construction phase will take precedence .
The question which immediately comes to mind is whether this is the best solution .
In my opinion , a massive subsidy for the energy sector is not a good solution because I feel that it is at variance with the current trend towards liberalisation and the creation of a competitive internal market .
It must be emphasised that the main responsibility lies with the energy sector and with the industry itself .
Measures which are taken on the basis of this decision may in no way be allowed to cause disruption of competitive practices within the internal energy market .
I also feel that Community aid should only relate to the design phase .
Subsidies for the construction phase such as proposed by the Commission should then only be granted in exceptional cases .
In this context , the integration of renewable energy sources constitutes an important factor .
In my opinion , these will contribute in future to the diversification of energy sources and thus as such to the continuity of energy provision within the European Union .
Support of tangible projects such as off-shore wind parks should therefore be encouraged .
The way in which the Commission wants to implement all this does give rise to a number of questions .
I think it is not a good idea to give the European Parliament a droit de regard only when the issues concern strategically important changes to project specifications .
It is important to seek a balance between , on the one hand , a quick reaction by the Commission to new developments and , on the other hand , the need for effective control by Parliament .
To satisfy the need for transparency , the Commission needs to submit regular reports .
Finally I would like to emphasise that actual measures will be necessary if we want to reap the rewards of the internal market .
In fact , the new guidelines might significantly contribute towards coping with the problems of : the continuity of energy provision , the integration of renewable energy , the outermost regions as well as enlargement .
I would like to clearly point out that Community aid must be applied pragmatically and that , in the first instance , accountability must be given to the energy sector itself .
Mr President , my sincere thanks go to my colleague , Mr Beysen , for the work he has done .
He took the views of the shadow rapporteurs into consideration back in the formulation stage in an exemplary manner and the levels of cooperation we have seen have been fruitful .
We must take account of the fact that in rather more than a year 's time there will be 10 new Member States in the European Union .
Their concerns are also our concerns .
The candidate countries must be included in programmes like the TEN-Energy programme as swiftly as possible .
All candidate countries have huge problems with regard to their electricity transmission networks .
In the Baltic countries there are no such networks as such .
If and when Ignalina is closed , and whatever decisions are made concerning bituminous shale , the Baltic countries ' energy strategies cannot rely exclusively on Russia .
What sort of timetable does the Commission have for including the new Member States in the trans-European networks ?
I have given emphasis to the question of whether the EU should support the private sector .
The basic philosophy here is that the energy sector must be one in which the market economy works unaided .
Only in exceptional cases can public sector aid be granted to the private sector .
The Commission 's contribution , which in the end is the European taxpayer 's money , must not be raised from 10 % to 20 % .
Previously , aid was available only for studies in the planning stage .
If the Commission 's new proposal is accepted , aid would also be granted for project development .
There is always the risk that project coordinators will increase their costs just to obtain as much aid from the Commission as possible .
It is good that the Commission will provide support for building trans-European networks .
This programme and this amount of money , however , will have only a limited effect , and will not solve the problems of Europe 's energy infrastructure .
The solution to the problem of bottlenecks is to be found in the Member States rather than in this EU programme .
There have been a lot of problems when constructing power lines as a result of the way in which decisions have been made at local and regional level .
Residents complain about electromagnetic radiation , the impact on the environment , blighted landscapes , and so on .
It is for this reason that no solution has been found for the largest bottleneck in the European electricity networks , which is on the border between Spain and France .
Matters relating to technology must not be linked to this programme .
We are now deciding on trans-European networks , without adopting a position on what technology is to be used in producing the energy transmitted through the network and what its source is .
The supplementary role renewable energy sources play in basic production is a part of the European energy palette .
In certain circumstances they serve as excellent local solutions .
This report is about infrastructure , not energy production .
The network and production must be kept separate .
As a separate issue I want to mention Amendment No 9 .
If this is meant to suggest that renewable energy sources will result in lower charges for the consumer , that is not true .
All the research shows that nuclear power is the cheapest option for the consumer of all forms of energy .
The Commission is proposing an electricity interconnection capacity of at least 10 % as a European minimum level .
The level of interconnection is already 20 % in some countries , however .
The Commission should set its targets higher and insist on a level of 20 % for all Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by making a point of thanking Mr Beysen .
It is unlike me to start a speech by congratulating the rapporteur , because I think that is what we are here for and we generally make a good job of it .
I think , however , that Mr Beysen deserves special praise for his hard work in contacting the other groups right from the start , in order to ensure the report was as unanimous as possible before it was tabled in plenary .
And he has succeeded admirably .
So thank you for involving us from the outset .
As a result , my group feels there is no need to table any amendments because , in my opinion , what Mr Beysen has done is fine as it is .
I would therefore like to just comment briefly on three political points that are important to me .
First , as the Commissioner made clear , this decision comes under the general heading of the liberalisation of the energy market ; in other words , it contributes to what is already on the Council 's agenda .
And when it comes to the overall package to open up the energy market , let there be no mistake , we have handed our homework in on time .
We adopted our first reading here in plenary on 13 March , after the Council urged us to get a move on .
The Commission did likewise ; it too has done its homework , unlike the Council .
The Council is doing what it always does , what it does best - nothing at all .
It sits and talks and fails to come to any decision .
That amounts to institutionalised indecisiveness , and that is why we need to say at this juncture : this is an overall package and we want results so that we can move forward .
Secondly , I really do think the Commission was right in this context to suggest - and our resolution should reflect this - that strategically important projects in the trans-European energy network sector should be given top priority .
By which we mean projects which are vital for security of supply , strategically important projects which are important in opening up the market , especially those relating to one part of this package I referred to , namely the regulation on which Mr Mombaur acted as rapporteur .
It is a pity he is not here today ; I think he too would have had a few comments to make here .
Thirdly , unlike traffic networks , the industry and companies involved in the energy networks generally make real money .
They make money !
And that means that it is primarily up to the industry to finance these projects .
It is our job as legislator to support this by putting framework conditions in place , which brings me back to the fact that the Council needs to wrap things up .
So that is how we want to go about this , by cofinancing support but with the companies in the front row when it comes to putting money in the kitty .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too first want to thank Mr Beysen for his excellent report .
He has raised some important points , and our group supports his approach .
The Commission is proposing that financial support for the trans-European networks must be stepped up .
This is to be supported in order to foster the internal market in electricity and gas .
As has been said here , it is also important to connect the new Member States to the internal market in energy .
This point of view is also contained in the report adopted by Parliament on cross-border exchanges in electricity .
It has also already been said here that the main responsibility for constructing and maintaining adequate energy networks lies with EU industry and business .
In this sense the energy networks differ from the trans-European networks , which receive large amounts of public money .
Network operators , however , have no interest in removing bottlenecks in the supply to their neighbours .
For that reason , state intervention and EU aid to promote competition is well justified .
Naturally we also have to see that aid does not distort competition and that it is used for the right purpose .
Concentrating EU aid on priority projects will encourage the removal of bottlenecks and boost competition , giving consumers greater choice .
In this way Europe 's own energy resources will be put to more effective use and the European economy will be given a boost .
In developing the trans-European energy networks , account must also be taken of social and economic rapprochement .
We also have to ensure networks are developed in island , peripheral and remote regions .
If necessary we must provide support for connecting the networks in these regions to other networks .
Following on from Union decisions , we also have to encourage the diversification of forms of energy and increase the use of renewable energy sources .
We have to ensure that decentralised renewable energy can access the network at a reasonable cost .
The recent massive storm damage was a reminder that we must insist on companies and industry being sufficiently prepared to repair damage speedily and restore networks in all regions of the Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I wish to begin my speech on Trans-European Networks in the energy sector by reminding you once again and quite forcefully , that energy is not a product like any other and that the market cannot be the main force regulating it .
Security of supply is a prerequisite for the political independence of our countries and of Europe .
This security requires a diversification of energy sources and will involve major long term , not to say extremely long-term investment .
Energy is , furthermore , an important factor in land-use planning and falls entirely within the field of public services in the truest sense of the word .
I would add that we must always bear in mind that when we talk about energy and about transport networks that , whereas new infrastructures must be created , existing infrastructures must also be reorganised in order to make better use of them .
Lastly , there must be - and I wish to express this forcefully - an obsession with the environment in all its dimensions : the visual dimension , pollution , and the despoliation of resources , not forgetting the issue of waste .
Incidentally , with regard to the report by Mr Beysen , whom I congratulate on his work , I can state my broad agreement with the proposals that have been made .
We must in fact improve and extend the energy transport networks and , by means of studies and investment , support the implementation of the least profitable ones where they are needed .
The internal market in energy is necessary but what it needs more than deregulation is investment throughout the Union , especially in the least accessible and least densely populated regions .
No one would deny that the interlinking of networks is necessary .
Let us not forget , however , that we need energy to put into these networks and a number of conditions must be met if we are to achieve that .
Lastly , I wish to confirm the importance to us of renewable energies , of research in this field and of the public investment needed for its development .
I must also admit that I do not fully understand the connection that some people wish to make between this aim of developing renewable energies and a liberal approach that often leads to a quest for the lowest cost in the short term , without worrying about the consequences in the medium and long term .
To conclude , whilst remaining critical of the liberal principles that I believe are dangerous for Europe 's energy independence and for small consumers , not forgetting the least-favoured regions , I believe that the Commission guidelines on the Trans-European Networks are a step in the right direction and , as they stand , I thank you for them , Commissioner .
Mr President , the European Commission claims that spending more public funds on building additional electricity lines in Europe will enhance competition .
There is no academic evidence for this .
What do we have to do if we want to reduce oligopolistic tendencies in the European market ?
Firstly , we must reduce market dominance .
We need to bring in measures such as divestiture in those countries where there are dominant operators .
Secondly , we must increase centralised electricity production , because that is the only way to make the sector more competitive in the near future .
Independent research shows that there is no economic rationale for spending billions on a new electricity grid .
I have with me some summaries of these studies and I will hand them over to the Commissioner .
So what should we do with the public funds available to us ?
We should spend them on gas pipelines , because that will bring more competition and security of supply .
We should spend money on offshore projects in the North Sea and the Baltic .
Historically , this market and the grid which exists in Europe were set up to promote centralised fossil fuel and nuclear power plants .
If we want fair competition , we have to use some public money to provide a level playing field for offshore projects .
We have enormous potential for this .
This should not be a Christmas gift shop .
If you look at the annexes to the report , this is a Christmas gift shop with all the electricity lines any operator ever wanted to build in Europe .
This is not a good use of European public funds .
Mr President , I have taken the floor to inform the Members who will listen to me of the significance of an amendment I have tabled , Amendment No 22 to be precise .
It raises a number of issues which relate to the region I represent , Sardinia , but which also concern all the islands in the Community and , therefore , around 15 million citizens dispersed throughout all the seas of Europe .
The general framework governing the trans-European networks described in this proposal includes , of course , the desire and the intention to help the underdeveloped regions .
The amendment I have tabled equates the situation of the islands to that of the less-developed regions , for energy is one of the sectors in which islands are at a greater disadvantage : there is not one island on our continent that does not have an energy problem in terms of cost , quantity , capacity for progress and economic development .
Some practical measures have been taken , for an important project has been included in the list of projects of common interest which concerns two islands in the Community - Sardinia and Corsica - specifically , the gas pipeline which will convey a considerable amount of methane gas from Algeria to Italy , France and southern Germany .
It has been included among the projects of common interest but not yet among the priority projects .
I therefore hope that , if the European Parliament adopts my amendment , a further boost will be given to this project whose implementation is awaited by a significant part of Europe , and , if possible , to other projects , which will then be practically implemented .

Mr President , Mr Beysen has tabled an excellent , forward-looking report which takes account of important basic documents such as the White Paper on renewable sources of energy , the directive on the internal market in electricity and the directive promoting electricity from renewable sources of energy .
We particularly welcome the proposed amendments calling for fair network access for electricity companies using renewable energy sources .
Of course , in the long term , we also expect the Commission to internalise external costs , which need to be broken down in the case of fossil and atomic energy production .
At present , we are probably all taking far too little account of future problems with security of supply and underestimating the expected cost increases in the primary energy sector in general .
In this sense , we welcome the proposed amendments tabled by Claude Turmes , while Mr Beysen is to be congratulated on having pushed so forcefully for the inclusion of wind energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this report .
It is about a logistics system in the European Union that we are trying to build .
It appears that electricity consumption will continue to grow over the next 20 years but that the rate of growth will fall off or slow down .
At the same time the production of electricity and other forms of energy will go down in relation to consumption .
We in the Nordic countries have opened up our electricity markets .
For example , in my own country , Finland , households have been able to choose their electricity supplier for many years now .
This practice has worked well in the Nordic countries , and even Norway , a country outside the European Union , participates .
The importance of renewable sources is increasing in our logistics system and limiting carbon dioxide emissions has also become a key issue .
Natural gas is also growing in importance .
We must be on our guard against the emergence of monopolies and reliance on just one supplier , which would cause huge problems .
Let us just recall how things went for Enron or how things are still going for a certain large company in Great Britain .
Where are the largest and nearest energy resources from the Union 's point of view ?
They are in Russia .
Now while the relevant Commissioner is listening attentively over there I would propose that , at the next summit between the European Union and Russia , an attempt at some sort of concrete agreement is made on energy , both gas and electrical energy , because we are very interested in both and we will be dependent on Russia for gas within 20 years or so .
Mr President , who could be against the construction and maintenance of infrastructures in the energy sector and the integration of energy networks of the countries that are soon to join the European Union ?
No one would be , of course , if it were truly a matter of meeting the needs of the people .
The real issue , however - as the report makes quite clear - is to make the construction and the maintenance of infrastructures in the field of energy subject to the laws of the market .
In order to establish a more open and competitive internal market for energy , public funds supplementing private funds will rise from 10 % to 20 % of total investment .
Members from the Lutte ouvrière are opposed to the use of public monies to increase private profits .
Besides which , the aim of increasing interconnection between gas and electricity networks is not to rationalise energy distribution at EU scale , but instead to open up the entire gas and electricity market to competition .
What this means , where France , for example , is concerned , is another step closer to the privatisation of Électricité and Gaz de France , a process that we reject entirely .
We reject it , as do the tens of thousands of workers who demonstrated on 3 October in Paris for Électricité and Gaz de France to remain public services .
We also oppose any attack on salaries or on the pensions of workers in this sector .
The various States or the European Community itself must be able to fund an energy transport network which is fit for the twenty-first century , whose management criteria are not profitability or the quest for profit for a few but which are to meet the energy needs of everyone and equal access for everyone .
We do not think , however , think that by allowing themselves to be guided by private interests , the current European institutions will achieve this .
Ladies and gentlemen , in accordance with Rule 120 , paragraph 5 , the Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs de Palacio , now has the final word .
The next item is the vote .
Draft general budget of the European Union - 2003 financial year
Draft amendments and proposed modifications to appropriations in Section III of the 2003 draft general budget concerning the Commission
Draft amendments to Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII and VIII of the 2003 draft general budget concerning the European Parliament , the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Ombudsman , and the European Data-Protection Supervisor
Mr President , before we begin the vote on the budget and the budgetary amendments , there are some statements I would like to make , some corrections and oral amendments that I would like put to the vote .
Firstly , I would like to inform colleagues in the Chamber that we have a very tight margin in category 3 , for internal policies .
It is only EUR 2.6 million .
If , as a result of the vote , we pass the ceiling , I would feel obliged to propose offsets and further reductions on other budget lines .
That is just a little warning .
Then there are some technical corrections .
First of all , amendment 662 on budget line B53004 ( new ) should not be subject to a separate vote because nobody has requested that .
It has been listed as a separate vote by mistake .
It should instead be voted on as part of block 4 .
I will check this with all the political groups but , as I understand it , there is no problem .
We also have a technical adjustment in heading 5 .
The amendments proposed reflect the announcement by Eurostat on 15 October .
We have new parameters for salaries in 2003 .
The 2.6 % increase has now been reduced to 2 % .
The resulting adjustments to match the front loading in 2002 need to be made .
I will quickly read the figures for the record .
In Amendment 525 , the final amount should be EUR 1 450 901 000 and nothing else .
In Amendment 556 , the final amount is EUR 68 890 436 .
In Amendment 650 on budget line A360 , the final amount should read EUR 38 219 720 .
Then we have two new amendments , because we had no amendments on pensions .
These are on budget line A1900 , where the final amount should read EUR 412 887 000 , and on budget line A6000 , where the final amount should read EUR 124 456 000 .
In Amendment 562 on budget line A7000 , the final amount should read EUR 54 916 000 .
Finally , in Amendment 527 on budget line A200 , the final amount should be EUR 147 529 904 .
We also have some technical corrections on agencies .
There is a separate remark for the agency enlargement costs .
They have now been slightly amended and should read as follows : for Amendment 583 on budget line B3-4201 , the correct amount is EUR 7 150 000 .
For Amendment 589 , budget line B5-3111 , the correct amount is EUR 300 000 .
For Amendment 596 , budget line B5-8301 , the final amount is EUR 3 522 711 .
Finally , we do not need a figure for Amendment 593 , because it has been withdrawn .
There is no enlargement cost in that case .
There is one item which has to be voted on and that is budget line A-3014 , one of the A-30 lines about European masters ' courses in human rights and democratisation .
The reference here to the University of Padua is not correct . It should be replaced by the European Inter-University Centre .
That is actually a new amendment to the draft budget and should be voted on at the beginning .
I would also like to tell the House that , in order to be consistent with the resolution , I will ask the sessional services to replace the second part of the first paragraph of the grounds for Amendment 644 on Afghanistan by paragraph 26 in the resolution , so that there is no difference between the wording of the resolution and the amendment . I do not think that requires a vote , but I just wanted to point it out to the House .
Finally , a politically more important point , because it concerns North Korea and the discussions we have had on KEDO and nuclear issues .
Following the recent information on the declaration by the North Korean Government on the possible production of nuclear weapons , the Committee on Budgets , at its meeting this Monday , authorised me to table an oral amendment in plenary .
This proposes that the EU 's total contribution to KEDO , which is EUR 20 million , be entered in the reserve , on the grounds that the North Korean Government has admitted it is working on the research and production of nuclear weapons .
This is clearly at odds with the general objectives of EU participation in the Euratom-Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation KEDO , which are ' to contribute to reinforcing and maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and to help achieve appropriate cooperation with both North Korea and South Korea to ensure the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy ' .
The appropriations will be released from this reserve on the condition that , firstly , North Korea proves itself willing to respect the international non-proliferation regime and , secondly , that North Korea proves it has discontinued its nuclear weapons production programme .
This is also a new amendment to the draft budget and must , preferably , be voted on at the beginning .
Finally , when we come to category 4 , I shall comment on two specific aspects of that category , but that is all I wish to say at this point .
Mr President , before proceeding with the vote let me draw Members ' attention to the following oral amendments to heading 5 .
Firstly , as the Council is now making a contribution to the frontloading operation , and given that Parliament will contribute almost EUR 43 million instead of EUR 40 million , which is what the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets decided on Monday evening , I propose that an amount of EUR 35 million should be taken back in 2003 .
Thus Parliament 's net contribution will amount to EUR 8 million .
Secondly , following Eurostat 's new figure on salary adjustments , which is now reduced from 2.6 % to 2 % , the amounts entered in the different sections on staff expenditure also need to be adjusted accordingly .
I therefore suggest the following adjustments to the following amendments to reflect these changes .
Amendment 493 , section - Parliament : a reduction of EUR 1.9 million on item 1100 .
Amendment 715 , section - Parliament : a reduction of EUR 3.1 million on item 209 .
Amendment 514 , concerning the Court of Justice : a reduction of EUR 500 000 on item 1100 .
Amendment 516 , concerning the Court of Auditors : a reduction of EUR 36 000 on item 1100 .
Amendment 520 , on the Economic and Social Committee : a reduction of EUR 236 000 on item 1100 .
Amendment 522 , on the Committee of the Regions : a reduction of EUR 102 000 on item 1100 .
Finally , Amendment 523 , concerning the Ombudsman : a reduction of EUR 11 000 .
I will have to make further remarks on the resolution .
Mr President , I would just like to say that we are now going into category 4 - External Actions - and here we have a special situation because we have created a so-called ' asterisk ' amendment .
We are above the ceiling of EUR 72 million .
This ' asterisk ' amendment means that if we make any more increases after this block 5 , credits for Afghanistan will be reduced .
I just wanted to warn everybody about this .
Of course , this is a first reading position , but still I wanted to inform you of the situation .
Mr President , this should , I hope , be the last time I speak in this vote .
Last Monday , we discussed East Timor in the Committee on Budgets , and I just want to explain what we are doing here .
To maintain a separate budget line for East Timor - which is very politically important for the Timorese Government and for many others - a split vote has been requested on Amendment 674 .
In order to clarify the vote , I should like to explain that the split vote means that the first part will include the amounts .
If we vote in favour of the first part , we vote in favour of the increased amount , which is EUR 25.5 million .
As far as I know , that is acceptable to everybody .
The second part of the vote concerns the nomenclature .
If you want a separate line for East Timor - which is the rapporteur 's recommendation , authorised by the Committee on Budgets - you should reject the second part of the amendment by the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , I hope this will be the only thing I have to say concerning the resolution .
The first-reading resolution needs to be adjusted to reflect the vote .
Therefore , paragraph 8 needs to be amended as follows . The word ' intention ' should be replaced by ' decision ' .
The figure of 40 million in the first line should be replaced by ' 42 690 000 ' and the figure of 40 million in line 8 should be replaced by ' 35 million ' .
Secondly , a minor change is also needed in paragraph 19 in the verb tenses .
In line 3 , the words ' should be ' should be replaced by ' are ' .
In line 4 , the words ' should be ' should be replaced by ' is ' .
In line 5 , the words ' should conduct ' should be replaced by ' conducts ' .
Thank you for those clarifications .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing the regret of Mrs Schreyer , my colleague , who cannot be here .
She has to be in Brussels this morning for discussions with the President , obviously on issues concerning the financing of enlargement and - equally obviously - before the Brussels European Council takes place .
Very briefly , on behalf of the Commission , I note with thanks Parliament 's adoption of its negotiating position at this first reading on the 2003 draft budget .

The rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , have supported a position that gives a reasonable prospect for a constructive and prudent 2003 budget at second reading .
The Commission will respond rapidly and fully to Parliament 's various requests and queries in order to encourage early resolution of the outstanding points before second reading .
We still have to finalise preparations for enlargement , but we are grateful to Parliament for its offers for 2002 .
That will obviously ease the problems in 2003 .
I shall make three other very brief points .
Firstly , we must , and will , pursue the administrative reforms vigorously .
A comprehensive progress report on reforms will be produced in January for Parliament to inspect .
Secondly , we shall update the Union 's agricultural budget and fisheries agreement needs for 2003 .
The Amending Letter will be put before the House next week .
Thirdly , the Commission notes Parliament 's concern that neither of our institutions is sufficiently involved in preparations for possible Common Foreign and Security Policy joint actions or in estimating the funding required for such actions .
Clearly , the budget for external actions has yet to find a reasonable overall balance .
The Commission will , consequently , propose realistic solutions in the coming weeks to help the budgetary authority reach satisfactory conclusions .
Mr President , I propose adding the words ' Pakistan and Russia ' to the word ' Israel ' .
Mr President , this is just a clarification , for the amendment should be in your voting list anyway .
I would just like to say that , at the very beginning of Amendment No 5 , my group proposes that the word ' condemns ' should be replaced with the word ' regrets ' .
The European Parliament has passed the EU budget , voting down an EDD amendment calling for the reimbursement of MEPs ' expenses at actual cost .
Amendments to this effect have been put down at successive budgets as long as I have been a member here , and have been rejected on every occasion .
At a time when the EU is celebrating enlargement , it is critical that the European Parliament demonstrate a commitment to financial probity and open accounting . Once again , it has failed to do so .
In the vote on the budget , we have in general voted against the committee 's proposals to increase the agricultural expenditure in category 1 .
That is because we think that the EU 's money can better be used in other areas where it is really needed .
It is unreasonable for approximately half of the EU 's total budget to be spent each year on subsidising the production and export of agricultural products .
As it stands , the common agricultural policy is not only expensive for the EU but also contributes to higher consumer prices .
The export subsidies mean that the EU 's food surpluses are dumped on the world market at low prices so that the food industry is placed at serious competitive disadvantages in many developing countries , for example .
The fact that the EU also subsidises tobacco cultivation is particularly worth noting .
The EU 's activities and budget should instead be directed at cross-border problems that the Member States cannot solve themselves .
The EU 's agricultural policy in the form of export and production subsidies should therefore be phased out and replaced in part by subsidies promoting biological diversity and environmental measures .
We welcome the fact that the appropriation for combating HIV / AIDS is up by approximately EUR 200 million , or 60 % , on the Council 's proposal .
This shows that Parliament really does want to comply with the commitments we made when the Global Health Fund was set up .
In general , we Swedish Christian Democrats share Parliament 's negotiating position on the issue of the budget .
There are nonetheless a number of points of widely differing character that we should particularly like to comment on .
We believe that , before we can approve the whole of the proposed amount , it is important for the Commission to be able to clarify how the aid for Israel and Palestine is to be used .
By approving , therefore , only half of the appropriation in the present situation , we are exerting pressure in the right direction .
It is encouraging that a start is being made on phasing out the subsidies for the transport of live animals , even though we should have preferred to have seen them removed completely .
We are sorry , however , that the aid for East Timor is being reduced , since the country is still in a phase of consolidation in the immediate aftermath of its declaration of independence .
We believe it is wrong to provide subsidies , to the tune of EUR 7 million , to European parties until such time as there is a legal basis for doing so , and we regret that the proposal to remove the appropriation was voted down by 393 votes to 76 .
We were also in favour of a feasibility study for a civil peace corps , something which was , however , rejected .
I voted against budget lines B7-6312 , Arndt 605 and Arndt 361 .
This funding for population and reproductive health care will be accessed to provide abortion in developing countries , according to the upcoming Sandbæk report .
The European Union has no legal right to provide or promote abortion and it is unacceptable to use public funding for this purpose within the Member States , candidate countries or developing countries where it is unacceptable to communities .
We Swedish Social Democrats have today voted against the amendments aimed at increasing the subsidies for agriculture .
We believe that the agricultural subsidies must be reduced .
A first step in the task of reforming agriculture would be to transfer resources to rural development .
On a slightly longer term view , it is not however enough merely to redistribute resources within the agricultural sector . Instead , the agricultural subsidies must also be considerably reduced .
That applies in particular to the tobacco subsidies .
The EU must not provide subsidies for the production of crops that endanger our lives as human beings .
. ( FR ) My colleagues and I from the Mouvement pour la France Group have signed the amendment removing the EUR 7 million appropriation for ' European parties ' from the 2003 draft budget .
In effect , the Treaty of Nice , which provides for public financing for political parties ' at European level ' , has not yet come into force , and still less its essential implementing regulation .
We are well aware that the existing ' parties ' are in need of money , for the Court of Auditors has declared their funding by certain Parliamentary groups of this House to be illegal .
We do not feel , however , that this is sufficient reason to disregard the fundamental provisions of the law .
Moreover , the implementing regulation drawn up last year in anticipation did not comply with the conditions of respect for national constitutional rules on neutrality in the funding of national politics and equal treatment of all the political groupings represented at the European Parliament , as they were defined by Declaration No 11 of the Treaty of Nice .
Basically , we can only reaffirm our rejection of this kind of funding , which will cost the taxpayer a lot of money and only provide minimal resources for European parties which have no real substance .
For quite a few years , the common sector in the Member States has been the victim of major cutbacks .
In that context , it is depressing to see that the EU 's budget contains an incredibly large amount of unused resources and that there is a complete waste of money in certain cases .
There is a great deal of the EU 's expenditure budget that we wish wholly or partially to abolish , such as agricultural subsidies , subsidies for the export of live animals to third countries , the greater part of regional aid , subsidies for tobacco cultivation and the running of the Economic and Social Committee and subsidies for European political parties , federalist EU organisations and the dissemination of EU / EMU propaganda .
This list of what we think are downright objectionable items of expenditure in the EU can be extended still further .
Another detail we have insisted on every year is that travel expenses for Members of the European Parliament should only be reimbursed in the case of actual costs that have arisen in connection with travel on EU business .
It is quite incredible that this issue can never be resolved , in spite of the fact that so many people purport to stand up for this principle .
The public funds spent by the EU can be better used in the Member States .
We believe that the Member States ' contributions to the European Union can be reduced .
. ( FR ) Of course , our group endorses the European Parliament 's refusal to allow the Council of Ministers to cut agricultural market expenditure across the board and the reestablishment of this expenditure at the level laid down by the 2003 preliminary draft budget .
Our group also welcomes the adoption of its amendment by the Committee on Budgets , an amendment seeking to increase by EUR 20 million the appropriations facilitating the establishing of young farmers in rural areas , an initiative which is proving very successful in France .
At the start of the Brussels European Council , however , we must not lose sight of the serious threats to the CAP posed by a new , historic enlargement of the European Union .
Indeed , the agreement on Europe 's Financial Perspective , which will be valid until 2006 and which was obtained at such high cost to France at the 1999 Berlin Summit , must not be jeopardised in the name of enlargement , considering that the last year of implementation of the current Financial Perspective will also be the year when the CAP is reformed and that France will henceforth be a net contributor to the European Union Budget .
The burden of the automatic increase in enlargement-related agricultural expenditure must not be borne by French farmers , and if farm subsidies were to be revised in 2006 , this revision would , of course , have to include the Structural Funds and each country 's contribution to the European budget .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) I roundly welcome the decision , in the framework of the general budget of the European Union , to maintain both a specific line for aid for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of East Timor , and for an appropriate level of funding .
The vote on the special function of the two parts of Amendment No 674 , in terms that the roll-call vote makes quite clear , merely continues the spirit of intense cooperation and solidarity that the European Union has demonstrated towards the world 's most recent nation .
Let us remember the award of the 1999 Sakharov Prize , by the European Parliament , to the current President of East Timor , Xanana Gusmão , and the promise of assistance in consolidating the new nation , marvellously expressed in the European Parliament 's resolution of 4 / 10 / 2001 .
The processing of this specific budget line in Parliament rewards the attention , the tenacity and the excellent coordination between the Members who are best informed and best disposed towards East Timor , specifically the Portuguese Members from the various benches in this House . Given the extremely broad majority achieved in plenary , however , it is also a sign that Parliament remains equal to its political and moral responsibilities and is not breaking the commitments it has given to the Timorese people .
This is indeed extremely gratifying .
I am chairman of the C.N. Group , which owns several newspapers .
For that reason , in order to avoid any suggestion of a conflict of interest , I shall not participate in the vote on this report .
In Sweden , freedom of expression has been protected by the constitution since 1766 .
The Directive on Insider Trading and Market Manipulation has given rise to debate and to some degree of unease , since there is a continued wish to protect journalists ' right to freedom of expression , even once the directive has come into force .
We believe however that we have received both sufficient explanations of why the directive is of great importance in terms of the desire , for example , to prevent financial speculation harmful to the private individual , and sufficient assurances that the directive will not have any effect upon the Swedish constitution .
The directive as a whole has an important role to play in creating a free and more efficient financial market demanding sound consumer and investment protection .
The amendment by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party would bring financial journalism within the scope of the directive , but responsibility for implementation would be left to existing self-regulating bodies .
That is why we have today voted in favour of the Directive on Insider Trading and Market Manipulation .
. ( FR ) It is disgraceful that the rapporteur is proposing to reduce the compensation amounts proposed by the Commission , with more concern for the financial well-being of the airlines than the interests of the passengers who are the victims of their commercial practices .
In the same way , he extols the merits of deregulation of the air transport sector , presenting it , against all evidence , as of benefit to travellers , whereas its sole purpose is to allow airlines to increase their profits .
It has also served to increase the chaos in the sector , the primary victims of which are those working in the sector and air transport users .
If we have not voted against this report , abstaining instead , it is only because , despite its limitations , it might lead to air transport passengers receiving a little more compensation in the event of overbooking , cancellation or long delays of flights .
We believe , for reasons of justice , that two levels of compensation for passengers would be the best solution , in practice one within the EU and one outside the EU .
In the absence of alternatives , we are , however , voting with the Group of the Party of European Socialists , that is to say for three levels of compensation .
. The ELDR Group supported the Lisi report .
However , we maintain serious reservations with regard to the Commission 's proposal on air passenger compensation for the following reasons :
1 ) The Commission 's proposal has not undergone a proper economic impact assessment , to determine the potential effect on ticket prices and consumer choice .
Such an assessment is fundamental to ensuring that the proposed system is sustainable in practice .
2 ) Both the proposal and Parliament 's compromise fail to recognise the fundamental difference between the usual circumstances leading to denied boarding and those leading to cancellations .
Whilst denied boarding usually results from deliberate overbooking , cancellation is very often due to circumstances beyond the airline 's control - for example , air traffic control .
Parliament 's definition of ' force majeure ' is an inadequate safeguard in this respect .
Though one might argue that airlines should seek recourse against those actually responsible in such cases , this will be very complicated in practice .
3 ) Ultimately , particularly where budget carriers are concerned , it might be preferable to require airlines to offer consumers the option of paying a separate insurance premium , on top of the price of their ticket , thereby guaranteeing them compensation for cancellation and delay beyond the airline 's control .
This resolution comes at a crucial time for world peace , in view of the imminent attack on Iraq .
The European Parliament feels the need to take a stand once again on this issue , expressing its full support for the militaristic policy of the EU , naming the ' fight against terrorism ' as the main objective of the European security and defence policy and calling for full and fast implementation of the European terrorism law and other autocratic measures by the Member States .
It fully espouses the American interpretation of the events of 11 September , endorsing statements on the global threat of terrorism and lending credence to propaganda about attacks on Iraq or anywhere else .
More to the point , the resolution states that ? ? ? ? is instrumental to Euro-Atlantic stability and openly supports the new ? ? ? ? doctrine , orientated as it is towards the fight against ' terrorism ' .
Of course , it does not fail to put the EU on a par with the USA in its role as global policeman , accusing the USA of unilateralism .
Against this background , statements about respecting the rule of law , freedom and democracy ring extremely hollow .
We consider the reference to the UN Charter to be both extremely dangerous and revealing , accompanied as it is by the view that 11 September was a case of armed attack .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the resolution .
. ( FR ) I supported the European Parliament resolution on combating terrorism in order to show my commitment to this cause , but , if the truth be known , I find the text extremely dissatisfactory in a number of respects .
In Paragraph 6 , the European Parliament appears to be saying that the legitimate right of a State which has been attacked to defend itself can only be exercised with the authorisation of the UN Security Council , which would appear to be entirely incorrect .
In the event of an attack , the Security Council can only pronounce on the collective use of force , not on the right of the State which is the object of the attack to defend itself .
In Paragraph 36 , the European Parliament suggests that what is known as the ' pillar ' structure of the European institutions could hamper the fight against terrorism , and this hardly makes any sense .
The general ' disarmament ' which the Union has undertaken , abolishing internal border controls and turning a blind eye to the flow of ' unidentifiable ' immigrants in the name of human rights , has a much more damaging effect .
Lastly , as regards recital P , if , as we must , we want to avoid equating the Muslim world with terrorism , we also have to be conscious of the need to expose the ambiguities contained in the concept of jihad , which are extremely unhealthy fuel for terrorism .
The resolution on ' Assessment of and prospects for the EU strategy on terrorism one year after 11 September 2001 ' contains several contradictions .
Amongst others , I would highlight , some of its more negative aspects :
its defence of the militarisation of the ' fight against terrorism ' , examples of which are changing the current concept of defence to what is being called a ' broader concept of security ' , which includes ' pre-emptive strikes ' , such as we are seeing now , at the hands of George W. Bush , confusing Member States ' internal security missions with defence policy ;
the reaffirmation of NATO and of partnership with the USA as a framework reference for the EU in the ' fight against terrorism ' ;
its support for the reform of NATO ( its political and military structures ) in order to change its defence alliance missions into an offensive alliance ;
its willingness to criminalise the action of organisations and movements that fight , sometimes by means of an armed struggle , against the repression with which their peoples are targeted , confusing these with ' terrorism ' ;
the use of the war against terrorism to move ahead with the communitarisation of Justice and Home Affairs in the EU .
Hence our vote against the report .
. ( FR ) Terrorism sows and inspires horror .
No country in the world is safe from the effects of terrorism now .
In democratic States , there is no religious , political or economic justification for recourse to terrorism .
We must combat international terrorism actively , and , of course , in this regard , we support the joint motion for a resolution .
I regret to say that the attacks which took place on 11 September 2001 and , more recently , in Bali , have revealed the weak links in the global fight against terrorism .
The 50 or so European texts - European Parliament resolutions , framework decisions , conventions , regulations , directives - currently in force have had absolutely no success in reducing terrorism .
Yesterday , however , all the political groups one by one welcomed the speed with which Europe reacted after 11 September . Of course , in the crisis , a common definition of terrorism was produced , although with difficulty .
Moreover , Europol was given new responsibilities in this field and a list of unstable States harbouring fundamentalist cells was drawn up , but , a year later , the terrorist networks are still there and we are witnessing more and more terrorist attacks .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The panic caused by 11 September 2001 has still not died down .
Fear of terrorism has led to decisions which , under normal circumstances , would only be supported by a minority of this Parliament .
Although EU Member States are more restrained than America with regard to preventive warfare and more prepared to make payments to Developing World countries , we are still significantly affected by the short-sighted policies of Bush junior .
In preparing this resolution , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has made gains from the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and the Christian Democrats and Liberals have been able to largely impose their will on the Social Democrats and the Greens .
This means that more importance is being attached to NATO than the United Nations and that the curtailment of the rights of freedom has been considered more important than removing the causes which make humiliated people into terrorists .
This is exactly what it takes to ensure the enduring and increasing indignation of the victims of the current balance of power , ownership and income in the world .
It is nice that the Liberal party still wants to add a charitable slant to this poor position but it does not change the effect .
I am disappointed by the support of the Social Democrats and the Greens , who are showing that they now want to belong to the emerging parliamentary majority at any price .
I , like many of my British Conservative colleagues , abstained in the final vote today on the terrorist resolution , since a number of paragraphs adopted were directly aimed at undermining the inherent right to self defence enshrined in Article 51 of the UN Charter , and the right , when there is a clear and imminent threat from a rogue state or terrorist organisation to the security of a country or region , to act pre-emptively under the same inherent legal authority .
In addition there were references to diverse political concepts from CFSP to ESDP and the Echelon project .
On these we have distinct policies which are well known and differ from those of the majority of this Parliament .
Needless to say , we as a party condemn terrorist activities of all types everywhere and have as a country suffered at the hands of the brutal IRA and other paramilitaries for a very long time , so our abstention also reflects the rather weak tone of the resolution .
In parts this seems to be more concerned with protecting the civil rights of terrorists than with condemning their murderous behaviour towards innocent civilians .
. ( FR ) Although he mentions the ' 75 % of the 1.2 billion people living below USD 1 a day ? in rural areas ' , the rapporteur makes no proposal for remedying the food shortage in poor countries other than ' access to markets for developing countries in order to allow them to benefit from common prosperity and achieve economic growth ' , together with a number of charitable measures .
Yet it is precisely the market economy which has driven these countries to abandon food-producing traditions in favour of single-crop farming for the world market , and this same market economy which means that even the growth of the world economy leads to more poverty and hunger for over a billion people .
Moreover , the rapporteur is quite aware that the major powers are cutting aid to poor countries and that it only actually benefits a tiny section of the local population , and that is when it does not take the form of orders for wealthy countries ' corporations .
In any case , what the poor countries need is not patronising charity but an end to the plundering and exploitation they have always suffered at the hands of precisely these large industrial groups and major powers .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) Europe is strongly divided over the debate currently taking place on the future of the common agricultural policy .
Basically , on one side , there are the advocates of multifunctional farming , of which I am one , who find it unacceptable that 80 % of Community aid should end up in the purses of 20 % of the farmers , and , on the other side , there are the defenders of the status quo .
In this respect , Mr Kanbhai 's report gives me the opportunity to put paid to a rumour which is all too often spread about and which I consider to be erroneous , namely that the European Union is closed to exports coming from the world 's poorest countries .
The implication is that we are falling short of our duty of solidarity towards the developing countries by implementing a protectionist agricultural policy focusing solely on European farmers .
Where does this rumour come from , considering that the European Union imports more agricultural products from developing countries than from the United States , Canada , Japan , Australia and New Zealand taken together ?
Lies , I suppose .
Are we to infer from this that boosting trade and agricultural deregulation are the essential pillars of development policy ?
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr Khanbhai is once again proving to be an effective champion for developing countries .
He recognises the right of every country to protect its products by raising tariff barriers and urges rich countries to open themselves up to exported products from the poorest countries in spite of all this .
He also asks the wealthy countries to spend a minimum of 0.7 % of their Gross National Product on development aid and recognises the need to redistribute agricultural land ownership .
I hope his views are shared by his Christian Democratic and Conservative group colleagues .
Unfortunately they have discovered a new priority during recent times .
This is the priority of free trade , that is , support for the wrong kind of globalisation than is encouraged by the World Trade Organisation .
If free trade is implemented , this will mean survival of the fittest .
Companies with the lowest labour and environmental costs will then be able to steal the market from their competitors , wealthy countries will become richer at the expense of the poorest and the number of those excluded will grow at national level and world level .
It is therefore delightful to see that a majority is now forming for an attitude which relies on solidarity rather than the opinion ' you do not get anything for nothing ' .
Incidentally , I am aware that this relates to a non-legislative initiative proposal with few direct consequences in practice .
. ( FR ) We do not endorse the contents of the resolution on the 12th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) to be held from 3 to 15 November 2002 in Santiago , Chile .
Returning all the African elephant populations from Appendix II ( marketing authorisation ) to Appendix I is tantamount to banning the export of limited quantities of skins and ivory under the supervision of the Convention Secretariat , whereas such export activities have been made possible again by the substantial increase in herds in a number of southern African countries .
The increase in the populations in these countries is a considerable nuisance , causing the destruction of harvests , damage to local habitats and substantial losses of revenue for local farmers .
With a view to the proper management of elephant populations in southern Africa ( Botswana , Namibia , Zimbabwe and South Africa ) , we supported the amendments tabled by our group calling for the transfer to Appendix I to be postponed .
Our vote and our position reflect the mutual interests of the local populations and the wild fauna which is threatened with extinction .
Mr President , this is a question about the Eighth Conference of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol dealing with the reduction of CO2 emissions .
Is an urgent matter because the New Delhi Conference , to which the question refers , is now beginning .
The European Parliament , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy in particular , are very concerned that we should keep the Kyoto momentum going .
In the European Union all is really not well , because some of the Member States that have ratified Kyoto are in the process of increasing their emissions of CO2 , notably Spain .
We have adopted a number of directives tending to decrease CO2 emissions , and the Commission has put forward a very useful programme showing what it has done and what it intends to do .
We are particularly interested in the proposals on monitoring mechanisms , which are likely to come forward soon .
I want to ask three things .
Firstly , how important is the New Delhi Conference ?
The Commissioner would say that it is very important .
If so , then my next question is why is she here and is she planning to go ?
I am sure that if she is not planning to go , it is not a symptom of the downgrading of the status of the conference .
We simply want to know what is likely to happen at New Delhi .
We have heard conflicting rumours .
Secondly , it would be interesting to hear how the Commission thinks other countries could be encouraged to participate in the Kyoto process .
For example , I recently met with the Australian Ambassador to the European Union .
Australia is not a party to Kyoto and is clearly not planning to become one .
Australia might not have major CO2 emissions , but it could lead the way in South East Asia - a very important area where increasing industrialisation is increasing those emissions .
Thirdly , we should sort out what the role of MEPs is when they attend such conferences .
In the past , my colleagues have had increasingly uncomfortable experiences attending these conferences , for example the Johannesburg Conference on Sustainable Development .
The Commission is always extremely helpful and briefs MEPs as much as possible , but our delegations are not part of the meetings held by the EU delegation as such .
We cannot understand why we cannot be observers at that process .
It is absurd for the representatives of the people of Europe to travel halfway round the world only to be spectators at a conference where the people negotiating on their behalf are not directly elected on a European mandate .
We would like to see this changed so that we are at least given observer status in EU meetings at such conferences .
Mr President , thank you for those very valid questions on COP 8 as it is called , which I will try to answer as clearly as possible .
First of all , after Bonn and Marrakech , COP 8 is an opportunity to reinforce the commitments from developed countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and repeat calls on those countries that have not yet ratified the Kyoto Protocol to do so in the near future .
The discussions at COP 8 in India will first of all deal with progress on implementation . That is to establish the state of play .
The concerns of developing countries relate to adaptation to climate change and the initiation of a process for further action to be taken after 2012 , for a second commitment period .
The progress of the Conference will be detailed in a daily declaration .
However , if you ask how important this conference is compared with the others , I can say that no negotiations on major issues of substance are foreseen .
So there is a difference between previous COP meetings and this one .
This is not to say that it is not important , but it is not at the level of true negotiations as yet .
We can expect the developing countries to remind the industrialised world of our obligations under the climate convention when it comes to helping them in capacity building and adaptation to climate change .
The European Union , together with other developed countries , wants to have an initial discussion on the process for deciding on further action for the second commitment period and to initiate this process in New Delhi .
The Environment Council also called upon other countries to engage in a dialogue on this question last week .
I can anticipate that the role of the European Union will be to try to build bridges between Japan , the United States and other countries which would like to push the developing countries to move towards quantified commitments for the second commitment period , as of now .
The developing countries are opposed to that and , of course , argue from a political standpoint that it is our role to lead the way , to show that we are serious about getting our greenhouse gas emissions down , before they will accept anything that could hamper their development .
So this debate will probably start , but we in the European Union have said that we should concentrate on establishing the process , because our first objective is for the Kyoto Protocol to enter into force .
We should not let anything stop us from reaching that goal .
The Commission together with Member States will use COP 8 to emphasise the importance of implementing the Kyoto Protocol and the agreements reached in Bonn and Marrakech .
We welcome the various points raised in the European Parliament resolution of 2 October and we will take them on board as far as possible .
One issue that we will pursue at COP 8 is also a follow-up to the coalition of the willing on renewable energy that the European Union launched in Johannesburg .
We will discuss the way forward with like-minded countries and encourage others to join in .
As you know , the Kyoto Protocol will enter into force once 55 parties representing at least 55 % of the emissions of Annex 1 have ratified the Protocol .
So far , 95 countries representing 37.1 % of emissions have ratified the Kyoto Protocol , representing around two thirds of the world population .
The speed of ratification , and this concerns your second question , Mrs Jackson , increased before and during the World Summit in Johannesburg .
Such events often trigger this kind of reaction .
That is fine , but the important thing is to get the countries to ratify the Protocol and to make progress in implementing it .
Canada and Russia said , during the World Summit , that they intent to ratify it , while major developing countries , such as China , India and Brazil , have by now done so .
I would say that what is most important now is to continue to put pressure on Russia , because we know that the ratification by Russia , which represents 17.4 % of emissions , is vital to reach the 55 % threshold needed for the Kyoto Protocol to enter into force .
We are , of course , in contact with the Russian authorities and we are closely following progress on ratification in Russia .
My colleague and I have urged other parties , with whom we have bilateral meetings , to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and we are continuing to do so .
We have done all we can , travelling around the world talking to Australia and other countries in the everyday bilateral context , drawing attention to this issue and to the importance of ratifying the Kyoto Protocol .
So we are continuing to call on the US and Australia to return to the Kyoto process .
The European climate change programme Mrs Jackson referred to was launched on 8 March 2000 and has identified key elements for a cost-effective EU-wide strategy to combat climate change .
Our communication last year outlined a first package of ten measures with a cost-effective reduction potential of between 122 and 178 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent .
That is nearly halfway towards our Kyoto target of -8 % .
The Commission has already presented proposals for a number of these measures , including an EU emissions trading scheme , the energy performance of buildings , co-generation and a strategy to increase the use of biofuels in road transport .
Others , such as legislation on minimum energy efficiency standards for end use equipment or the promotion of energy services and on fluorinated gases , are in the pipeline .
But is true that some of our Member States will have to take serious steps to deal with the current trend when it comes to greenhouse gas emissions .
You cannot afford to be lax in that area .
Transport has been identified as one of the more intractable sectors , with carbon dioxide emissions from transport the fastest growing , despite the progress made through our agreement with the European Automobile Manufacturers Association .
The Commission has indicated that changes in current mobility patterns need to be a high priority .
Turning to the role of MEPs , the MEPs I met yesterday , who will be in the delegation going to India , find it frustrating that often they are in the same group as the NGOs .
As observers , they will not have access to the negotiations or to the round table discussions in New Delhi .
We have had Members of the European Parliament in the European Communities delegation at previous COPs in Bonn and Marakesh .
On both occasions I appreciated and enjoyed the outstanding cooperation with the EP delegation .
It has been very helpful to have the Members of the European Parliament present and active on those occasions and at bilateral meetings with other parliamentarians .

In a letter to President Cox , the Commission President , Mr Prodi , recently confirmed that , on the basis of the framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission , the Commission could accept the inclusion of eight Members of the European Parliament as observers in our Community delegation for COP 8 .
The inclusion of the MEPs in the COP delegation follows the established rules on the presence of Members of Parliament in delegations to international conferences .
We decided , after our discussion yesterday , that we on the Commission side will do everything we can to see whether some parts of the round table discussions could be made public or opened up to Members of the European Parliament , but we are in the hands of a UN organisation , so we can only ask .
You will then need to ask the Council and the Member States whether it would be possible to participate in coordination meetings .
This issue will have to be raised in a more general context , because it concerns not only the MEPs attending this and other climate change meetings , but also other international fora .
It is important to sort out for the future the different roles and responsibilities of the Commission , the Member States and Members of the European Parliament .
Now is probably not the time to change all the rules in the existing agreement , but later on it should be taken to a more general level and clear rules established for the future .
I have appreciated enormously the cooperation with Members of the European Parliament . I hope that will continue at COP 8 in India .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is no longer a matter for negotiation - it is a matter for action .
And I would say that , in terms of the EU 's new political agenda , there is a set of three objectives in this field that must be achieved in the short term .
First of all , ensuring that the Protocol will enter into force .
In order for this to happen , Russia must ratify the Protocol .
The problem , however , is that Russia has already promised on several occasions that it would ratify the Protocol and this has not yet happened .
I ask the Commissioner , what type of concrete political and diplomatic initiatives are being and will be adopted in conjunction with the Russian Government to ensure that the Protocol is urgently submitted for ratification in the Duma ?
Secondly , I believe it is important not to give up - and in fact we cannot give up - attempting to convince the US administration to sign up to the Kyoto Protocol .
The directive on emissions trading will help the European campaign to persuade the Americans to sign up to the Kyoto Protocol .
Let us say that , with emissions trading , we will be able to demonstrate that it is possible to comply with Kyoto at less economic cost .
I do feel , however , that on this issue too , embarking on a charm offensive is not enough . We must take Kyoto to the next round at the World Trade Organisation .
And I wish to ask the Commission , is it prepared to submit an initiative to the next World Trade Organisation round , that guarantees the elimination of competitive and legitimate advantages that American products will gain as a result of their economy not being covered by the Kyoto Protocol ?
Thirdly , Mr President , I believe it is important for the European Union to strengthen its international leadership on the basis of action rather than words .
On this matter , I wish to congratulate Commissioner Wallström on the excellent work she is doing in this field .
The Commission has demonstrated its ability to take the initiative , not least in its directive on emissions allowance trading and in the European Programme on Climate Change , but I do feel that this is a serious political problem : where the Member States are concerned , we are seeing real paralysis .
I believe it is crucial , for the sake of the credibility of our leadership , that the Member States also start to take action .
With regard to the role of Parliament 's delegation in New Delhi , I would emphasise the words of its Chairman , Caroline Jackson : the parliamentary delegation must be allowed to attend the daily meetings held by the EU representatives .
Mr President , I want to begin by emphasising what Mr Moreira Da Silva and Mrs Jackson have just said .
Political leadership on this issue is incredibly important .
I also think that the way in which the EU has dealt with the issue via the Commission has been excellent .
These issues need nonetheless , in the future too , to go on being given a high profile .
It is not acceptable for there to be certain Member States that do not really take the issue seriously and that , instead of reducing emissions , are tending to do the opposite .
Almost the same situation applies too to the candidate countries that wish to become members of the EU but that have still not ratified the treaty .
We must continue to exert pressure and say that we require ratification if membership is to become possible .
What we expect first and foremost from the New Delhi conference is political leadership and the maintenance of a strong political message from the EU .
The most important issue , even if we are now beginning to understand that it will probably not be possible to concentrate on it , is about what will happen during the next commitment period .
What , then , will happen after 2012 ?
What shall we do ?
What are the objectives ?
I should also like to put these issues to Mrs Wallström .
What is it intended should happen during the forthcoming period ?
Does the Commission already have plans as to how matters need to proceed ?
What demands are to be made , and how are we to make progress in solving the problem of climate change ?
The same applies to our role in relation to the developing countries .
We quite often point out the need to ensure we help the developing countries fulfil what is required of them by the Kyoto Protocol .
How are we to do this in purely practical terms ?
We have today voted on the EU budget at first reading .
There will of course be a second reading , but it is difficult to see where climate issues in particular fit into the picture .
To repeat Parliament 's old demands , it should soon no doubt be time to incorporate shipping and aviation into these talks .
That has still not happened , but it is no doubt desirable that it should .
Even if these issues cannot perhaps be among those raised in New Delhi , it is nonetheless important that we make these demands .
In conclusion , I want to repeat the principle on the basis of which I think this discussion ought to proceed and which , in actual fact , gave rise for once to some discussion at the most recent meeting of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I mean that we must seek equal rights for all citizens of the world .
The committee certainly adds the rider that this is to happen in the long term , but what is nonetheless required is for all citizens to have the right of access to good , renewable energy on equal terms .
Mr President , Commissioner , whilst there is genuine cause to welcome the question and the resolution tabled by Mrs Jackson on the Union 's position at the New Delhi Conference on Climate Change , the fact that the report has been tabled so late leaves us with some doubts as to its real aim .
So , ladies and gentlemen , how should we interpret this debate , which is being held after the opening of the Conference , if not as a sign of political and psychological immaturity in the face of the reality of the threats to our world posed by the upheaval of climate change ?
We must ask ourselves whether the latest UNEP report , which revealed that USD 150 billion is spent on environmental damage each year , escaped the scrutiny of certain European visionaries .
Do not worry , ladies and gentlemen of this House . I do not mean you .
Commissioner , how do you intend to convince your fellow Commissioners of the urgent need for practical measures ?
In New Delhi , what we actually need to do is to increase the international reaction to the threat of climate change a little more .
This momentum , which the European Union harnessed to implement the conclusions of the last Earth Summit as fully as possible , must be maintained with a view to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol , as defined at Bonn and Marrakech .
The European Union must continue to be a driving force in combating climate change .
At New Delhi , we must also pave the way for the second period , as you have said , and prepare to address requirements which are more pressing because of the gravity of the situation , and we know that time is of the essence .
There are three essential points we must uphold in New Delhi .
Firstly , as regards carbon wells , which distort the true environmental picture , scientific rigour and objectivity exclude this simple solution , this expedient .
Secondly , it is imperative that the surge in air traffic and its impact on the increase in greenhouse gas emissions are included in the process .
What is the Commission 's current view on this ?
Thirdly and lastly , the COP 8 must not fail to condemn the attempt to include nuclear power as a renewable energy , for nuclear power is limited and even obsolete .
For example , Amendment No 15 to our resolution , seeking to reinstate it , must be rejected .
There is no more urgent subject for us and our debates than the potential future impact of climate change .
There is nothing more essential in politics than the very essence of all politics : the continued survival and proper functioning of the Earth itself .
We must act now to give ourselves the chance of a future .
Mr President , many other conferences have already taken place since the climate conference in Kyoto .
Now that we are preparing for New Delhi , the Kyoto Protocol is still not in force , however .
Obviously we cannot have complete control over the world just like that .
Certainly not when we consider that man has limited influence over CO2 emissions .
Technically speaking there are vast sources of CO2 emissions and CO2 wells .
It is therefore only to be expected that emissions caused by man have only a limited effect on the overall amount .
However , we still have a duty to limit CO2 emissions as far as possible .
A glance at the conference programme shows me that specific matters relating to the implementation are up for discussion .
The emphasis being placed on wind energy , cooperation with third countries and emissions trading schemes is a positive development .
In my opinion the European Union can make a substantial contribution towards projects for clean development in developing countries .
The EU already has a pioneering role to play with regard to emissions trading schemes .
Parliament has chosen to implement an unambiguous and well-thought-out system to be introduced in 2005 .
Economies can be made by businesses being more frugal with energy and the link with the overall energy policy is of course very important .
With regard to CO2 wells I would like to point out the danger that we might overestimate in our accounting for CO2 wells in , for example , the ocean .
As the water warms up , its capacity for absorbing CO2 will fall again .
The European Union ratified the Protocol six months ago .
Let us hope that the New Delhi climate conference will result in ratification by the Russian and Canadian Governments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to Mrs Jackson for tabling such an important question and to Mrs Wallström for her honest answer .
It is , though , a pity that , realistically speaking , no serious political progress is expected in New Delhi because people are in fact hoping for something else .
After the dreadful floods in Germany and neighbouring countries , people expected the climate problem to be resolved once and for all in Johannesburg , only to be told that it had a different agenda .
The same appears to be true of New Delhi , but we must continue to be tough negotiators , even if we cannot always make rapid progress .
We must also remember that Kyoto is , of course , just the first step , which is why we reiterate quite clearly in our resolution that all citizens must end up with the same rights , which basically means that per capita emissions should be the same the world over .
For the developing countries , this implies a great deal more than we promised in Kyoto .
In view of the recent debate on emissions trading in Germany , we have to keep reminding ourselves that all the parties in Germany are in fact agreed that we need to reduce emissions in the long term by 80 % - I repeat 80 % by 2050 - and if we are already arguing so energetically against it now , when first steps need to be taken , then I do not hold out much hope for this long-term objective .
Nonetheless , we must stand by it and our resolution reaffirms this .
Ratification by Russia , Japan and the USA is still very , very important .
As we have been told on numerous occasions , all we can do is keep on making demands and ensuring that every meeting , at whatever level , between representatives of the European Union , be it the Commission or the Council of Ministers or us here in the European Parliament , between the EU and the USA , between the EU and Russia , addresses this issue .
It must be our top priority in our dealings with these countries .
We must not relax in our efforts and I expressly endorse what Mr Moreira Da Silva said about the WTO .
We must get the WTO to agree to allow us to keep certain products off the European market if they have been manufactured using processes that cause additional climate change .
The credibility of the European Union is , of course , vital .
We have to clean up our own act .
Parliament has , by a very large majority , taken a clear stand on emissions trading .
I am sorry that the Council of Ministers has postponed its decision yet again and I am sorry to hear from initial reactions that important amendments which we adopted , for example on the CAP or on 1990 as the base year , may not meet with the Council 's approval .
The Council needs to adopt a clear concept , and quickly , and we , the European Parliament , need to be tough negotiators .
That is all I have to say .
Three minutes is too short a time to expand on the whole issue but I think it really is important for us to keep clarifying our position here in this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , climate policy is a process that will inform everything we do in the twenty-first century and I trust that Europe will continue to play a leading role here .
I have something to say to the members of the parliaments .
We have more and more global processes , not just now with Kyoto , but on other issues - I am thinking of the International Monetary Fund , financial policy , worldwide credit policy , environmental policy and trade policy - which are in fact decided solely by the executive .
The parliaments rubberstamp them , they have no choice .
The question is : surely , with increasing globalisation , parliaments could be more involved in the opinion-forming process ?
This question is directed both to us and to our parliaments .
We need to find new ways of working together instead of just taking recourse to the executive - in this case the Commission .
Secondly , Kyoto must be ratified and that will be our main job in New Delhi .
We must convince our counterparts , especially our Russian counterparts , that this makes sense .
Thirdly , when we talk of reducing CO2 - and other greenhouse gas emissions , but mainly CO2 - we always mention renewable energy in the same breath .
And so we should .
I have no wish to contradict that .
It is just that , in New Delhi , we will be in a country that generates well over 50 % of its electricity from coal .
If they could bring their coal technology up to current European standards , we would save much , much more CO2 throughout the world than with all the other very costly reduction measures put together .
This is a fact and we must face it .
In other words , if we want a climate policy , we need an active coal policy and we should mention that in the same breath as renewable energy , because 80 % of the world 's energy is still generated from fossil fuels .
Finally , I think that climate policy also gives us a chance to foster a new relationship with developing countries , in the form of emissions trading .
The Commission itself conducted a very interesting study in its institute in Seville , with a time frame of up to 2030 , when , it states , emissions trading with Asia will be worth around EUR 80 billion .
That implies a capital inflow of around EUR 80 billion for these countries .
Know-how will be transmitted to these countries and the advantage to us is that the reduction in emissions will be entered against our account , meaning that both sides will benefit from the trade off .
We should be thinking more along these lines .
Mr President , Russia intends to ratify shortly and then the Kyoto Protocol will be in force .
A worldwide discussion will immediately arise - how and when will the US and the developing countries participate in this issue ?
Europe has to take the lead again in this discussion .
Much greater reductions are to be implemented in Europe after 2012 , for example minus 30 % in 2020 as proposed by the German Government .
How do the Commissioners feel about this ?
On the other hand , as has already been stated , equal rights to emit CO2 per world citizen at a sustainable level is also written in the Parliamentary resolution .
How does the Commission feel about this idea ?
That will mean that India will be allowed to emit double its current amount , China must stabilise , Europe must reduce its emissions by 80 % and the US by 90 % .
Worldwide burden sharing is necessary if we really want to make progress in the fight against climate change .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we have already heard several times , one of the most important items on the agenda of the COP 8 conference in New Delhi in India is to agree on when the Kyoto Protocol will finally enter into force , with the emphasis on ratification by Russia .
I should like to reiterate what Mrs Annelie Hulthén said , namely that we must make sure that future Member States of the European Union understand that this is one of our priorities .
Another important issue -- and at this time and at this conference , which should not be taking place anyway , this probably has less to do with specific negotiations and more to do with thinking up a strategy and enumerating its features - is how we can convince numerous developing countries to join the fight against climate change in the future .
This will of course depend on our own credibility when it comes to climate change .
In other words , Europe and the European Union must deliver satisfactory results here .
Our success or failure in achieving this credibility with our partners in the developing countries - for whom I realise , Commissioner , this will not be easy - will not depend solely on our environmental policy ; it will also depend on whether we have coherent policies in other sectors , such as European agriculture .
One point , which has not yet been raised today but which I consider very important , is the question of monitoring .
I think that , if we want the Kyoto Protocol to be a success and deliver demonstrable results , then we need a reasonable , reliable monitoring system .
In other words , we must ensure that the Member States deliver reliable figures on their emissions and on the flexible mechanisms .
We also need reliable data on what Europe sees as the very negative question of planting , in other words reforestation and similar activities .
My final point , which numerous members have raised , is of course the question of what happens after 2012 , at the end of the first period , and it seems to me that we can make good use of COP 8 if we avoid getting embroiled in finer points and negotiations in order to table this problem and start thinking now about what must and will happen in 2012 .
Mr President , thank you for these valuable contributions to this debate .
I would like to comment on some of the points that have been raised .
First of all , what can we do to influence Russia and to push for ratification from the Russian side ?
It is difficult to talk to the Russians .
We have for some time now been planning a troika visit to Russia and we are continuing to plan for that visit because we want to meet the right people .
We want to have it at a high political level in order to have a meaningful discussion .
In all bilateral talks , including those between Commissioner Prodi and Prime Minister Putin , climate change and the Kyoto Protocol have been on the agenda .
Of course we raise this issue in all our bilateral contacts .
We are also aware of a study that has just been published by the Russian Government on the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol .
We are currently analysing the results - hopefully we will be able to use some of them in our ongoing debate .
We are keeping a close eye on what happens in Russia , in order to be able to use the positive forces that exist in Russia .
In the end , I suppose that it is Prime Minister Putin who will decide .
What about a WTO initiative ?
That has not yet been included in our plans at all .
Maybe that is a good idea .
I have not though about it enough to give you a really considered answer today , but I am worried about anything that could complicate or halt the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol .
We should be very careful not to raise the issue in such a way that we create more stumbling blocks in the debate on the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol .
I would be happy to come back to the debate on the WTO and the links between these issues .
What happens in the second commitment period ?
First of all , we are interested in establishing the process in Delhi and COP8 .
It is too early and in view of the risk of complicating the whole debate on the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol , we want first of all to establish the process and decide how to get to the second commitment period .
It seems a little pointless to go into the details on that before the Kyoto Protocol has even entered into force .
So first things first .
We have to stick to that strategy at COP8 as well .
There was one question on air traffic .
Of course the Commission and the European Union are working within ICAO , because this is clearly an international issue .
I am sure we would all agree that the work in ICAO has not been satisfactory when it comes to speed and commitment , but it also has a UNCCC mandate to work on the climate change issue .
This is an area where we can hopefully do more , but we will have to continue to work in an international context .
Finally , what about equal rights per world citizen ?
The ultimate goal is to stabilise concentrations in the atmosphere at harmless levels .
Remember that .
We need to reduce emissions as a result .
I believe this will lead to convergence of per capita emissions internationally .
Whether equal rights is the right target , I cannot say .
I do not want to say to the European Parliament that it is a ridiculous idea , but my personal opinion is that it might not be the most sensible approach .
It is a moral concept rather than an environmental measure .
Our main objective is to protect the environment .
That , I believe , is how we should formulate it .
We emit eight times more , on average , than an Indian citizen .
How do we create equal rights for citizens throughout the world ?
I would like to approach it from an environmental point of view , so that we make sure that we stabilise concentrations in the atmosphere at harmless levels .
I hope you understand my argument .
Perhaps this is something which requires further debate .
We have an important role to play in New Delhi , in the COP8 discussions , because we can definitely work with the developing countries .
We will probably be the bridge between G77 , China and the developed countries in the debate on how to deal with climate change .
To conclude this debate , I have received , pursuant to Article 42 of the Rules of Procedure , the motion for a resolution B5-0531 / 2002 , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , Commissioner , when we debated the seed directive here in Parliament in the mid-1990s , I acted as rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
At the time , we successfully applied for the final vote on the issue of genetically modified organisms to be deferred .
I then negotiated for two years on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture .
The issue at stake then was not whether genetic engineering should or should not be used ; the issue at stake was labelling and the inclusion of this seed directive and its methods in the release directive , which at the time was still Directive 90 / 220 .
We achieved this .
At the time , the scientists still insisted that genetically modified crops could coexist alongside non-genetically modified crops ; they excluded the possibility of contamination .
This stand has now been overtaken both by events and by opinion within the scientific community itself .
Now those who wish or rather who , under the bio regulation , are legally obliged to farm - be it conventionally or organically - without using genetic engineering , face the problem of unwanted contamination .
Now the Commission wants to set a threshold below which no labelling is required .
This is where the figures start to get confusing .
Once upon a time there was talk of 1 % contamination ; now we are down to 0.3 and 0.5 % .
But the fact remains that genetically modified organisms are being released unintentionally in huge quantities .
If we relate this to an area of seven-and-a-half or eight million hectares of rape or corn , 7 million plants seed every year .
This is not going to be negotiated with Parliament , not even in the Standing Committee on the release directive , which has now been renewed ; it is to be decided in the Standing Committee on Seeds , where a ruling is to be laid down under the comitology procedure which , if implemented as it stands , contradicts Parliament 's figure of 0.5 % in the food labelling directive .
If we approve seeding in these quantities without labelling , then we must assume that the other value will be exceeded during seeding and that even those who do not use any form of genetically modified organism will be forced to comply with labelling and testing requirements .
We need a ruling here which clarifies once and for all - and this is also the position which the Committee on Agriculture has just adopted - that there has to be coexistence , that those who wish to use genetically modified organisms must ensure that those who do not are not brought into contact with them .
That applies both to the 70 % of farmers in Germany who do not want GMOs and to about the same percentage of consumers who do not want GMOs .
So there is no point in starting from a specific threshold because , if it is exceeded , the risk and the individual costs will be impossible to bear under compensation rules .
So we need a ruling whereby those who are to blame can be held to account under the polluter-pays principle .
This process , these rulings are no simple matter , Commissioner , and cannot be decided under the comitology procedure or in the standing committee and technical annex ; they need further debate and another vote , with codecision by Parliament .
We should also hold science to account and organise hearings in order to clarify how coexistence which is really worth its name , can be applied .
All this takes time and must not , under any circumstances , be rushed .
Until then , the rule must be that uncontaminated seed can be guaranteed for those who do not want to use genetically modified organisms .
Mr President , the questions are very important in the context of the current debate on GMOs in Europe .
We still do not have a clear-cut reply to some of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's questions .
Please accept that my answers are to some extent preliminary ones , which will require further scrutiny and reflection , both within the Commission and in our ongoing discussions with the Member States and the different stakeholders .
I wish to begin with a short description of the problem we are faced with when dealing with the adventitious presence of GM seeds in conventional products .
This is also important for everyone who has followed this debate .
On a global scale , GMO cultivation has increased dramatically in recent years .
In 2001 , 5.5 million farmers in 13 countries grew an estimated 52.6 million acres with GM crops .
Between 2000 and 2001 , the number of acres planted to GM crops increased by almost 20 % .
For some crops , the increase was particularly large .
In the US , GM corn increased from 4.4 % of all planted acres in 1996 to 32 % in 2002 .
GM soya beans increased from 7.4 % in 1996 to 74 % in 2002 .
To date , the cultivation of GMOs has been geographically concentrated , with 99 % of all GM crops produced by four nations : the United States of America , Argentina , Canada and China .
However , GM cultivation is likely to spread to other nations in the next few years .
So far Europe has played a very marginal role , with fewer than 20 000 acres of GM crops , mainly in Spain and France .
That is some 0.03 % of the worldwide area .
Europe has large volumes of trade with major GM producers - although trade in GM products has mainly concerned products for animal feed .
Imports of GM products for human consumption , like maize , have largely ceased , because of the inability of exporters to ensure the identity of all individual GMOs in shipments .
The last few years have shown that the adventitious presence of traces of GMOs in conventional products has become inevitable .
Cross-pollination between plants is a natural phenomenon - that also happens between other seeds .
We simply cannot completely control its mechanisms , which include factors such as wind and insect movements .
It is therefore largely unavoidable that small traces of GMOs will be transferred to conventional crops and their harvested products .
Storage and transportation practices may also make it difficult or extremely costly to ensure total segregation .
Consequently , conventional seed lots will contain traces of GM seeds .
Setting tolerance thresholds for impurities for GM seeds in this particular case is the only way to address the problem .
Closing our market completely is not a viable option .
Against this background , the Commission is currently preparing a proposal for a Commission directive amending the annexes to the seed directives .
This proposal includes additional conditions and requirements concerning the adventitious presence of GM seeds in lots of non-GM seeds .
The Committee on Agriculture has been informed twice about the status of this proposal .
Commissioner Byrne has written to inform Mrs Jackson that the text will be formally submitted to the European Parliament , which will then have the opportunity to scrutinise it .
Article 21 ( 2 ) of Directive 18 / 2001 / EC provides for the possibility of establishing thresholds below which traces of authorised GMOs are exempted from labelling requirements .
Hence , conventional products containing adventitious traces of such GM seeds below this threshold would not have to be labelled .
Let me now answer some of the questions raised by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
On the competent body to set thresholds , the Regulatory Committee , provided for in Directive 18 / 2001 / EC , is competent for decisions pertaining to thresholds under Article 21 ( 2 ) of the directive , with regard to exemption from labelling requirements .
However , it is not competent for decisions made under the sector-specific seeds directives , where thresholds relate specifically to marketing criteria for seeds .
The Standing Committee on Seeds rightly has the necessary competence in this case .
Consistency between the different pieces of legislation has to be maintained .
On the risks that a significant percentage of GM seeds may be released out of control into the environment , I would first say that it is paramount that any threshold should take account of the protection of human health and , importantly , in the case of seeds , the environment .
You will be aware that this includes a comprehensive free-market assessment of the potential risks .
Secondly , thresholds must be workable and enforceable .
The proposed thresholds arise directly from the opinion of the Scientific Committee on Plants and are scientifically founded with reference to the characteristics of the crop species .
Thirdly , on the registration of GMO cultivation , under the provisions of Article 31 ( 3 ) ( b ) , Member States are required to establish registers for recording the location of GM fields grown for commercial purposes .
As detailed in the article , the objective of this is to allow the possible effects of these GMOs on the environment to be monitored .
As for the scope of Directive 18 / 2001 / EC , this clearly relates to cultivation of a GM seed product itself and not a conventional seed product containing traces of GM seeds .
The GM seed product itself has to be labelled as such and also traced , so that growers will know what they are sowing .
It will therefore be possible for Member States to record the locations of the resultant crops .
However , the threshold values , which are based on robust scientific assessment , should aim at ensuring that the cultivation of conventional seeds basically maintains the characteristics of non-GM cultivation .
Coexistence is a key issue in the Commission communication on Life Sciences and Biotechnology - a Strategy for the Future .
The Commission has commissioned a number of studies on this issue .
The main aim is to assess the consequences arising from an increase in the cultivation of GM crops in the European Union in the context of coexistence .
So far , we only have preliminary data based on hypothetical scenarios , and further experimental data is required to provide a more accurate picture .
The Commission is actively pursuing such work before considering possible options to ensure the viability of conventional and organic farming and their sustainable coexistence with GM crops .
As a further step in this process , the Commission has commenced discussions in partnership with Member States , farmers and other private operators to find the most appropriate solutions .
It is important to say that the issue of coexistence is not one of risk per se .
It does , however , highlight a possible need to establish correct agricultural management systems and practices for the different crop types to ensure their coexistence and consumer choice .
This is my initial reply to your questions and I will be happy to make further comments at the end of the debate .
Mr President , allow me if you will another brief supplementary question .
The Commissioner said that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has been informed .
That is correct .
She said that Parliament will be informed .
This too has been promised .
But we do not want to be informed , Commissioner , once you have made your decision ; we want to be included in the decision-making process .
Our complaint is that this is to be regulated in the form of a technical annex .
We feel that this is a core amendment to the directive and we want to be included in the decision-making process .
I would be grateful if you could comment on this or if you could at least pass this on to the Commission as a whole .
Mr President , this is a recurring institutional debate .
Should the codecision procedure or comitology be used ?
The seeds directives provide for purity criteria in the annexes and they can be adapted to scientific and technical knowledge by the comitology procedure provided for under the seeds directive .
It is thus possible to set thresholds for GM presence in non-GM varieties through a comitology procedure .
The 1 % food labelling threshold provided for in a Council regulation has been set by the comitology procedure provided for under the foodstuff labelling legislation .
Article 21 ( 2 ) of Directive 2001 / 18 / EC also states that labelling thresholds may be set in the comitology procedure provided for under the directive .
Timing and the possibility of making it a practical procedure are also factors .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too have , on numerous occasions in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , bemoaned the fact that seed regulations are being pushed to such an extent under the comitology procedure .
I have said that I think it would make more sense if the Commission held fire on the regulation for GMOs in seed under the comitology procedure until Parliament has completed the current procedure .
We need the new seed regulations to be consistent with the regulations on GMOs in food and feed and on the traceability and labelling of GMOs .
These issues were hotly debated at first reading here in this House as recently as the summer .
The resolution was extremely tight on several points , especially the question of threshold values .
We are now waiting for the Council of Ministers to reach a decision , which since last week has again been postponed to December .
A final decision by the Council cannot now be expected before the middle of next year .
I think it would be far better if the Commission were to keep its paper in the pending tray for another year , so that the threshold values can be adjusted to the regulations currently on the agenda .
So much for the procedure .
Now for a brief material comment .
The question of whether GMOs are a good or a bad thing does not belong in today 's debate .
But as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf refers in his question to positions on GMOs , I wish to do likewise .
It is clear from all the Member 's questions that there is something he has failed to understand or does not wish to admit .
There is a difference between releasing GMOs under Directive 2001 / 18 , on the one hand , and setting a technical limit value for the adventitious presence of GMOs in conventional seed by amending the annexes to the seed directives , on the other .
These directives contain an array of technical rules and requirements on the quality and marketing of seed in the EU .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf himself said that the actual directives were adopted in the usual manner after hearing the European Parliament and that it was decided in the process that certain technical details were to be regulated under the regulatory committee procedure .
The committee does not of course decide on the release of GMOs , it decides how to define a further quality standard for conventional seed and it has the jurisdiction to do so under current EU law .
The Commissioner said as much .
The scientific committee has , in its turn , confirmed , as do countless other scientific works , that statistically halfway reliable statements do not brook a limit value of less than 0.1 % .
This is the cut-off point .
There is no such thing as a 0 % value , and nothing is GM-free .
The Commission draft suggests threshold values for GMOs that do not represent a risk to the environment and consumers , and which can therefore be commercially cultivated in the EU .
The registration requirements in Directive 2001 / 18 have nothing to do with the marketing of conventional seed .
Reproduction seed , which farmers themselves cultivate , is at times much more of a problem .
It is not subject to any quality testing requirements whatsoever and does not therefore undergo any tests to detect GMOs .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf himself is in favour of liberalising these reproduction regulations .
And another thing .
The lower the threshold value for the adventitious presence of GMOs is set , the more conventional and organic products will have to be labelled , which is why the Commission , various Member States and a large majority in the European Parliament are calling for a realistic limit value of 1 % in the forthcoming GMO regulations .
To close , may I say that working farmers need a fundamental understanding of the simple biologic facts of the adventitious and technically unavoidable presence of type A seed in type B. Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf works as a farmer .
There are such things as natural events .
There will always be GMOs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after so much criticism , I should like to offer Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf my warmest thanks for his oral question to the Commission .
It is not just on the mind of my group , it is , of course , also on Mrs Sommer 's mind .
As she said , we worked together with an overwhelming majority in the Committee on the Environment on this issue , precisely because we have the impression that our right of codetermination is being curtailed , whatever the legal situation here ; I think we all know that , Mrs Sommer .
We have asked the Commission and various representatives working on this directive for a deferment on several occasions , because the message we keep getting is that the idea is to railroad these legal provisions through before the end of the year .
The legislation in this area , which is currently being dealt with by the Council but which was dealt with by Parliament at first reading up to July , signals that we are taking this seriously .
I shall resist the temptation to rehash the debate we held up to July , but I should like to comment on one point which is , of course , also addressed in the legislation and which , as rapporteur , I am familiar with , namely the regulation on genetically modified food and feedingstuffs .
What we want to know is : what is being done to prevent technically unavoidable , unwanted contamination ?
What proposals does the Commission have for investigating this question ?
Word is spreading that we are in fact regulating something at European level .
We are regulating limit values , threshold values for technically unavoidable , adventitious contamination .
We all agree here that we need these limit values and that there is no such thing as completely ' GM-free ' .
At the same time , we are not saying that there are laws in the pipeline , there are recommendations in the pipeline tackling how this can be avoided in future .
If the objective - and here too we agree with the Commission - is to deny this contamination and if the objective is the coexistence of various types of farming , such as traditional and organic farming , then this is a question we really should be asking ourselves .
If the Commissioner says that there are no clear-cut replies to these questions , which is perfectly understandable , then I understand even less why this is now being railroaded through here under the comitology procedure .
Mr President , Commissioner , I really am appalled by your reply , because you said absolutely nothing about the central issue of how we want to achieve or can guarantee freedom of choice for the consumer .
You said absolutely nothing about how we are to handle Parliament 's resolution at first reading on a limit value of 0.5 % for labelling .
That is precisely what the Council is currently negotiating .
With your planned limit value for seed , this value is not achievable .
You know that , which is why I should now like to ask you to tell us what conclusions you intend to draw from this vote by Parliament .
Is it in fact that you want to press ahead , that you want to bring about a fait accompli , that you want , as it were , to give the seed industry a Christmas present ?
I think you should state here today how you intend to handle Parliament 's resolution at first reading on this regulation .
You said just now that contamination is unavoidable .
That is as incorrect as it is unacceptable !
In saying this , you are setting yourself up as the mouthpiece of the genetic engineering industry because that is what the lobby claims , but it is not true .
Tests in Europe have shown that there is no contamination of seed of any consequence and in Austria we even have purity requirements for seed and I think that is exactly what we need .
We need freedom of choice for consumers and , in order to guarantee it , we need purity requirements .
We should not just throw in the towel in the face of contamination when , with the right policy , there is no contamination , because products or seeds which cause such widespread contamination cannot be released .
So what we need is freedom of choice for consumers and , please , rather than giving Christmas presents to the seed industry , give us a timetable today .
We want to know what the Commission is planning to do and if it really is prepared to accept Parliament 's democratic resolution and wait until we have adopted a resolution on the Scheele Report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with you that all the directives and regulations on GMOs should be part of the same framework and should not conflict with each other .
Secondly , I understand that the Commission chooses the quantitative detectability techniques in order to define the adventitious presence of GMOs .
That I quite understand .
In fact , you sometimes even disregard the 1 % adventitious presence of GMOs because - and I agree with you here - the authorisation for the circulation of a given GMO comes under a different directive , which takes into account the risks for human health and the environment .
If there is no risk to human health and the environment , an authorisation is given .
However , when it comes to the directives on traceability , for some peculiar reason , you do not follow the principle of detectability which you follow for all the others .
This will also create problems for the World Trade Organisation , because if you accept that the presence of 1 % is not a problem for health and so on , why do you not accept that detectability should be included in all traceability directives ?
If GMOs are present , whether adventitious or not , that fact should be stated .
You insist on not including detectability in the traceability directives .
You must abide by what you have said , namely , that all directives should be part of the same framework .
I expect to hear what you have to say about the detectability issue , which is very important , even in trade .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is important , in the light of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's question , to remember that we are discussing the adventitious presence of GMOs which are licensed in the European Union .
We are not discussing the release of GMOs , but the definition of a further quality standard in the marketing of conventional seed .
Parliament adopted the proposal for a regulation on the traceability and labelling of GMOs or genetically modified food and feedingstuffs at first reading in June , calling for a threshold value of 0.5 % .
I agree with the Commission here that this value is pitched too low and is impracticable .
A tolerance threshold of 1 % for the adventitious presence of GMOs in non-GM products is realistic .
In setting threshold values for seed , which is what we are discussing here , the Commission has to take due account of Parliament 's and the Council 's suggested thresholds in the procedure mentioned .
The threshold values for the adventitious presence of GMOs need to be coordinated in the two texts .
I should also like to stress that uncontrolled reproduction represents another particular and potential source of GMOs in food and feed .
Reproduction seed is not subject to any mandatory quality testing and is not therefore tested for the presence of GMOs .
That needs to be made perfectly clear here .
The Commission 's biotechnology strategy sets the coexistence of various types of cultivation as an important priority .
Coexistence is only possible if we have reasonable threshold values as , technically , wind-borne pollen can never be discounted in nature .
One hundred percent purity was never possible for biological reasons and never will be in the future .
Threshold values for product purity are standard and necessary in numerous industries .
In the organic farming sector , for example , there is a threshold value of 5 % .
That means that products labelled as organic products may contain up to 5 % of certain non-organic ingredients .
I say that for the benefit of the Greens .
The important criterion must be that the statutory framework is practicable .
More importantly , it must be in keeping with WTO rules and must not hamper the development of biotechnology in Europe by tying it up in unnecessary red tape .
Mr President , of course the questions and the statistics by our Green colleagues are loaded and selective .
Can I therefore ask if the Commission agrees that a Eurobarometer survey shows that 75 % of Europeans favour basic research aimed at new technologies which help knowledge to progress ?
Is it true that , according to Eurobarometer surveys , 48 % of Europeans agree or strongly agree that GM is useful in food production for improved nutrition and for improving shelf life or taste , despite the emotive campaign by the Greens to convince them of the contrary ?
Not only are these campaigns emotionally charged , they muster distorted and misleading information to support their ultimately untenable and irrational opposition to the new technology of genetically modified crops .
I wish they would be honest enough to recognise that there are at least some benefits .
I believe that these actual benefits , not to mention the potential benefits , substantially outweigh any risks .
Yes , there are always potential risks in any new technology product or process .
We are challenging the frontiers of knowledge , but we have safeguards in place .
We require exhaustive testing and trials in laboratory and field .
But the opponents do not want proof .
They condone obstruction and destruction of these trials .
Will they deny that GM crops have major environmental benefits ?
Not only do they reduce production costs , they also cut back on the use of energy , pesticides and herbicides and reduce CO2 emissions .
Though their opponents are still grasping at straws , it is clear from experience in America and elsewhere that the environment benefits .
In Europe we can perhaps afford the luxury of denying ourselves the food productivity benefits which GM crops offer , but do our Green colleagues not consider the interests of their fellow human beings in sub-Saharan Africa or East Asia to whom GM crops will bring nutrition and health benefits and may even help them survive ?
Do they consider the effect that turning our backs on this advance will have on our scientific base and researchers , on our farmers and farm workers ' jobs ?
On thousands of jobs in the food processing industry ?
On the price of food as well as the quality and the variety available to our consumers ?
Yes , European consumers are entitled to be able to choose what food they buy and eat .
We must protect our environment as best we can , but we also owe it to our constituents to be frank and honest about the risks and benefits .
It is accepted that an organic label indicates 95 % organic , i.e. up to 5 % not organic .
Why make the non-GMO label almost unobtainable by specifying unachievable levels of purity ?
I could well accept that premise , with the mischievous intention of making non-GMO so rare that no one could afford it .
Then everyone will be forced to come to terms with the real world , where there will always be the possibility of some adventitious GM content .
Mr President and Mr Purvis , I know one thing and that is that the GMO issue will give me grey hairs .
We know from Eurobarometer opinion polls that most people are worried about GMOs .
At the same time , they say that they do not know enough about them .
Perhaps there is a connection .
I would like to say to Mrs Breyer that we have looked at those concerns very carefully to ensure that we establish clear legislation - a clear framework - for handling both the potential benefits and the risks of GMOs .
That is why we have revised Directive 18 / 2001 / EC to include better risk assessment and better information , so that consumers can make an informed choice .
That is why we have proposed further legislation on traceability and labelling .
However , it would not be honest to say that if we continue to import seeds , for example , we can guarantee total purity and no adventitious presence of GMOs .
We know that everything in nature escapes - through cross-pollination for example - so closing borders is not a viable solution .
We have to be pragmatic and establish levels and thresholds to deal with natural phenomena .
We have to look at the situation as it actually is and at the products we import .
This leads me to Mr Trakatellis ' question about traceability .
The proposals on traceability and labelling , as well as on food and feed , are not based entirely on the detectability of GMOs .
Even if they cannot be detected , consumers have the right to know .
The current Novel Foods Regulation will be replaced by these proposals and the scope will be broadened to give consumers a choice , even if the GMOs are not detectable . Consumers have the right to be informed of the presence of GMOs in the products they buy , even if the GMOs are not detectable .
I shall comment on two further issues that have been raised .
Firstly , on labelling thresholds , the Commission can only take account of existing legislation and , for the time being , a 1 % threshold is in force for foodstuffs .
This 1 % threshold is provided for by the Council regulation , as amended by Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 49 / 2000 .
Above that 1 % threshold , an indication of the presence of a genetic modification in a food is compulsory .
As the recital of the regulation states , the 1 % value best serves the purpose of establishing a tolerance level which simultaneously remains low and takes into account the necessary feasibility along the production chain .
All these factors along the production chain are involved .
The seeds thresholds are based on this 1 % threshold .
You have to count backwards in order to reach this 1 % threshold .
A recital of the draft Commission directive on seeds provides that , should the food threshold change , the thresholds for seeds would need to be reconsidered accordingly .
On the coexistence issue , the Institute for Prospective Technological Studies is carrying out a study entitled ' Scenarios for Coexistence of Genetically Modified , Conventional and Organic Crops in European Agriculture ' , commissioned by the Agriculture Directorate-General and coordinated by the Joint Research Centre .
The main aim of the study is to assess the consequences arising from an increase in the cultivation of GM crops in the European Union in the context of coexistence .
The study aimed to identify the source and estimated levels of adventitious presence of GM crops in non-GM crops at farm level , identify and assess changes in farming practices that could reduce adventitious presence below policy relevant thresholds and estimate the costs of relevant changes in farming practices , monitoring systems and potential insurance systems .
The study confirms that cross-pollination and coexistence are issues that need to be considered in relation to agricultural production in general .
The results of the study need to be interpreted with caution .
Only three crops were analysed : oilseed rape for seed production , maize for feed use and potatoes for human consumption .
The results are derived from models and have not been validated by real field data .
Therefore this study provided preliminary conclusions but the hypothetical results need to be confirmed and further research will be done .
The Commission is discussing this and coordinating with the various directorate-generals .
This debate will certainly continue .
This is a very complex and sensitive issue , legally , technically and politically .
As I said earlier , we readily admit that we do not have all the answers .
However , what we can do - as we have done with other technologies - is to put in place a legal framework to deal with the potential benefits as well as the risks .
That is what we have tried to do with the revised Directive 18 / 2001 / EC , traceability and labelling .
Consequently it will , for example , affect thresholds when it comes to seed regulation .
I thank you for this debate and I am sure we shall continue it at a later date .
Thank you Commissioner .
The next item is the debates on cases of violation of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the debate on the following five motions for resolutions on the International Criminal Court :
B5-0546 / 2002 by Mr Sakellariou and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the General Affairs Council 's position concerning the International Criminal Court ;
B5-0549 / 2002 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the International Criminal Court ;
B5-0553 / 2002 by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the International Criminal Court ;
B5-0557 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the International Criminal Court ;
B5-0561 / 2002 by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the International Criminal Court .
Mr President , the aim of this report is to call upon the Council of the European Union to fulfil the commitments it has made as regards the ratification and effective establishment of the European Criminal Court .
Credit is due to the Danish Presidency for having made every endeavour to maintain a united Union position .
However , the General Affairs Council has assumed a very ambiguous position regarding the possibility of concluding bilateral agreements , following the offensive launched by the current US Administration in an attempt to obtain immunity for all US citizens across the board and the willingness to accept this demand displayed by a number of European countries , including Italy - something which particularly pains me - which , apart from being my native country , was also the first Member State to ratify the Treaty of Rome .
I would therefore like to stress how shameful it is that the United States should have gone so far as to resort to threatening to impose sanctions on the countries which have ratified or intend to ratify the International Criminal Court Statute , and emphasise that there can be no agreements allowing those who have debased themselves by committing crimes against humanity or genocide to do so with impunity .
Since the Rome Statute does not allow for derogations from this requirement , any agreement to that effect is to be deemed not to be compatible .
That applies to the 15 Member States , but also to the countries which are going to join the Union and the countries with which the Union enjoys relations .
The Council therefore needs to make every effort to hold a frank dialogue with the US Administration and to present to us a report stating a clear position on the compatibility of any potential bilateral agreements with the Rome Statute , before the Copenhagen European Council takes place .
Mr President , the United States ' refusal to ratify the International Criminal Court is indicative of its pride , but also of the ridiculous , hypocritical nature of the Court .
It is supposed to give substance to the concept of international , immanent justice which can punish , if not prevent , genocide and crimes against humanity .
Even with one International Criminal Court conducting an investigation into a few crooks who bear a large part of the responsibility for the massacres in the former Yugoslavia and another conducting an investigation into the genocide in Rwanda , however , there is absolutely nothing to suggest that all those guilty of offences which are just as serious will be prosecuted .
How likely is it that the politicians and economic profiteers of the former colonial Belgian power , who consciously set the Tutsis and the Hutus against each other , will be prosecuted ?
Will the French leaders be prosecuted , those leaders whose troops in Rwanda were present , holding their fire at the massacres unleashed by the government in office , when they did not make matters worse by supplying weapons to either side ?
Will the United Kingdom be prosecuted for its part in the political man ? uvres which played such a major role in the ethnic massacres in Sierra Leone ?
How likely is it that George Bush , who is preparing , openly and publicly , to bombard tens of thousands of Iraqi civilians with the excuse that he is punishing their dictator , will be prosecuted before the Court for crimes against humanity ?
How likely is it that the industrial groups which , thanks to the gung-ho activities of politicians , are free to derive considerable profits from the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction , will be prosecuted ?
Well then , the only effect of the International Criminal Court will be to add a touch of hypocrisy to an imperialist world where the strongest have the last word .

Mr President , we must maintain the integrity of the Rome Statute and be instrumental in getting the International Criminal Court up and running as soon as possible . That is why it is unacceptable for the American Government to undermine the Court by trying to enter into bilateral agreements with EU countries or candidate countries .
I am pleased that the Danish Presidency has worked hard to maintain a common EU position , and I am sorry that no such position has come about .
The Council has to a large extent given in to American pressure , and I want , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to call upon the national parliaments in the EU and in the candidate countries to keep a close eye on what their governments are doing so that the Rome Statute is not weakened .
As is well known , the United States signed the statute , but has withdrawn its signature .
I hope that the Council will embark upon a new dialogue with the American Government concerning the recognition of the International Criminal Court , which all the Member States and most of the candidate countries have now ratified .
The EU and the United States share the same basic values .
Both parties profess freedom and democracy and the defence of human rights and the principles of the rule of law .
That is why the United States , which will be able to contribute in a particularly positive way to the Court and to the way it operates , should be among the signatories of the Rome Statute .
Since 1998 , the EU has tried to accommodate American anxieties in relation to certain provisions of the Statute , but its efforts have unfortunately been in vain .
It is unfortunate , moreover , that the United States does not now intend to be a party to the statute which , as I say , it in fact signed during the Clinton administration .
The United States ' decision is wrong , and we must all regret the American measures .
We must therefore hope that the United States can be convinced to adopt a more positive line once the Criminal Court has in practice had the opportunity to show that it operates in accordance with the highest standards of the rule of law and does not allow itself to be misused for political purposes .
Mr President , this debate on the International Criminal Court has gone from one extreme to another .
We heard one extreme earlier , in Mrs Cauquil 's speech .
Mrs Cauquil , I must say to you in all honesty that we do not want an international revolutionary tribunal .
Putting forward theses such as yours is a sure-fire way of scuppering the whole idea of a criminal court .
On the other hand - and here I do agree with you - we do not want a criminal court to be no more than a rubber stamp in the hands of the major powers .
I am really sorry that the forces that , even if they are not willing or able to prevent this court completely , want to downgrade it to some sort of rubberstamp are gaining ground in the USA and China and Russia and other countries .
We in the European Union are going the way of the law and I think that this forms part of a good and important tradition .
The Council of Europe was founded as a human rights community here in Strasbourg over 50 years ago .
The Human Rights Convention was adopted and the Court of Human Rights was created here in Strasbourg .
For the last 50 years , the European Parliament has sat here in Strasbourg as the voice of the people , as the voice of the European rule of law and because we want to extend this rule of law to the whole continent , we quite deliberately set the idea of the Copenhagen criteria , democracy and the rule of the law , at the spearhead of the historic enlargement process , which is now approaching its culmination .
This is a consequence of our history , which has , unfortunately , seen its own share of genocide , expulsion , disenfranchisement , suppressed minorities and crimes against humanity .
We have no right to play teacher to the rest of the world , as we sometimes do , unless we take our own rule of law seriously .
That does not just mean respecting the rule of law internally , it also means being the strong partner for others throughout the world , when it comes to the worldwide rule of law .
The criminal court , like our founding treaty , was born in Rome and the idea of Rome is somehow bound up with the concept of law .
The Rome Statute underlying the criminal court should not be undermined , weakened or watered down .
If we do not want the courts needed for genocide and recurrent crimes against humanity to be wrongly denigrated as victor 's justice or one-off justice , then we need a permanent criminal court to which all are equally subject , large and small states alike , whatever the nationality of the perpetrator or criminal .
That is why we want to hold on to this Statute as it stands .
We are severely critical of the Council of the European Union for skimping on clarity and dignity here , for repeatedly trying to get by with devious manoeuvres and for repeatedly giving in to the powers that be .
If Europe wants to take itself seriously , it must fight for this criminal court and must say to the United States of America that they are indeed our most important ally , but that just such an ally has a duty within the free world to take the law seriously , however uncomfortable it may find it .
We do not need more unilateralism in response to 11 September ; we need to strengthen the rule of law throughout the world , which is why we are calling for fast , undiluted ratification of the Rome Statute .
Mr President , the last time we debated this , in answer to my question , the President-in-Office confirmed that agreements under Article 98 ( 2 ) are compatible with the Rome Statute and indeed are foreseen in the Rome Statute .
I am therefore slightly surprised at the negative text of the resolution we have before us and at some of the contributions to the debate , because the General Affairs Council surely produced a very good outcome - European solidarity was confirmed .
It was a good example of how the common foreign and security policy works in bringing Member States together and it preserved the integrity of the International Criminal Court .
So we should really be welcoming that agreement , particularly as it established the general principles governing any agreement to be signed , including the point made by colleagues that no agreement should be signed if it means that people will enjoy impunity .
That is specifically ruled out .
We must recognise the reality : the Americans need to be brought gently along and persuaded that this is not a witch-hunt against American forces , it is about having international law ruling the whole of global politics .
Mr President , in response to this interesting albeit short debate , I would like to say , on behalf of the Commission , that the European Union is , as we have already heard , firmly committed to the International Criminal Court , which it considers to be a critical development in the quest for international protection and human rights .
The principles of the Rome Statute , as well as those governing the functioning of the Court , are obviously in line with the principles and objectives of the Union .
Our commitment is articulated , as Mr Titley just reminded us , in the common positions on the ICC adopted in June 2001 and revised in June 2002 .
It is reflected in the Action Plan on the ICC adopted in May of this year and the conclusions and guiding principles adopted by the Council as recently as 20 September .
These decisions all give clear evidence of the European Union 's continuing support for the Rome Statute and for an effective International Criminal Court .
Consistent with that is the fact that the European Union is actively committed to ensuring the widest possible signature , ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute .
To that end , between 1995 and 2001 , the Commission 's European initiative for democracy and human rights financed nearly EUR 7 million in projects with this purpose in various parts of the world .
An additional EUR 6 million is earmarked for projects in 2002 / 2003 .
As well as continuing to encourage all states that have not already done so to sign , ratify and adopt implementing legislation for the Rome Statute as soon as possible , we also encourage all states to respond to Washington 's request for immunity agreements in a manner which is consistent with the Rome Statute .
The conclusions and guiding principles adopted by the Council on 30 September provide guidance on the ways to ensure that such responses preserve the integrity of the International Criminal Court , which is absolutely fundamental and vital .
The European Union also wants all states which have ratified the Rome Statute to be actively involved in nominating and electing the chief prosecutor and judges of the International Court .
This should be done in a manner consistent with the process and criteria established by the Rome Statute and the resolution of the first assembly of states parties .
I am grateful for this opportunity to set out the position of the Commission and the European Union .
Mr President , pursuant to Article 142 , I should like to ask the Bureau how , under Article 50 of our Rules of Procedure we will be discussing a matter such as the dialogue with Iran in the field of human rights ?
What does this have to do with urgent cases of breaches of human rights ?
This has nothing to do with the provision of Article 50 ( 1 ) .
The motion tabled by the Socialist Group , concerning the stoning of women , a frequent practice in Iran , which is even inflicted on girls of 9 years old , made perfect sense .
This is something I fail to understand , Mr President .
I wish , however , to ask the Bureau a second question : If we are going to look at the dialogue on human rights between Iran and the European Union ; I should like the Bureau to clarify the precise meaning and scope of this debate , because according to the Iranian authorities and according to what we can read about the dialogue on the Internet , what they are saying is that Islam is being persecuted in Europe , particularly in the United Kingdom .
It is there , in print .
I should like to have clarification of this matter .
Mr Casaca , I would remind you that it is the Conference of Presidents which establishes our agenda , after which it is approved by the plenary , and that it is then , and only then , that Members may express their objections .
I am afraid you have waited too long to express your objections and I urge you to do so earlier next time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately after the debates , at about 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolutions concerning the ' Human Rights ' dialogue with Iran :
B5-0548 / 2002 by Mr Ford and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on death by stoning ;
B5-0551 / 2002 by Mrs Frahm and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the ' Human Rights ' dialogue with Iran ;
B5-0552 / 2002 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the ' Human Rights ' dialogue with Iran ;
B5-0554 / 2002 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Gahler , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the ' Human Rights ' dialogue with Iran ;
B5-0556 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Iran ;
B5-0559 / 2002 by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on executions and stoning in Iran .
Before giving the floor to the authors of these motions for resolutions , I would point out , ladies and gentlemen , that we are extremely behind schedule .
If you want the House to be able to express itself by voting on your scintillating speeches , I would ask you to genuinely respect your speaking time .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the Socialist Group in this debate on a resolution that has jointly been tabled by five groups .
This clearly expresses our joint concerns about the executions of women and , more rarely , men by the cruel and barbaric practice of stoning and about the sharp rise in the use of the death penalty in Iran over the past two years .
Seventy-five people died in 2000 , 139 in 2001 and so far this year 250 .
We note the letter of 23 October from the Iranian ambassador to the EU , assuring us that there have been no cases of stoning in recent months and that directives have been issued by the competent authorities for the cessation of this process and are being observed .
Nevertheless , we are not entirely reassured while sentences of death by stoning continue to be passed and while the use of the death penalty more generally continues to grow .
The European Parliament and the EU generally protest against the use of the death penalty throughout the world , whether it be in the United States , China , Japan or anywhere else , and Iran is no exception .
Nevertheless , we recognise that sections of Iranian society are trying to move on .
Forces of progress who want to see a less cruel form of Islamic society exist and they are growing in numbers .
This resolution does not threaten talks between the EU and Iran regarding future trade and cooperation agreements , though it is clear that this will include a human rights clause .
The European Parliament , which has to approve such agreements , will watch with close attention .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a government that has presided over the execution of over 250 people since January 2002 , including 27 since 30 September alone - the day on which negotiations were held between the EU and Iran ; one which , secondly , includes a woman such as the advisor to President Khatami , a woman who has said that stoning is a legitimate and defensible method of protecting family values ; thirdly , one that sentences human rights activists such as Nasser Zarafshan to years in prison - such a government deserves the label ' inhumane regime ' and must be condemned in the strongest terms .
I do of course endorse the material need for dialogue between the European Union and Iran .
However , I simply cannot understand why negotiations on a cooperation and trade agreement between the European Union and Iran should begin on 29 October .
Parliament has called on numerous occasions for cooperation agreements or financial aid to be suspended or frozen when human rights are being violated .
So why are we applying this double standard ?
The Council decided on 22 October , just two days ago , not to table a human rights resolution on Iran at the next sitting of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
I find that totally unacceptable .
I cannot but wonder if the reason for not wanting to expose the Iranian Government now is that it does not square with the policy on Iraq ?
We in the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left support the joint motion , although it does represent a shift from the real resolution on human rights to a composite resolution on human rights plus cooperation between the European Union and Iraq , but we think that parts of items 4 and 5 are wrong for the reasons I have mentioned and we have therefore applied for a split vote .
I really would be delighted if the hope reflected by this common motion were to be fulfilled , by which I mean if an end to human rights violations in Iran were to give us cause for optimism .
However , present circumstances alone give me no cause whatsoever for any such belief , which is why we must raise our voices , at any rate here in Parliament .
Mr President , first of all a point of parliamentary self-criticism .
As far as I can see , this draft resolution seems to be remiss on one particular point from an editorial point of view .
The four Iranian women condemned to death by stoning have not been fully named with first names and surnames - see the end of Paragraph 3 .
Of the four names mentioned , for example , two at least would be considered to be generally used as first names .
I therefore propose a correction to the text for the sake of the case of these condemned women .
Speaking metaphorically , the dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran on human rights is very much an uphill struggle .
From the European perspective , we have to guard against being responsible for obstructing the way ourselves .
Any hand extended by Iran is therefore welcome .
We welcome particularly the valuable gesture made by the Iranian Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Kharrazi , to an ad hoc delegation visit of this Parliament on 20 July , who wanted direct contact between representatives of the Iranian legal system and EU lawyers .
I would like to see the Council and the Commission seize this offer as quickly as possible .
After all , the Iranian sentences , which have been rightly challenged , can be dealt with by this motion for a resolution at a correct and conclusive level .
The chance of this type of contact should also be seized upon in order to oppose the barbaric sharia punishment of stoning .
For let there be no misunderstanding with regard to Europe 's position towards Iran .
We cannot and will not live with a system which condones stoning fellow human beings , wherever this may be .
Mr President , as rapporteur for Iran , I support the joint motion for a resolution .
Dialogue with Iran is important , but our main concern , as the European Parliament , is for a human rights dialogue .
As parliamentary representatives , we are free from diplomatic constraints when it comes to demanding this universal principle , which is why we say loud and clear to any country concerned that we reject the death penalty in general .
As far as the rise in the number of death sentences carried out in Iran compared with previous years is concerned , I should like to state here how I evaluate the situation .
Conservative forces within both formal and informal structures are obviously using death sentences carried out or corporal punishment inflicted to intimidate both the people and the liberal forces in parliament and other societal institutions .
It has nothing to do with Islam or the Koran .
Because internal pressure is increasing , so is repression .
That is why we must stick to the demonstrable facts in all our criticism and check every allegation , irrespective of its source .
That is why I am against overloading the resolution with allegations which , in the final analysis , we cannot prove , thereby undermining our own credibility .
People have been sentenced to be stoned to death .
We have proof that two of these sentences were carried out in the first half of 2001 , but not for 25 September 2002 .
Let us therefore make use of Iran 's readiness to discuss all human rights issues , including individual cases , without preliminary conditions , as expressed in talks with the EU-Iran Human Rights Exploratory Experts mission at the beginning of the month .
I still worry that the Council has drawn the short straw by officially refraining from tabling the annual human rights resolution on Iran at the United Nations .
It is not the Presidency that deserves to be criticised here , but the usual suspects who feel their plans may be upset .
What we do say is that it is good that they want to talk ; let us hold a comprehensive dialogue and , if we see improvements , only then should we refrain from tabling new resolutions in due course .
There can be no upfront concessions at the expense of human rights .
Given the situation , we should clearly remind the structures in question in Iran - and in my view the Council and Commission as well - of one thing .
A negotiated agreement will only come about with Parliament 's assent and the issues to which we shall be paying particular attention are those I have just addressed .
Modernisation currently taking place within Iran is still not leading to an improvement in the human rights situation .
Barbaric punishments are still being carried out .
The backward and medieval practice of stoning still forms part of its criminal justice system .
Individuals are publicly hanged , hands are chopped off for minor transgressions and eyes are even put out without anaesthetic .
Women are predominantly the victims of this inhuman judicial procedure .
If Iran is serious about opening itself up to the West , if it is serious about a dialogue with the European Union , then this violation of human rights has to stop .
The extreme nature of the sharia represents an insurmountable obstacle for normal relations .
There can be no question of a trade and cooperation agreement with Europe as long as the human rights situation is not resolved .
The negotiators working on behalf of the European Union have to make this very clear right from the start .
Does Commissioner Kinnock agree with me on this ?
Clearly we cannot abandon a condemnation resolution in the UN if Iran continues with its evil infringement of universal principles .
This is not a question of a successful human rights dialogue with the EU as was suggested , but of a successful abolition of barbaric methods .
The European Union cannot afford to isolate Iran .
It is very important for reformists to be supported in their battle for a democratic and more humane Iran .
The younger generation wants change and offers hope .
Unfortunately the Iranian authorities do not know how to handle the situation .
But there is no substitute for openness and democratisation .
Modernisation can only triumph if barbaric practices and an evil past are brought to an end .
Mr President , Commissioner , unfortunately what Mr van den Bos is saying is not presented clearly in this joint motion for a resolution and that is why we have not signed it .
As long as Khatami 's adviser on women 's affairs considers stoning to be a measure which underpins the family , we can only consider this to be truly horrible .
Since our resolution of 13 December 2001 , 250 people have been executed in Iran , and 75 the previous year .
How can they speak about progress !
It does not look as if the human rights situation is improving .
I find that the motion for a resolution placed before us for our vote is not sufficiently clear .
Despite the visit by a European delegation in connection with human rights , there were still five public executions on 30 September .
We therefore condemn the European Council 's decision not to introduce a resolution about human rights in Iran before the next sitting of the UN Comission on Human Rights in Geneva .
We want to state clearly and unambiguously that this resolution must be introduced before the next sitting .
We want to say in all clarity that the European Parliament cannot assume that we can discuss cooperation agreements if there is no real improvement to the situation on human rights in Iran and that is why we have not signed .
Mr President , Iran is a large and important country with an ancient tradition of culture and learning going back to the pre-Islamic Zoroastrian period .
It is also a country with which the West has had troubled relations over a number of years .
In rejecting Western consumerist values , Iran radicalised itself and supported radical Islamic groups in Lebanon , such as Hizbollah .
There is added complexity because the conflicts with the West have long been bound up with internal disagreements within Iran itself .
Recent years have seen a growing awareness within Iran that this isolation was harmful to Iranian interests and leading nowhere .
The result has been a thaw in relations which we should welcome in the EU .
Our relations will depend on fundamental progress in the areas of human rights and illegal immigration , weapons of mass destruction , in particular the country 's nuclear weapons programme , drugs , the Middle East , Afghanistan and the battle against terrorism .
With regard to drug trafficking , the Iranians , who have a very serious drug problem of their own , should be commended for their efforts and cooperation .
They have also resisted the temptation to destabilise Afghanistan and have indicated they will not attempt to foment instability in Iraq in the event of Saddam Hussein 's departure from the scene .
Iran needs regional stability , and this has been recognised by the Iranian leadership .
On the Middle East , Iran has joined Saudi Arabia in accepting the principle of ' land for peace ' , if that is what the Palestinians want .
All of these developments are important and very welcome .
Iran needs to understand that Europe is extending the hand of friendship and that ways can be found to live together without Iran losing either its identity or its opposition to the worst of Western values .
It would be wrong for the European Union to overstress the issue of capital punishment per se , which remains legal , if used appropriately , in international law .
It is practised in the world 's largest democracies such as the USA , Japan and India and is supported by tens of millions of citizens in my country , the UK .
Iran 's leaders , however , should be in no doubt about the universal horror felt by us about the barbaric and medieval Sharia punishment of stoning to death .
I urge the Iranian leadership to reflect on this and to find solutions commensurate with Iran 's dignity and history .
Mr President , sadly , it cannot be denied that there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of executions in Iran in the past year .
The practice of stoning men and , in particular , women , not only continues to be provided for by law but is frequently applied , as is shown by the many death sentences already pronounced .
As we are aware , in the coming months , a further four women will be stoned under a legislative framework which forces an oppressive , discriminatory system of control on women .
As far as respect for fundamental rights is concerned , the deterioration of the situation in Iran has been pointed out and emphasised by a number of organisations as well as a UN General Assembly resolution and the most recent report produced by the Special Representative of the UN Human Rights Commission on Iran .
Now , in the dialogue taking place between the European Union and Iran , the Union 's exploratory mission did indeed record willingness on the part of the Iranian Government to discuss human rights issues , including specific cases , but this verbal expression of good will has not been borne out by any practical measure .
Quite the opposite : the situation seems to be deteriorating .
Although it is true that we must welcome signs of cooperation from the Iranian Government , we also need to realise that the increase in executions and the continued stonings are a negative sign for the Union , which cannot accept them out of respect for its own Charter of Fundamental Rights and the international conventions .
It is therefore imperative that , at all stages of the current dialogue , the Union makes clear that it is an absolute necessity that Iran guarantees respect for fundamental rights , especially women 's rights , and that it reiterates the need for Iran to abolish the death penalty , the practice of stoning and all other inhuman or debasing practices .
There were many of us , not only here in Europe but throughout the world , who put our faith in President Khatami .
That applied above all , of course , to the Iranian people .
We all hoped that he would be able to lead Iran onto a more democratically open and tolerant path .
Unfortunately , we have all , time after time after time , been disappointed .
The latest reports are frightening .
Journalists , intellectuals and critics of the regime disappear and are tortured , imprisoned and put on trial for trivial reasons .
The death penalty is frequently applied .
In that respect , Iran is one of the world 's worst offenders .
The latest reports of women having been stoned to death according to ancient sharia laws are utterly hair-raising .
The fact that this is happening in 2002 is completely unacceptable .
A whole world turns in abhorrence upon Iran .
Relations between the EU and Iran are characterised by a certain amount of caution , which is good .
If these relations are to become meaningful , the issue of human rights must always be at the top of the agenda , however .
I would also draw attention to the fact that Parliament has its veto when it comes to acknowledging possible agreements , and this is something we shall use if the situation does not improve .
Mr President , we too protest against the sentences inflicted on many Iranian women , against the disgraceful sentence of death by stoning and against the two-fold oppression of women by the dictatorship of mullahs .
We will vote for the resolution on the table in the hope that it will put pressure on the leaders of these countries and induce them to put an end to these barbaric practices .
The dictatorship of mullahs is not the only regime under which women are barbarically oppressed , however .
This is also the common practice of numerous regimes which the major powers consider to be their allies and on which they have the means to exert effective pressure , starting with Saudi Arabia and some of the oil emirates in the region .
I also protest against the barbarity of the death penalty and against obscurantism , even when it is not practised by primitive religions but by the leaders of the principal world superpower , which has the gall to set itself up as the defender of civilisation .
Mr President , it is true that President Khatami inspired hope concerning human rights in Iran , hopes that he himself crushed a long time ago , however .
Now , he is demonstrating good will in the light of the trade agreement with the EU .
We do not need good will , however ; we need results .
I agree with all my fellow MEPs who have said that we cannot enter into any trade agreement with Iran .
It would be completely schizophrenic , on the one hand , to say that we want to see a strongly critical resolution in the UN and , on the other hand , to enter into a trade agreement with the same country .
Let us think for a moment .
Of course we must embark upon the critical dialogue with Iran , and if this yields fruit in terms of our no longer seeing stonings or barbaric death penalties and sentences in Iran , then we can of course begin to pave the way for trade agreements .
Not a moment before , however .
Mr President , I hope that discussions on Iran will take place soon in the form of a dialogue between parliamentary committees and that an association agreement will be signed and implemented as a result .
Both sides need to make an effort if we are to achieve this objective .
On our side , we need to show we are willing to acknowledge the history of this vast country , as well as its present situation and the natural and socio-economic factors which shape it from both within and without .
We need to set an example and show our confidence in the leaders and people of Iran , the charming , dignified , talented people of Iran looking forward to democracy and reform , witness the hope they still place in President Hatami , who really is fighting to bring about changes in their theocratic regime .
On Iran 's side , its leaders must realise that the West , and the European Union in particular , will only open up to and work with the developing world if it respects human rights ; these are not values Europe wishes to impose , they are ecumenical values and they include women 's rights , which are particularly prone to abuse .
Communication and dialogue will help here .
So let us continue and strengthen this dialogue and signal once again , via this resolution , that we shall not waver from our principles and values and that this will be reflected in the preparations for and final text of the association agreement .
May I state , as coordinator of the European People 's Party in the Committee on Women 's Rights , that we are giving this matter serious attention .
We are planning a fact-finding mission with our opposite numbers and representatives of civil society and we shall lobby for the final text of the agreement , if it comes to that , to include a clear , express clause on women 's rights .
Mr President , I should like to express my gratitude to honourable Members for tabling this motion for a resolution .
Naturally , the Commission continues to be concerned by the human rights situation in Iran and , in particular , by the persistence of repressive measures against democratic institutions , civil society and the media .
The prevalence of arbitrary arrests , torture , discrimination against minorities and evident lack of the rule of law are all deeply disturbing .
The all-too-plentiful evidence of the use of cruel , inhuman and degrading punishments , including the appalling stoning of children , of women and of men , continue to demonstrate the scarcity of civilised standards .
The most effective way to raise these concerns is through the half-yearly comprehensive dialogue meetings , bilateral talks at ministerial level and similar sustained activities .
In addition , avenues for more direct and specific dialogue have been explored recently by the troika , as several Members said .
On 21 October the GAERC endorsed the strategy for starting a human rights dialogue with Iran on the basis of the recommendations of the exploratory troika mission that visited Teheran from 30 September to 1 October last .
During these explanatory talks , the Iranian Government voiced a political will to enter into a human rights dialogue and to do so largely on the EU 's terms .
No restrictions were requested in relation to the list of human rights issues to be discussed and the dialogue will be regularly assessed with the help of specific and realistic benchmarks , such as reports from the visits of the United Nations thematics rapporteurs .
The dialogue would initially take the form of an experimental round table in Teheran in December of this year .
Its format will be assessed immediately after the first session and could be revised , as necessary , in the spring of 2003 .
The opening of negotiations with Iran on a trade and cooperation agreement , indissolubly linked to instruments on political dialogue and counter-terrorism , gives the European Union substantial leverage , since the progress in the negotiations will be directly related to parallel progress in , among other things , human rights .
This connection is at the heart of the political package defined at the June Council and formally adopted on 12 July .
The establishment of a structured EU-Iran dialogue on human rights is obviously not a complete antidote to the variety of deep and serious concerns .
At this juncture , however , it seems to constitute the most effective available means of promoting our attempts to bring about tangible improvements in the grievous human rights situation in Iran .
I emphasise that , in all of this , our concerns relate to the basic rights and well-being of human beings , regardless of their faith , regardless of their customs .
That is the fundamental value that guides us and provides the motivation of the European Union .
We will continue to act upon those fundamentals .
Mr President , Commissioner , just one supplementary question .
Would the Commission be prepared to include the European Parliament in the December round table in Teheran which was mentioned ?
Mr President , I can certainly make enquiries of my colleagues whose portfolios directly concern this issue .
I am certain that the Commission , whether Parliament is involved or not , will welcome any reinforcement of its consistent and assiduous efforts to achieve objectives that we know are fully shared by this House .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m. , that is if the Members wishing to speak on the final item on the agenda make an effort to be concise .
The next item is the following six motions for resolution on the situation in Nepal :
B5-0545 / 2002 by Mr Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0547 / 2002 by Mrs Carrilho and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0550 / 2002 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0555 / 2002 by Mr Thomas Mann , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0558 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the political situation in Nepal ;
B5-0560 / 2002 by Mr Messner and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Nepal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing our sympathy for the Nepalese people , for whom the last few years have been one of the most difficult periods in their history .
Nepal 's fledgling democracy is shaky and the rule of law is constantly giving way to the arbitrary and to violence .
Over 3000 people have died in less than a year - which is appalling - following the violent confrontations between the army and the Maoist guerrillas , whose aim is to overthrow the monarchy , apparently against the wish of the population .
In actual fact , this people has been subjected to a genuine civil war for over six years , and the reaction of the international community has been almost total indifference .
The difficult situation has just been violently exacerbated by the events which took place at the beginning of this month .
In announcing the dismissal of the Prime Minister and temporarily assuming the executive powers , something which has not happened since the end of the absolute monarchy in 1990 , King Gyanendra has sparked off a major political crisis .
Indeed , even though he subsequently appointed another Prime Minister , the new Prime Minister has no representative legitimacy and , indeed , the King must be sorely tempted to use the fight against Maoist guerrilla groups to suspend the rule of law and put an end to the period of parliamentary democracy which has prevailed for 12 years .
These events have destabilised Nepal and thus exacerbated the unrest and instability throughout the region as a whole .
The European Union can no longer be content just to express good intentions faced with such a situation .
We must urge the new Prime Minister in the strongest terms possible to resume unconditional dialogue with the Maoist rebels .
Moreover , it would be desirable , in this respect , for the Council to appoint a special representative for Nepal without delay , who would , if necessary , be able to serve as mediator between the two sides .
Lastly and most importantly , given that this conflict is largely the result of economic and social problems , we must set aside a substantial amount of financial aid in order to be able to make an effective contribution to the restoration of peace and democracy in this small kingdom when the time comes .
Mr President , the escalation of force in Nepal is an unacceptable threat to stability in the entire region of the Himalayas .
The destructive work of the Maoist guerrillas continues unabated .
In many parts of Nepal there are no longer any schools or hospitals and the infrastructure will be in ruins for years to come .
Every week we hear of more police officers and civilians murdered .
The most recent low point was when the famous statue of King Gyanendra was blown up in the middle of Patan , an area that I know well .
One passer-by was killed and nine others were injured .
The guerrillas - unlike the majority of the population who are unequivocal in their support - want an end to the constitutional monarchy .
Over 5 000 people have fallen victim to the violence since 1996 .
It was only last May that the European Parliament conferred with Prime Minister Deuba in Brussels .
Now the King has sacked him because , contrary to what he said in public , he was in favour of postponing the November elections for a year .
Bahadur Khadka , whom the King appointed as his successor , and who has already been prime minister twice before , is now heading the transitional government and has announced that he intends to secure peace and stability in the country and start negotiating with the rebels .
The position of the PPE-DE is perfectly clear .
Nepal needs the rule of law , pluralism and continuing parliamentary democracy .
The fight against corruption and nepotism must be stepped up and the postponed elections must be accompanied by effective security measures , so that they can be held as quickly as possible .
We call on the European Union , across the party political divide , to offer its services as mediator .
The Council should appoint a special representative for Nepal .
I hope the Commission shares this position .
I have acted as vice-chairman of the SAARC delegation for many years and know from my regular contacts with and in Nepal that Europeans are held in high regard .
We could start acting as honest brokers right now and make an important contribution to the peace that the Nepalese people have long deserved .
Mr President , it looks as though in Nepal , the very beginning of democracy has been murdered along with King Birendra .
The current ruler is concentrating all power in his own hands .
The state of emergency has been replaced by a permanent state of absolute power with no real hope of improvement .
The rebel movement grows daily because the sense of hopelessness is steadily increasing in the countryside and young people join the rebels .
They are fighting a corrupt regime which owns 95 % of the country 's wealth .
And some of our Member States , including my own , Belgium , are sending weapons to this country .
In its earlier resolutions , the European Parliament has rightly urged that Europe should make the effort not just to support democracy but also to ensure that a political solution and negotiations can be achieved , but not that more powerful weapons should be delivered allowing even greater repression .
This contravenes the European code of conduct itself .
In the last six years alone five thousand people died in Nepal .
Yesterday , another 25 were killed in various clashes . I do not care which side the victims come from , what concerns me is that we must strive for a peaceful solution , that the only hope we can give this country is developing its land and providing opportunities for its people .
I therefore hope that you will support our amendments which refer to these points .
For surely it is unacceptable for there only to be one answer : shooting and killing .
We do not think that this is acceptable and we ask your support otherwise we will not be able to endorse this resolution , at least as far as I am concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is universally known that human rights are being violated in Nepal .
This resolution rightly condemns all acts of violence , those perpetrated by the security forces , but also those by the Maoist rebels .
It rightly presses for mediation and political consultation .
However , it rightly asks for the underlying causes of the conflict to be addressed , that is , abject poverty , social inequality and marginalised population groups .
In August , the European Commission provided EUR 615 000 for a peaceful solution to the conflict .
Against this background , it is unwise to supply murder weapons to Nepal .
It is also a clear violation of the code of conduct regarding the export of weapons .
The Flemish Greens clearly state that the conditions for supply are not fulfilled and our party will continue to ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Belgian Parliament whether it is still possible to suspend the planned supply of weapons .
In this sense , this resolution is a more than obvious 