Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 29 November 2001 .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of Thursday 29 November have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , this concerns the Fiori report which we voted on in Brussels last time .
I have to say that this was Parliament at its worst .
We had a temporary committee which met for ten months to discuss an issue that could have been discussed within the existing committees .
Firstly , it was an abuse of the temporary committee status - Parliament is very fortunate to have this privilege , and I do not think that we should abuse it , especially in the way it was abused with that vote and the final outcome .
As chairman of the Committee on Budgets , I would dearly love to know the cost of that temporary committee for an outcome that had nothing at the end of it .
I would hope that , if we have temporary committees in future , they will deal with subjects outside the normal committee structure .
If we have enquiries in the future , let us try to carry them out within the budget and not give rise to excess expenditure .
Mr Wynn , I can assure you that you will receive an answer very soon .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Order of business
Madam President , the Commissioner probably gave us more than we already formally have in the extremely important negotiations which were preceded by many debates here in this Parliament , and were followed by a resolution which we presented to the Commission , to which the Commissioner made reference during the negotiations at every opportunity and stated : " in the final analysis , I need the majority and support of the European Parliament " .
And we would now decide to hold a debate without a final say from us ?
I cannot really imagine this .
I would also like to call on the fellow MEPs from the other parties , irrespective of the content of their opinions , to conclude this debate with a political verdict .
We owe it to the Commission and to the dignity of this House .
Since the negotiations are of such significance , we must really employ our full powers and reach a verdict .
Madam President , I do not think that anyone here will deny that the Doha Summit was an important political event , both for the European Union and for the whole world .
I believe that it is equally important to carefully analyse the outcome of the summit and the decisions that were taken there .
Rather than running the risk of adopting a superficial position , Parliament can simply publish a few brief considerations .
However , I think that it is too early to carry out a serious political assessment , which is in fact what is expected of a parliament .
I believe that we must wait and not vote for a resolution this week .
I shall now put the request to the vote .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Still with regard to Tuesday , I have received a request from Mr Westendorp to postpone the vote on telecommunications until Wednesday .
Madam President , with regard to the telecommunications package which we are going to vote on - tomorrow , in principle - I would like to ask that the vote be delayed until Wednesday .
We have just held a meeting with the Council and the Commission and they advise us that , so that the various groups may have time to examine the compromise proposals , that vote should be held a day later .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Regarding Wednesday
Madam President , on Wednesday 's draft agenda there is a joint debate on the Middle East at 3 p.m.
It might be helpful for colleagues if in advance of that debate , in which there will be a great deal of interest , Parliament 's services would consider reprinting copies of the joint address to this House by the Speaker of the Knesset and the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council .
The message delivered on that occasion might shed some light in our current darkness .
Madam President , on the list of urgent topics relating to human rights , there is one on Irian Jaya and another on Sulawesi .
Both islands are part of one country , Indonesia .
I propose that they be combined under one title , ' Indonesia ' , and that the situation of both islands be dealt with under that title , and we would thereby have time to deal with the tragic situation in Ireland .
I wish to make a point of order to draw the attention of this House to the grave discourtesy and disrespect shown to it by a member of the Belgian presidency .
I refer to Mrs Magda Aelvoet , Minister for Consumer Protection , Public Health and the Environment in the Federal Parliament of Belgium .
I wrote to Mrs Aelvoet on 13 June 2001 - and that letter was signed by 20 Members of this House - requesting a meeting with her to raise the question of the fraudulent importation of cat and dog fur products into the EU from Asia and China .
We received no reply to that letter .
I wrote again on 12 July 2001 and received no reply .
Mrs Alvoet came here to Strasbourg on 12 September 2001 to address an intergroup meeting on animal welfare .
I raised this issue with her : she said that she had written to me and had extended an invitation to the MEPs who had signed the letter with me to come and meet her in Brussels .
When I returned to Brussels , there was no sign of this letter .
I wrote for a third time to Mrs Aelvoet requesting the letter and have received no reply .
Three times I have followed up with telephone calls and again received no reply .
I find this a grave discourtesy to the Members of this House who signed that letter and I also find it astonishing that a minister in the EU presidency should come before a packed meeting of an intergroup and say that she has written to me when she knew full well that this was a lie and no letter had been sent .
I hope , therefore , Madam President that you will confirm , on behalf of this House , that this sort of behaviour by a minister in the presidency is gravely discourteous and not going to be tolerated in future .
Mr Stevenson , we shall certainly take note of your complaint .
Madam President , like Mr Stevenson I want to raise a point of order with regard to a matter of discourtesy to this House .
Some months ago I wrote to the President of the Commission asking a formal written question , as I am entitled to do as a Member .
I received a reply which said : ' the research needed in order to provide a detailed response would be out of all proportion to the result desired and exceed the requirements of a response to a written question . '
That is a gross discourtesy to any Member asking a question of a body , which is supposed to be , there to serve and to be transparent in response to requests for information .
If that were the sort of response a minister in the British Government gave to a member of the British House of Commons , he would deservedly be pilloried in that House .
I expect better from the President of the Commission .
I wish to say , on behalf of this House , that when a Member asks a perfectly legitimate question I expect that question to be answered to the fullest extent .
We should not just be given an excuse and some sort of non-answer .
I would like to remind the President of the Commission of his pledges to provide transparency and openness in terms of information to this House .
Of course , Mr Bradbourn , I wholeheartedly agree with you .
Madam President , I had announced that I wanted to make a statement on behalf of the Socialist Group with regard to the constitutional crisis in the European Union following the last meeting of the Council of Justice and Interior Ministers last week .
My statement is as follows :

I would like to express our concern about the grave situation which has arisen in view of the Laeken Summit , because , by supporting the report by Mrs Reding , of the PPE-DE , and the report by Mr Watson , a Liberal , which was widely supported by the European Parliament , this House has defined a clear approach in the fight against terrorism .
Since 11 September , the European Council , on two occasions , in Brussels and in Ghent , has maintained the same approach , without reservations from any Head of State or Government .
The European Parliament has dealt with the Commission ' s two proposals by means of an urgency procedure , with huge support at the last part-session in Brussels .
Today , Parliament is going to be consulted once again and we are in a situation where one government , the Italian government , is refusing to accept something which is clear to all the institutions of the European Union .
Madam President , I would like you to express , on behalf of my group , firstly our support for the President of the European Council , Mr Verhofstadt , who will go to Rome tomorrow to try to resolve this unacceptable situation ; secondly , to express our support for the Commission , which has exercised its right to initiative responsibly and with a sense of duty .
Finally , I would also like you to strongly protest , on behalf of Parliament , at the unacceptable statements , delivered in coarse and rude language , made at the weekend by a former colleague of ours , now an Italian Government Minister , Mr Bossi , which would make Mr Haider green with envy .

This is a very important issue , on which we are all united .
If we cannot move ahead as fifteen , we will do so as fourteen , but we must combat terrorism on all fronts , and one of them is corruption and the recycling and laundering of money .
( Applause from the left )
I certainly share the concern that Enrique Barón Crespo has raised at the failure of the Justice and Home Affairs ministers to reach agreement on the proposal for a European arrest warrant .
I note , however that , in addition to Mr Verhofstadt 's planned visit to Rome , there will be an extraordinary meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs ministers on Thursday of this week .
It must be hoped that agreement can be reached on that occasion .
The House anticipated that an agreement might not be reached and recommended at least consideration of the use of Article 40 of the Treaty which would allow a number of countries to proceed on the basis of reinforced cooperation .
Nobody wants that solution ; it must be hoped that we can reach agreement between 15 , but , one country must not be allowed to hold up progress in the fight against terrorism called for by the Heads of State and Government in Ghent .
( Applause from the left and the centre )
Madam President , I cannot remain silent for Mr Barón Crespo has , of course , made the most of the opportunity to transform what might actually be well-founded comments into a crusade , which has been on the march ever since the Italian people , of their own free will , elected a new government .

Mr Barón Crespo just will not accept this , and the sooner he does the better .
I want all the Members who are protesting to understand this too : democracy is this , ladies and gentlemen ; every people chooses its government freely and willingly .
More specifically , I would stress the absolute falsehood of what Mr Barón Crespo has said .
The government and the Italian people are more committed to combating terrorism than anyone .
The government and the Italian people have paid the price of terrorist attacks in recent years and have always been in the front line . It is silly to confuse the issue .
There is no point in trying to put everything under one roof .
We are discussing the possibility of extending the European arrest warrant and it is on this , the extension of the warrant to other offences not initially covered , that we are attempting - and we are confident that agreement will be reached - to find a way of accommodating the different legal traditions and the different legislative frameworks of each country , so that we can be sure that the decisions we take to address the current critical situation of terrorism will also provide us with a properly harmonised Community legislative framework .
This , then is the issue , this and no other .
Anyone who wants to exploit the tragic events of 11 September to continue with this mad campaign against a legitimately elected government will certainly not find support .
I will end by suggesting that Mr Barón Crespo reserve his enthusiasm for more justified causes , and that he stop trying to mislead us by confusing the issues on the table .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Barón Crespo 's comments demand a response .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I would like to say that we expect that the Italian government , in which we have the greatest confidence , will help to ensure that we can finally reach an agreement .
We regard the fight against terrorism as a priority , and this is an issue on which there should not be any differences between the party-political families .
However , Mr Barón Crespo , I also believe this not an issue that should be the subject of party-political controversy , and we also know - please listen to what I am saying , I am trying to be very objective - that no result has been achieved on the party statute .
You also know that it was not those of my own political persuasion who contributed to this failure .
I would ask you , just as you are critical in other cases , to be critical of your own party when results are not forthcoming , as in the case of the party statute .
Your credibility would be greater if you applied the same yardsticks right across the political spectrum .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , I think it is pretty rich to compare the European arrest warrant with a party statute .
However , there are , of course , parties - particularly in Germany - where there is a close link between arrest warrants and their party statute .

( Applause and laughter ) I would just like to say one thing to Mr Lisi : the entire ' Forza Italia ' delegation has , at all the hearings on the Commission 's proposals that have taken place in this House up to now , agreed to all the European Parliament 's opinions .
So I wonder why the Italian Prime Minister , who comes from the same party as Mr Lisi - who incidentally approved all this himself - is now instructing his Minister for the Interior to veto offences which we all agreed should be prosecuted at European level .
I wonder if this could possibly have something to do with party politics , but not the issue that Mr Barón Crespo has rightly raised here .
Madam President , the great majority of my group have voted against the Watson report on the European arrest warrant .
However , our motives were very different from those of Mr Berlusconi , and that is why I should like to make this contribution , mainly to avoid being tarred with the same brush .
In principle , the Group of the Greens are in favour of a European arrest warrant , but only after a number of minimum standards have been put in place in the field of law of criminal procedure , for example with regard to legal aid or to criminal investigation methods .
The rationale underlying a European arrest warrant is that all legal systems are more or less the same , and that it really does not matter in which country one is sentenced .
That is not yet the case at the moment .
If these systems were alike , it would not be so difficult to establish these minimum standards .
I know that sooner or later , everyone will support these minimum standards , but our group has made them a condition for a European arrest warrant .
As such , this is absolutely and fundamentally a different viewpoint from that adopted by Mr Berlusconi , and it should not be confused with his .
Neither should it be confused with a kind of anti-European sentiment .
We are in favour of a European arrest warrant , but only when this condition has been met .
Madam President , Mr Poettering , you just mentioned the European party statute in connection with the European arrest warrant .
The only real connection is that they are both things we consider to be desirable .
However , I do not quite understand your criticism of my group .
You were talking as if it was my group 's fault that nothing has happened so far .
As I understand it , the situation was rather different .
There were governments that wanted parties existing in only two countries to be granted this status .
Surely that cannot be so , the European party statute cannot be a way of providing back-door finance to national or regional parties .
I just wanted to establish that point so that no false impressions arise or misleading discussions take place .
Madam President , I should like to change the subject and get us off this tack .
Today is International Human Rights Day and I wish to express my distress and horror at the tragic death of the eight refugees , including three children , who suffocated in a container in southern Ireland .
Eight dead refugees who were the victims not so much of the traffickers , as the authorities hastened to assure us , but of European indifference and a global system which allows and encourages the free movement of heads , but not the free movement of people , of a system which condemns two thirds of the people on this planet to live in conditions of unbelievable poverty .
The European Parliament cannot stand by impassively in the face of the present-day refugee tragedy , nor can we feel safe in fortress Europe surrounded by such human misery and such a huge development divide .
I think it is a very good sign that we shall be debating the question of refugees and immigrants during the urgent debate on Thursday , and I would be most obliged , Madam President , if you would convey these views to the Council in Laeken .
I wish to raise also the discovery of eight people dead in a container of furniture in County Wexford over the weekend .
The dead included a four-year old boy , a ten-year old girl and a sixteen-year old boy .
There were three adults found dead also - two men and a woman - and there are five survivors .
It appears that , so far as we understand it , about 11 of these people came from Turkey , one from Albania and one from Algeria .
It seems to me quite appalling that we have a situation in Europe where people are so desperate that they have to put themselves into the hands of criminals in order to try and find a new life in Europe .
We have done something serious about dealing with the criminals on the one hand and with our approach to immigration on the other .
We cannot continue to allow the situation where people are so desperate that they will do anything and even put themselves and their children at risk in order to find a new life .
I would ask those in this House who are supporting Mr Berlusconi in opposing the European arrest warrant to ask themselves why are they supporting a situation where the criminals who put these people into this container will escape the justice which needs to be meted out to them ?
Could I also ask , Madam President ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , I am going to make a very simple proposal relating to International Human Rights Day .
Given that eight people recently lost their lives in tragic circumstances and that you , Madam President , often invite us to show our respect for those who are victims of violence by observing a minute ' s silence , we should , naturally , observe a minute ' s silence tomorrow morning at the opening of the sitting , for the eight people who recently died at the hands of evil traffickers .
Madam President , I hope that the new President will treat all Members equally .
I have been indicating for quite some time - well before many people who have already spoken - that I want to make a point of order .
I have two points .
The first is in relation to Mr Stevenson 's attack on a Belgian minister who is not here to defend herself .
A personal and vitriolic attack like that is unjustified when the person is not present .
Secondly , in relation to what has happened in Ireland this weekend , it is only proper that we should have a debate on this .
People are focusing on the wrong aspect .
It is quite clear that the fortress mentality of Europe is what is causing people to put their lives at risk , by trusting people who are trying to make a profit .
We need to open up the borders instead of encouraging this kind of fortress mentality .
That is the only way we are going to ensure that people do not lose their lives in such a tragic way .
Dover and Wexford are only two examples of what is to come .
Finally , I am very disappointed that some of my fellow Irish Members in this House did not feel that they could support this being discussed in Parliament .
That is a tragedy , considering that it happened in their own constituency .
Madam President , I rise to support the remarks of Mr de Rossa and Mrs McKenna with regard to the horrific situation and tragedy in Wexford , Ireland .
The Irish Government has already expressed its sentiments in this regard and will be taking appropriate action .
I support you also , Madam President , in making space on Thursday 's agenda for a debate on this tragedy .
Certainly , Mr Fitzsimons .
As you know , Parliament has decided to include this issue in the debate on topical questions to be held on Thursday .
Madam President , at the last part-session in Brussels you very kindly said that you would write to the Greek authorities about the 12 British and two Dutch plane spotters who were arrested .
I was wondering whether you have had any reply to that letter .
My constituent Wayne Groves is still in prison after nearly five weeks with no charge and no trial .
I believe it is against the European Convention on Human Rights .
I should like to know whether there is anything further you can do on their behalf and whether you have had that reply .
Yes , Mrs Lynne , I have received a reply from Mr Papandreou , the Greek Foreign Affairs Minister , which I shall send on to you and to all Members as soon as possible , as this reply is open to public scrutiny .
As you will see , the letter does not , unfortunately , give an entirely satisfactory response regarding the people who are being detained .
Madam President , I should like to endorse Mrs Lynne ' s point of order , but I should like to ask you to re-establish contact , and I should also like to call on my fellow Greek MEPs to ensure that these spotters , who have now spent nearly five weeks in a Greek prison for indulging in their pastime , can be brought to court before next Friday , because procedures will otherwise be delayed by a three-week break and these young men , these spotters who were enjoying their pastime , would then be locked up seven or eight weeks without being brought before the law .
I would therefore ask you and my fellow Greek MEPs kindly to exert some political pressure to ensure that these spotters can have a court hearing before next Friday .
Madam President , I would like to endorse the point made by Mrs Lynne .
Today is Human Rights Day and yet there are 12 European citizens in prison in Greece without trial .
Members opposite have been raising the issue of the European arrest warrant - this incident shows precisely why Members on this side of the House have concerns about a European arrest warrant .
British citizens engaged in the harmless pursuit of plane-spotting find themselves in prison in Greece without trial .
I really look forward to seeing the reply you have received , which you described as unsatisfactory , and hope you will respond in very robust terms to the Greek Government .
They must not be allowed to keep European citizens in prison without trial .
Unfortunately , Mr Perry , the reply was unsatisfactory , as I just said .
Mr Papandreou ' s reply was as follows : ' I have made known the interest that the Foreign Affairs Ministry is taking in the matter .
Nevertheless , as you can understand , the executive power cannot possibly intervene in any way in the workings and the independence of the judiciary . '
I shall , of course , see what action I can take in this matter .
But unfortunately the response is , for the time being , negative .
Madam President , I should like to comment on the positions taken by the honourable Members in connection with the arrest of a number of Britons in Greece and , first , to assure them that , as Members of Parliament , we have no way of influencing the independence of the Greek judiciary , and rightly so , nor do I believe that you are able to influence the judiciary in your countries .
Secondly , you must know , as we said during the last debate in Brussels , that the acts for which they were arrested , at least as they have been reported in the press , are acts for which they would have been arrested in any one of the fifteen Member States of the European Union .
So we would be well advised to respect the institutions on the basis of which the fifteen Member States work together , to respect the independence of the judiciary and to respect the laws which apply in the fifteen Member States .
Let us be clear on one thing : there are fifteen countries here , represented by numerous parties and numerous persuasions , all are equal and of equal value , and no one has the right to tell other countries how to act , as if they were countries which did not belong to Europe .
I should like to thank you , Madam President , for writing a letter to the Greek authorities about the plane spotters , and for what you said today .
It is particularly important that you do this on behalf of the whole European Parliament and as you represent a Member State that is not involved on either side .
You said you would reflect on further action you would take .
Could I ask when you will report back to the plenary on that ?
I should also like to thank Mr Souladakis for what he said .
I believe that there is a common understanding here of the necessity to observe human rights and of the need for cooperation between our two states in the European Union , as well as for respect for the independence of the judiciary .
Through you , Madam President , perhaps I can appeal to all the Greek Members of this House to see whether we can produce some form of joint statement in support of those principles which might advance understanding and lead to a quicker resolution of this issue for the 12 individuals involved .
Madam President , as you are well aware , the situation caused by ETA ' s terrorism in Spain is horrendous , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your work during your Presidency .
I would like to say once again that I totally reject ETA and all those who support it or apologise for it .

Madam President , both myself and my party have been seriously slandered in some sections of the Spanish media , since , through illness , I was not able to attend the last part-session in Brussels , where a debate and a vote were held on Mr Watson ' s report , which I fully supported through various press releases which were sent to all the Spanish media 24 hours before the debate and the vote , and which were systematically hushed up .
For all these reasons , Madam President , I would ask for your support in this situation in which I have been unable to defend myself .
To this end , since my position and that of my party was clear , public and expressed prior to the vote , I would like to ask you formally that my vote in favour of the Watson report and Amendments Nos 117 and 118 be registered , as that is how I would have voted had I been present .
Furthermore , I would point out that the inclusion of my vote would not significantly alter the final result of the vote .
Finally , I would like to publicly thank the Efe Agency , the only one to express the truth in its communications .
We will always support the defence of life and the most fundamental rights and we will always be against murderers and those who justify and support them .
Madam President , today we are commemorating International Human Rights Day .
By coincidence , this week 's agenda features a joint debate on the area of freedom , security and justice , requiring straightforward involvement by Parliament on human rights .
At the beginning of this year , I denounced in this House the pardon of 15 torturers by the Spanish Government , as this means that torture will continue to be frequently practised by the Spanish police .
Three months afterwards , a young woman , Iratxe Sorzabal ,
( The speaker brandished a poster )
was sexually humiliated and subjected to torture sessions for hours from the moment of her arrest .
These photos were taken in the hospital and show the marks ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , on Wednesday , we are going to debate an item on cooperation between the European Union and the United States in the fight against terrorism .
However , we discovered - on the Internet , in fact - that this debate is going to be based on an exchange of letters between a representative of Mr Bush - a Mr Forster , I believe - and Mr Prodi .

Parliament does not have a copy of these letters , although we can read them on the Internet , in which the United States government demands Europe take forty or so measures to cooperate with the fight against terrorism .
It also appears - we can only say ' it appears ' as we have no documents to refer to - that Mr Prodi sent a reply to the United States government at the end of November .
I think that , for this slightly rushed debate to be held in more favourable conditions - the debate is , however , scheduled for Wednesday - it would be helpful for Parliament to obtain a copy of the letter that the United States government sent to Mr Prodi and Mr Prodi ' s reply .
That is the request I would like to make .
Of course , Mr Krivine , we shall try to follow this up as soon as possible .
Madam President , this point may be of some interest to the House .
Honourable Members may recall voting in the mini-part-session on the Foster report on common rules in the field of civil aviation security .
This report had to be brought forward very quickly in the light of the events of 11 September .
We were then awaiting the response from the Transport Council meeting last Friday and everyone hoped that a common position would be reached .
I should like to inform the House that the Transport Council and Member States did not reach a common position , despite urgent appeals from all sides on the desperate need for these measures and despite the fact that this Parliament had bent over backwards to do its very best in a very short period of time .
The behaviour of the Member States and the Council in all of this has been quite appalling .
This is probably one of the most important measures that has come through since 11 September and it would have affected 38 European countries .
I will keep this House informed as to progress but I would like you , Madam President , to pass on our comments to the presidency .
I would like to draw your attention , Madam President , and that of Parliament , to the unacceptable and discriminatory behaviour of the Albanian authorities towards the Greek minority in the town of Chimara particularly , where , last week , special police forces demolished buildings , physically abused members of that minority , to whom the buildings belonged , even women and children .
The buildings included the minority ' s administrative headquarters , the infants ' school and several shops , which , on the pretext that they had been poorly constructed , were destroyed by bulldozers on the instructions of the town ' s mayor , whose election , it must be stressed , was not recognised as legitimate by Council of Europe observers .
Madam President , I think that Parliament should take on board these extremely regrettable actions when preparing for the forthcoming negotiations on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and Albania .
Thank you .
Madam President , are we , the Members of the European Parliament , all fraudsters ?
Are we all thieves ?
Are we all idlers ?
Are we timewasters who do nothing from morning to night and spend our time enjoying ourselves and getting rich ?
I do not think so .
Yet that is what is stated in a book by an Italian journalist , Mario Giordano , entitled ' L ' Unione fa la truffa ' [ The Union is a swindler ] .
The title says it all .
This journalist is also , I regret to say , the director of a major Italian television company .
The book , which I found in a bookshop in Rome - where I had gone to meet my mother and sister as I often do - filled me with horror and sent shivers down my spine , for it describes all of us Members of Parliament as idlers who do nothing but plot frauds and robberies .
Madam President , please would you examine this book and instigate legal proceedings for libel against Mario Giordano , who , it pains me to admit , is Italian .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo , for this information .
I can assure you that we shall take a close look at this book and see what can be done to restore our reputation .
Madam President , I wish to draw the House 's attention to the vigorous protests and exasperation of Greek farmers , who are again involved in mass dynamic demonstrations against the anti-farming policy of the European Union , which is turning them off their land , ruining them and forcing them to abandon the countryside .
Our farmers are fighting against the policy of quotas which limits dynamic arable farming , even of products in which the European Union and Greece are nowhere near self-sufficient , such as oil , tobacco and cotton , for which the Council even ignored a resolution by the European Parliament calling for a 50 % increase in quotas .
Our farmers are fighting against their exploitation by the processing industry , which snaps up their produce at derisory prices .
Hundreds of thousands have already abandoned farming and joined the ranks of the unemployed .
They are calling for quotas to be abolished , at least for products in which the European Union is not self-sufficient .
They are protesting about policy to date .
They are calling for infrastructure projects , such as irrigation works .
They are calling for producer prices which cover the cost of production and afford them a profit .
Madam President , we are at their side in their just fight for survival with all the means at our disposal , even if their fight qualifies as terrorism as defined recently by the Ministers of Justice of the European Union , a definition which we fear will also be adopted by the Laeken Summit .
Madam President , ten years ago this week , our Sakharov prize winner , Aung San Suu Kyi , was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
This Saturday , all living Laureates will go to Oslo to commemorate 100 years of the Nobel Peace Prize - she will not be there .
She has been kept under house arrest since September 2000 and has not been allowed to move about freely for 13 years .
Will you please , Madam President , send her a message of support from this Parliament and also urge the Norwegian Nobel Institute to express their deep concern about the fact that she is not able to join them on Saturday in Oslo .
Would you also ask the Nobel Institute to urge the military junta in Rangoon , Burma , to give Aung San Suu Kyi her freedom forthwith .
Mrs Kinnock , I am , of course , very willing to take this step , but I think that it will be even more effective after the debate , which is on the agenda under the item on human rights , has been held on Thursday .
Once we have held the debate , I shall be able to inform the Institute of the position that the European Parliament has clearly adopted .
I would like to inform you that , at the request of several groups , we will be holding a brief but intense commemoration tomorrow to mark the events of 11 September .
The commemoration will take place in the House , just before the address by the President of South Korea , in other words at approximately 11.50 a.m.
European Food Authority
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0416 / 2001 ) , by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down the general principles and requirements of food law , establishing the European Food Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety ( 1088 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0414 / 2001 - 2000 / 0286 ( COD ) )
Madam President , today 's debate is the culmination of a long process which began in the days of the BSE epidemic .
It is in a sense a proposal that comes as much from this House as from the other institutions of the European Union because our two temporary committees of inquiry culminated in the recommendation that there should be a body of this kind .
One Commission fell , another came into office accepting that something of this sort should happen and it is that proposal from President Prodi , driven forward by the Commissioner , which we are dealing with today .
It is , therefore , the work of many hands and if this debate today is considered , calm and , I hope , rational it is because of the extent to which the three sides in the triangle of forces have attempted to come to an agreed conclusion by the time of this second reading debate , in order to expedite the introduction of the new authority itself .
There should not be any undue delay .
If we can avoid the conciliation stage , we will do so .
There are still perhaps a few reservations which I shall refer to in a moment , but we have come to a point where we believe we have a consensus in this House .
We certainly have a majority in this House and I should like to thank the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs of the other political groups , particularly Mr Bowis , Mrs Paulsen and Mr Staes for the work they have done right through since the original White Paper .
I would also like to thank my own researcher , Michelle Smythe , and everyone from the Commission and the Council , under both the Swedish and Belgian presidencies , who have brought this forward .
Since Mrs Aelvoet has taken a bit of a pounding today I shall pay tribute to her part in it also .
We have now agreed on a timetable to get the new authority up and running . To do that there is a series of specific compromises : 16 new amendments which broadly find favour with the Commission - I hope Mr Byrne will be able to indicate that - and the Council .

Firstly , we had to adopt an unusual procedure for one point that remains in some doubt , that is , the site of the new authority .
We wanted to set out criteria for the site of the new authority as we believe we should .
The Council , however , were not prepared to accept them in the body of the text .
But you do not throw away the whole report for that : we have put it into the legislative resolution and we hope that you , Madam President , will be able to set out exactly what our reasoning is .
The decision will have to be made on merit and not through the kind of political horsetrading that is currently being whispered about .
It would be the worst possible start if this body were sited in an inappropriate place for the worst of reasons .
We tabled the compromise amendments in order to bring forward the major priorities that this Parliament has always emphasised : firstly , a parliamentary hearing for the proposed executive director of the new authority and a three-month period for Parliament to express its opinion on the candidates for a small and tightly-focused management board .
That is the board that will meet in public and will make its opinions equally public so the citizens of Europe can see what it recommends .
It will have a role to play in risk analysis , risk communication and risk management , where its advice is appropriate .
These are substantial powers .
In addition , this legislation gives protection to those who want to report on unsafe practices in the food and feed business .
Citizens have a duty to tell the truth and I believe we have guaranteed that .
If the 16 compromise amendments , and the others already agreed with the presidency , are passed , we can proceed to set up the new EFSA .
The problem of BSE , for example , is still with us : cases of it have been notified in two previously clear Member States this week .
Everybody knows that food and animal feed have to be safer .
The procedures whereby such products come in and out of the European Union have to be open , transparent and , above all , safe .
Some of the practices of industrialised farming have threatened us all .
Producers and consumers alike have everything to gain from a monitoring authority which protects the interests of all and is beholden to none .
On that basis I commend this proposal to the House .
We have come quite a journey since the Commission produced its first White Paper .
At that time I had the privilege of writing the report for Parliament with my friend across the floor - Mr Whitehead - acting as shadow .
Now I am reciprocating as shadow for his report .
My party is not a great party for harmonisation but we are a party for harmony and that is what we have seen in this report and the way it has been dealt with .
I too wish to play tribute to the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs , also the Commissioner , Mr David Byrne , and - dare I say it in the light of earlier comments -to Magda Aelvoet , the minister .
I hope Ms McKenna will not take offence if I give her praise in her absence as she too has played her part in looking for and helping us to find compromises which make sense , which do not betray anybody and which take forward the concept of food safety for the peoples of Europe .
This is an issue which is of considerable importance to people .
There is nothing more important than the safety of the food and the drink that they and their families partake of .
There is a European dimension to this because , increasingly , not only does food cross boundaries but people cross boundaries .
So we need to be certain that the food we eat has been grown in soil we can trust and the fertilisers added to it are known to be safe .
The feed that is given to livestock also plays its part in ensuring that the food that ends up in our supermarkets and on our tables merits our confidence .
Then we want to make sure that the processing of food is safe and , finally , we want to make sure that when it is stored and retailed , it is still safe for us to take home .
Then of course it is up to us .
There are many critical issues in this report - the title of the food safety authority has been crucial to us .
We do not want to see an all-singing , all-dancing bureaucracy - we want an authority which is focused on safety , on the assessment of risk , on giving guidance where appropriate to the managers of risk .
An authority that understands that risk can never be eliminated but it can be adequately spotted and dealt with .
Science is crucial , so is independence - that is why the siting of this authority is important .
The pre-conciliation process - if I can call it that - that we have been going through is an example of how to take measures through Parliament and the institutions .
At this last stage Parliament has spoken overwhelmingly with one voice .
I know the Commission and the Council have listened and I believe they will have benefited because we are working together on this measure .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we talk about the European Food Safety Authority today , there is one thing in particular that we need to say to the citizens of the European Union . That is that we are convinced even now , without this Food Safety Authority , that the food people in the European Union are consuming is safe .
So safe , that I am convinced that it is among the safest in the world .
However , if we believe that a food safety authority would have advantages and lead to improvements in the European Union , there must be good reasons for that .
I would like to name three conditions that I believe need to be met to achieve such improvements .
Mr Bowis and Mr Whitehead have already touched on these points .
The first is the quality of the experts .
It is not acceptable for people the Member States want to get rid of to be sent to this authority as experts and scientists .
It is your job , Commissioner , to invite the Member States to send only the cream of the cream .
Secondly , to secure improvements we need transparency and openness .
Even more than the scientific committees , which have had a high degree of transparency since the BSE crisis , the Authority needs to ensure that it earns the people 's trust .
That means that it must be open and transparent in its activities .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , and Mr Byrne , we need controls .
It is also your job , the Commission 's job , to convey to the Member States that supervision and control are the most basic tasks of the Member States , something you have criminally neglected in recent years .
If we want to carry on guaranteeing safe food , and perhaps even safer food , if we want to win back the people 's trust , then we can only do this by meeting these conditions and by tightening up controls .
If we do that , the new Food Safety Authority will be a step forward for the European Union .
I call on you , Commissioner , to make sure that is the case .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think it is rather fantastic that we have now brought about some pretty good legislation .
Two years is certainly a long time , but I personally thought it would take longer .
It is incredibly important that we talk about safety , on which we can arrive at a common view .
Safety has to be assessed .
Openness and public control are more important than anything else in this new legislation .
Whatever we say and however we behave , new crises will occur and there will be new scandals .
We are going to be presented with new scientific proposals which point in one direction or another and which , rightly or wrongly , will frighten people .
The only way to deal with this situation is through complete openness and with total public scrutiny , for people cannot be calmed down simply through publishing decisions .
Now , everyone with an interest - consumer and environmental organisations and the media - will immediately be given information , and not only information from a majority of scientists on a panel but also details of minority views .
In that way , no one will be able to say that the EU is concealing anything from its citizens .
Finally , I want to say that this is all well and good , but that I wonder how things will work out in terms of compliance and control .
What is there in terms of a possible system of penalties to be imposed upon those Member States and companies which do not comply with the safety standards ?
That is one step .
It is a large step and also the first .
Let us never forget , however , that it must be implemented . Otherwise , it will be merely hot air .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Whitehead , the Regulation that is before us is ground-breaking , in my view .
I am indeed of the opinion that something good can come out of a crisis situation .
We often see this in the food industry too . Crises can lead to headway being made in the legislative field .
The Regulation that is before us constitutes one such step forward . I should like to underline a few aspects which were important to my group in particular , and which we have also adopted .
Firstly , the Regulation will ensure that it will no longer be possible for infected food to be exported to third countries , often Third World countries .
Secondly , the diversity of food is highlighted . It is also pointed out that traditional products exist , that we should recognise this and that food has a certain cultural role to play .
Thirdly , we as Parliament have ensured that we have turned the proposed food authority into a food safety authority , which is quite an achievement for our Parliament .
Thanks to Parliament and you , Mr Whitehead , we have been able to play a role and have been able to underline the significance of transparency in this respect .
It is indeed true that we need transparency in order to restore consumer confidence .
We , as Parliament , have also ensured that we have gained more insight into the make-up of the management board and into the appointment of the executive director .
Finally , we have also called for more objective criteria for the location .
When we came out of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy at second reading , we noticed we had 28 amendments , 28 amendments which the Council struggled to accept at times .
We carried out a kind of pre-conciliation exercise , one with which I am delighted , because the rapporteurs , along with the co-rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , made certain that we , as Parliament , were able to take a united stand at the Council , a Council where we heard one voice , where Mrs Aelvoet listened to us , and I am really very pleased about that .
Madam President , our political group is entirely in agreement with the tenor of this report .
We also think that it is right to table a number of those amendments again that have not been incorporated into this common position .
Furthermore , we think that these amendments are of such a kind that it should not now take very long at all to find a common solution together with the Council of Ministers and the Commission .
The most important amendment from the European Parliament is that which makes it clear that what we are concerned with here is an authority dealing purely with food safety and not with food in general .
For us , this clarification is important .
It is important to focus specifically upon the safety issues .
Amendment No 4 concerns the correspondence between the EU ' s food regulations and other international agreements and regulations .
Obviously , the EU must cooperate in this area with other parts of the world .
However , the trend within the World Trade Organisation , in particular , is in danger of leading to a situation in which we have a series of different conflicts between different systems of regulations .
In that case , we think it is incredibly important to assert the right to tougher rules for health and environmental reasons .
Amendment No 22 relates to the funding of the authority .
For us , it is an issue of principle that an authority should be financed from the Budget .
It must not be financed by means of fees deducted for its services .
That is why Amendment No 22 is important to us .
A number of amendments relate to openness , and those we naturally support .
According to Amendment No 41 , board meetings must , as a rule , be public and not held behind closed doors .
We think that is incredibly important .
We also approve of the proposal that members should be drawn from a broad geographical area .
The proposals we are now discussing have their background in the serious food safety crises within the EU in recent years .
Dioxin , BSE and salmonella are just a few of the areas concerned .
These scandals are closely linked to heavily industrialised agriculture and to an agricultural policy in which large-scale production and yield have become more important than the environment , animal protection and safe food .
If the EU is really to be able to attend to the causes of the problems in this area , reform of the common agricultural policy is needed , above all , so that sustainability and the protection of animals and the environment are put first .
Only then shall we really be able to tackle the basis of the food safety problems in the EU .
Madam President , the views of the 370 million citizens of the European Union on the food chain in Europe have dramatically changed in recent years .
This is partly due to the advent of BSE , foot-and-mouth disease in Europe and the chicken dioxin scandal that took place a couple of years ago .
Of course the consumer is always right , but on this occasion the European Union legislators have had to redouble their efforts to improve the safety of the food chain in Europe and to restore consumer confidence in food products within the Union .
It has not been an easy task .
However , the White Paper mentioned by Mr Bowis that the Commission brought forward outlines a raft of directives and regulations that need to be updated and modernised so as to make the food chain in Europe safer .
I would like to take this opportunity to commend Mr Byrne , the Commissioner for Consumer Protection and Public Health , for his absolute determination to guarantee that European Union consumers have total confidence in all food products that are sold within the Union .
That not only means improving safety standards of production within the Union but also tightening up rules and conditions for the importation of food products into the Union .
The key element of this White Paper is the setting up of the food authority , as we discussed today .
It is very important that this authority is up and running as soon as possible , no matter where it is located .
This European Food Authority can work with the 15 governments of the Union , in an advisory and preventative capacity , to guarantee that food products from farm to table comply with the highest public health standards .
We live in an internal market with free movement of goods , persons , services and capital .
Food is an internationally tradable product and it is therefore very important that a coordinated and common approach is taken to promoting food safety in Europe .
This is only right and proper in the light of the fact that consumers are criss-crossing the frontiers of the European Union on a daily basis .
I also support the approach taken by Commissioner Byrne in guaranteeing that all interested parties are given due representation with regard to the implementation of the new directives and regulations under the White Paper on food safety .
Groups representing the food industry , farm organisations and consumer interests are all actively involved in the implementation of these directives and regulations .
Indeed , as a result of the Amsterdam Treaty the European Parliament has the power of codecision with regard to the implementation of the new directives and regulations in the area of consumer protection and public health .
We intend to remain vigilant at all times so as to guarantee that confidence in the European food chain is fully restored , sooner rather than later .
I commend the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , and all involved in producing this excellent report .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when euro-federalists are citing the need for a political Europe , which in their view would enable European integration to become more democratic , in other words , would give fewer powers to the European Commission , what do we see happening ?
A new body is being set up - the European Food Safety Authority - and it must be said that this authority , because of the representatives appointed to form its Management Board , will necessarily be dependent on the European Commission , despite its legal title .
Let us cast our minds back to the unforgivable errors that the European Commission made during the mad cow epidemic . Its priority , at the time , was the creation of the single market , come what may , rather than the safety of food for European consumers .
In order to make the European Food Safety Authority more credible in the eyes of Member States ' citizens , it is not enough for its seat to be independent of the European Commission as well as physically distant .
The members of the future Management Board of the new body must be monitored by the same citizens , through their representation at the European Parliament .
It does not seem that the Authority is giving sufficient assurance that it will be independent .
It will be subjected to the power of lobbies and to the wishes of the European Commission and therefore , will be independent only of universal suffrage .
Furthermore , who can assure us that it will respect the principle of subsidiarity and individual food characteristics ?
Will it smother small- and medium-sized food businesses with even stricter regulation , that will be tolerated by fewer and fewer citizens ?
Why call it an ' Authority ' when it has no legislative power ?
And lastly , why give it so many resources - EUR 67 million and 339 officials - when it could be equally efficient and less costly if it worked together with the existing national agencies ?
Thank you .
For many years , we have been attempting to restore consumer confidence and I believe that the creation of the Food Safety Authority is a step towards achieving this goal .
We must acknowledge that there was some excellent consultation in the management of this dossier and we must not fall behind with this today .
Zero risk does not exist and the consequences of a bacteriological problem , whether or not this is linked to terrorism , can be extremely significant for all our citizens .
We are well aware that food contamination can affect a large number of people .
That is why safety must be at the heart of this system .
We must not be overcome by panic either , because the European food chain , as a result of the many decisions that we have taken in this Chamber , is certainly one of the safest in the world . However , the shortcomings that have come to light during previous crises compel us to take further measures in the area of food safety .
In order to be effective and credible , the Authority must bring together the leading scientific experts ; it must only undertake risk assessment , as part of the Rapid Alert System , whilst risk management must remain in the public domain .
It must also work together with the national agencies .
Its intervention must be proportionate to the level of risk , in other words , if there are simply rumours , communication must then be stepped up . If , however , there is a risk , the required precautionary measures must be taken ; if there is a danger , then preventative measures are necessary .
Lastly , the Authority must be independent and utterly transparent .
At the same time , monitoring must be increased and , in the case of a serious offence , penalties must be substantial as well as effective .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a rule our food is already safe .
Nevertheless , 2 000 people worldwide die every year of salmonella poisoning .
In the United States alone , 9 000 people die each year of microbe-related food poisoning .
These are worrying statistics , and we are not even talking about other food-related illnesses .
With the general principles of food law , we are laying new foundations for safe food and we will be building on those in the next few months and years .
We must work on a system which fills consumers with confidence .
Emotions sometimes run high where food is concerned , beef being a recent European example of this .
Politicians cannot and must not ignore these emotions , but we must consider the facts .
That is where the European Food Authority comes into its own : it must be a beacon of objectivity .
The European Food Authority must join forces with national authorities , but we must ensure that it is not rendered powerless from the word go and that it is headed by an approachable front man who does not need to fight to impose his authority but who embodies quality and authority .
I would like to finish off with a word of thanks to the rapporteur who has proved to personify the self-same quality and authority .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will , in effect , vote in favour of the Whitehead report .
The European Food Safety Authority , an essential food safety mechanism serving the consumers and the political authorities of Europe alike , is essential to the performance of the functions that it will be assigned .
Its first task is to investigate all the failings that led to the recent food safety crises , both the crises in the food business , such as chicken dioxins , food and mouth disease , trafficking in veterinary products , the excessive use of vaccines and tranquillisers on animals and also the original BSE crisis .
I would point out that even Finland now has its first case of mad cow disease .
That is the first point I would like to make .
My second point is that it is the agency that must also stop the uncontrolled spread of contaminating transgenic products that are even infesting traditional cereal crops , since consumers are rejecting transgenic crops , whose only virtues are commercial .
Therefore , this agency must also , other than resolving all those problems , ensure food safety from the farm to the fork .
In order to do so , the Food Safety Authority must apply , from the beginning of 2002 , the principles of transparency and monitoring that my fellow Members have already mentioned .
The failings in the area of hygiene as being the sole criterion , which has been highlighted in the many crises that we have listed , particularly in animal feed , shows that the agency must give advice on good practice , on labelling , on products that have been produced locally , that contain dairy products , instead of dealing with industrial standards alone , which do not prevent salmonella , listeria or any of the more distressing epidemics .
Its main function is therefore to coordinate the national agencies , and to do so , the agency must be independent and transparent .
On the other hand , I have doubts regarding Amendment No 34 , which deals with the appointment procedure to the Management Board , a process that seems hazy at best , since it refers to the meritocracy of the Management Board .
So what exactly does meritocracy mean in an agency that should be composed of experts in the relevant scientific fields ?
The Management Board has a political and managerial role .
I very much fear that this meritocracy is simply a way of masking the pressure exerted by large food corporations .
I hope that the Commissioner will be able to reassure me on this point .
As for where the agency will be based , we believe this is a side issue ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , given the tug-of-war about the location of the European Food Safety Authority , it appears to be a highly prestigious matter .
This does not contribute towards safer food or consumer confidence .
Another point of concern is our keenness to impose our strict standards on the rest of the world .
In this respect , I have to say that other parts of the world often do not have the luxury of aiming for the highest possible safety standards for food .
Their priority is to collect sufficient food to survive .
Needless to say , we should not simply export food which fails to meet our safety standards to those countries .
But in those cases where export increases food safety in the countries concerned , export of this kind must be allowed .
In those cases , the automatic destruction of batches should not be an option .
As far as the appointment of the management board is concerned , I do agree with the compromise that has been struck with the Council .
It is indeed unwise to enlarge this management board any further , because this could compromise its decisiveness .
Furthermore , I am opposed to organising hearings in the European Parliament prior to appointing the members of the management board .
This applies even more to the executive director .
It would be wise for the European Parliament to move further away from the executive tasks of the future European Food Safety Authority .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the coming week , the Laeken Summit will adopt a number of decisions , including - it is to be hoped - a position on the food authority , deciding where it is to be based .
We know how important it is that this decision is made .
Several years have already passed since the beginning of this procedure ; this proposal has been on the table since 1999 , at least , so it is high time that the decision is taken .
I feel that , in tabling a second time the amendment which was voted upon at first reading some months ago , Parliament is trying to make two statements , which you , Commissioner , must convey to the governments .
The first is that this is a matter covered by the codecision procedure and so Parliament ' s opinion on the criteria to be put to the vote tomorrow should also be taken into consideration when it comes to deciding the site of the authority .
We know that one of the approaches taken at Laeken will be horse trading - you can appoint the Chair of the Convention if I can choose the site of the Authority , and you can have the Police College - but I feel , rather , that all these decisions need to be taken on the basis of certain criteria which are strictly related to the interests of the institution we are attempting to create .
Therefore , when Parliament points out that the site chosen for the Authority should have a longstanding tradition in food safety and food safety research in general , this is clearly a criterion whose importance must be stressed .
When we talk about a good scientific infrastructure and facilities in the field of food safety , you , Commissioner , and the Commission must stress the importance of this criterion .
When we say that it has to be easily accessible in terms of communications and have efficient and rapid transport connections ; when we say that it has to have connections with those services that deal with public health and consumer protection issues ; of course it springs to my mind that the Joint Research Centre , which employs thousands of European researchers , is situated in Ispra , and therefore , my opinion can only be that these criteria apply to one candidate city alone : Parma , in Italy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work , which is just as we expected .
I think that this regulation and this legal basis will , with the measures that follow , help to improve food safety in the European Union , and will establish the general principles of the new food law .
With reference to general food law , I would like to mention , in particular , that this represents a real success in developing the principle of a seamless improvement in the food chain from farmer to consumer .
A key aspect of the principles set out here remains the traceability of products .
I believe that we have accordingly established two significant new principles and requirements for improving food safety .
The centrepiece of the regulation is the creation of the European Food Authority , or , as it is designated in the amendment , the ' European Food Safety Authority ' .
I do not want to spend too much time on definitions here .
What I consider most important is the fact that the framework conditions have been created for this Authority .
The first of these is adequate financial provision .
It seems to me that this has not so far been achieved to the extent we might have wished , and the same applies to conditions governing communication between the Authority and the various authorities in the Member States .
Appropriate arrangements have not yet been set up in the Member States , and there is still a lot to be done in this regard .
As for the openness of the authority , I believe that this House 's amendment is certainly correct , but we also have to guarantee that in certain circumstances the Authority can also meet behind closed doors .
An important issue , as many others have already said , is the location of the Authority , and if the Council rejects our proposals , it seems to me that it must intend to locate the Authority in such a way that our requirements and conditions cannot be met .
We cannot let such a situation prevail , nor can we accept it .
The Council must finally give in on this and select a location that will facilitate communication with the Commission , Parliament and the Member States .
Mr President , my thanks go to the rapporteur for the excellent work on this report .
As has already been established , the European Parliament has been very active for several years now in questions relating to food safety .
The rapporteur has also carried out very valuable work by holding discussions with the Commission and Council , in order to ensure that the start-up of the food authority is not delayed ; this means that at the Laeken Summit a genuine decision really has to be made concerning the siting of the office .
With regard to the selection criteria , in my opinion Parliament has spoken quite correctly : it is a good idea to emphasise the research connection , the fact that the office is independent , and that there will be effective experts there to guarantee quality .
In the case of transparency , I can only agree with the previous speakers ; however , transparency also means that there is cooperation with the consumer organisations .
Let me start by saying that I am all for food and animal feed safety , but I cannot understand why the European Union believes that it is necessary to establish the European Food Safety Authority .
I believe I am right in saying that almost all major diseases , except possibly BSE , come from countries outside the European Union .
Therefore the World Health Organisation , which is already in existence and is doing just such work , should be adequate for this purpose and can protect all of our interests .
This organisation serves 27 of the countries of Europe including the countries of the European Union .
It strikes me that the European Union is creating a further quango which , like most authorities the EU sets up , will be expensive to run and turn out to be a white elephant .
If such a need did exist , surely it should be the work of each national government to look at the appropriate problems .
These would be pertinent to the conditions of that country and they can act accordingly .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to start by saying that I have great admiration for the way in which the rapporteur , and also , most definitely , the shadow rapporteurs , have dealt with this very complicated matter which was ultimately resolved very quickly .
There are , of course , minor points which require further attention , and I would mention monitoring as one of them . Who authorises this monitoring ?
But also , who will be organising , inspecting and running this food safety authority ? This should not be sixteen , but twelve , for we need independence .
What do we actually mean by food safety ?
We mean that in the internal market , we will ensure that we can guarantee food safety everywhere .
That not only includes Europe ' s fifteen Member States , but also all the candidate countries .
I have a few concerns in this respect .
Not because food in the acceding countries would not be safe , that is not what I am saying , but I am worried about the lack of good networks in the new Member States that could carry out inspections and instil consumer confidence .
Last Thursday , there was a meeting involving experts from the acceding countries who alerted us to the lack of such a structure .
That is one side of the coin . Inspection , also from the government , to ensure that the process runs smoothly .
There is also a flip side , namely the lack of a civil society .
That means a lack of well-trained consumer organisations that are independent and that could encourage the government at any time to pursue the policy effectively .
The same also applies to product organisations .
I wonder if the Commissioner would be willing to give us some information on that score , enabling us to see what we can do about this in future .
Madam President , life is one constant risk-benefit analysis - what we do , where we go and what we eat .
While the European food chain remains one of the safest in the world , recent scandals have damaged our consumers ' confidence in the food we eat and the methods we use to produce it .
The public has lost confidence in the national and European food safety systems after the scandals and scares with beef , E.coli , lysteria , salmonella , dioxins , eggs , poultry , milk and hormones .
The list goes on .
The public wants to be reassured that the road from farm to market , to the supermarket , to the oven , fridge and table is as safe as can be reasonably expected .
They want safety assessment that is neither secretive , behind the closed front door of the Commission , nor tainted by producer or pressure-group interest .
Since the beginning of your tenure , Commissioner Byrne , you have responded to the needs of the consumers of Europe by making every effort to improve the safety of the food chain .
This proposal is one of key importance for consumer protection in the European Union .
The institutions of the Union have come together to set out the principles of food law with a new authority which can safeguard the food we eat and the way it is produced .

I commend the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , and the shadow rapporteur , Mr Bowis , for a job well done throughout the discussion in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The result of their consensual approach has been to strengthen and unify the voice of the European Parliament on the key issue at stake .
I would ask the Commission and the Council to listen to this united voice and to adopt ' European Food Safety Authority ' as the title of the institution .
Keeping the word ' safety ' in the title of the authority will give a clear signal to consumers as to its purpose and goals .
I also firmly believe that if the authority is to have the confidence and backing of the people of Europe , it is imperative that it operates and communicates in a wholly transparent and independent manner , dedicated to the assessment of food-safety risk .
Risk communication will also be a key element .
One has only to look at the BSE inquiry in the UK and the Philips report which stated that breakdown in risk communication was a major factor in exacerbating the crisis there .
In conclusion , in relation to risk management , the measured and proportionate use of the proportionary principle or the political management ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , the issue of food safety is one of the many unifying factors in the Europe of the citizens we want .
As far as the European Food Safety Authority is concerned , I feel that the European Parliament has played a very major role : a great deal was achieved between first and second readings and , in my opinion , tomorrow ' s vote will produce an extremely important report for , indeed , at this point , there is no longer any excuse for procrastination .
We will have an instrument which will help us to keep a constant check on food safety in Europe .
As regards this major work , achieved through the efforts of both the rapporteur and the committee responsible , there are still a number of small points which , I feel , will have to be specified : for example , it is extremely important that the management board should include a representative from the agricultural sector because the fact that we are dealing with a process means that all the sectors need to be represented .
There are still a number of gaps as regards the procedures .
We are definitely going to use operators from the food sector and people and companies specialised in all the parts of the food chain in order to ensure that the necessary information flow banishes all fears from the tables of our fellow citizens .
One last question is that of the site .
An amendment has been tabled seeking to ensure that the locations of the sites of the Commission and the other institutions do not affect the choice of site .
The site should be in a place which has a longstanding tradition in food safety and which has scientific infrastructure and substantial resources in the field of safety .
Of course , I must put in a word for Parma , for Parma is one of the most important places in the Italian agrifoods system .
It is my genuine hope that the Laeken Council will take this candidate into due consideration .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unlike Mr Titford , I am convinced that setting up an efficient and independent European Food Authority as an early warning system is something very much to be welcomed .
It should act as a transparently functioning scientific reference point for the Commission , Parliament and the Member States , but it should also be open for producers and consumers .
Advice , information and risk communications for consumers can help to increase our confidence in the food we eat .
Food safety is a fundamental requirement for consumers who want to eat healthily and we must take responsibility for that here .
The food scandals over the past few years have demonstrated that we need , in particular , consistent implementation of directives and on-the-spot controls on food and animal feed .
If we are to achieve seamless traceability of production , it is essential to optimise the way we link the scientific facilities of this Authority with the control authorities in the Member States .
This will ensure safety in the whole chain from producer to consumer .
And imported food must be just as safe as food produced in the EU .
This safety can be guaranteed by imposing strict controls on food imports at the EU 's present external borders .
In parallel to this , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe need to establish properly functioning systems for monitoring the safety of food and animal feed before accession .
However , one important problem will not be solved by the regulation before us today , and that is the dividing line between food and medical products .
We need to minimise the grey area between these two product categories , food and medical products , as far as possible .
If we do not succeed in this , the result will be new demarcation problems and legal uncertainty .
That is why it is a matter of urgent necessity for us to make sure that when legislation on medical products is reviewed , an unambiguous EU-wide definition of food and medical products is established , so that there is a clear dividing line , because we can only improve safety for the consumer if we establish a clear definition .
Madam President , I recall that when President Prodi first offered me this particular portfolio in July 1999 he emphasised to me the importance of food safety during the life of this Commission .
He particularly suggested the importance of establishing a food safety authority during that period also .
He said that it was important that the consumers of the European Union had the same confidence in such an institution as US consumers have in their Food and Drugs Administration .
I hope that the new authority can deliver on this for our consumers and for our citizens .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank President Prodi for his ongoing support during our work to make his idea a concrete reality .
The wide scope of the general food law covering all aspects of the food and feed production chain that may have a direct or indirect impact on the safety of food has been maintained throughout the first and second readings .
The Commission welcomes this .
We also underline the importance of the wide remit which has been retained for the work of the European Food Safety Authority .
It is important that the food authority builds a comprehensive overview of the entire chain .
This should include aspects of animal health and welfare , animal feed safety and plant health , in particular at the primary production level .
Given our recent food safety problems , it would have been unthinkable to have a food authority that did not cover such matters .
The Commission supports Amendment No 1 which proposes that the authority be called the European Food Safety Authority , while ensuring that the broad remit , which is so important , is not affected .
The Commission can support Amendments Nos 29 to 44 by Mr Whitehead , Mr Bowis , Mrs Paulsen and Mr Staes .
These replace Amendments Nos 2 to 6 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 25 and 27 , which I do not support .
I can also accept Amendments Nos 7 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 19 , 21 and 26 .
Many of these add clarity to the text or enhance the transparency of the development of food law or the procedures of the European Food Safety Authority .
I also welcome Amendments Nos 22 , 23 and 24 which adjust the text to ensure that the correct budgetary procedures are in place and that arrangements for third countries , notably EFTA countries , are appropriate and in line with normal procedures for agencies .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 8 which would allow unsafe food and feed to be exported from the Community to the original supplier in a third country without any constraints or controls .
This is clearly an unacceptable practice that I am not willing to support .
Rejected food or feed could end up being used either in a third country or being shipped back to the EU and that would constitute a risk to food safety .
From experience , the Commission knows that such practices are also potentially open to fraud and black market abuse .
I do not support Amendment No 28 which refers to the selection procedure for the seat , as well as defining the selection criteria .
However , I note that Parliament is also proposing another approach .
This involves adopting a resolution to the report which calls upon the Council to consider certain criteria in its selection of the authority 's seat .
This House is aware that I believe strongly that the authority 's seat should be chosen on rational and operational criteria that will facilitate the smooth working of the EFSA .
For these reasons I can support the principles expressed in the resolution .
I also support the joint declaration from the Commission , Council and Parliament concerning the members of the management board of the authority .
I believe that Amendment No 37 on the board 's size , the selection process and membership criteria achieves the right balance between the different views expressed at first reading by the three institutions .
In conclusion , I should like to say that since I took up office as Commissioner for Health and Consumer Protection , I have made it clear that the establishment of the European Food Safety Authority was a top priority .
Community measures which protect the safety of the food supply require a sound scientific basis and the authority will provide this .
The authority is designed to be Europe 's automatic first port of call on scientific matters relating to the safety of our food supply .
Today we are taking an important step towards the establishment of the authority , towards giving the European consumer the safest food supply in the world , which is our ultimate goal .

I would like to thank Mr Whitehead , his team and Parliamentary colleagues who have worked closely with him on the amendments at second reading , and also Mr Bowis , Mrs Paulsen and Mr Staes .
I want to thank you for the close working relationship that existed between all of us - not just between our two great institutions , but also on a personal level between myself and all four of you .
I discussed these issues with each of you at some stage over the last few months .
In addition , I would like to thank the Council , both the Swedish and Belgian presidencies , and also the Minister Magda Aelvoet , who put her own shoulder to the wheel on this issue on a number of occasions .
I also thank the people in my own Commission who worked with me so assiduously , so carefully and so hard .
Not only do I appreciate the excellent work that has been done , but I would like to thank all those involved for the speed with which this complex proposal has been dealt with .
The spirit of collaboration with which the three great institutions have approached this file has been admirable .
It is clear from the amendments on which Parliament will vote that compromises have been sought which should enable the regulation to be adopted without a time-wasting conciliation process .
This will facilitate the establishment of the European Food Safety Authority early next year .
Electronic communications networks and services
The next item is the joint debate on five recommendations for second reading :
( A5-0433 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services ( Authorisation Directive ) [ 10419 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0417 / 2001 - 2000 / 0188 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs Niebler )
( A5-0432 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community ( Radio Spectrum Decision ) [ 12170 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0490 / 2001 - 2000 / 0187 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs Niebler )
( A5-0435 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services ( Framework Directive ) [ 10420 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0415 / 2001 - 2000 / 0184 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Paasilinna )
( A5-0434 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on access to , and interconnection of , electronic communications networks and associated facilities ( Access Directive ) [ 10418 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0416 / 2001 - 2000 / 0186 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Brunetta )
( A5-0438 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the Common Position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Directive of the European Parliament and the Council on universal service and users ' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services ( Universal Service Directive ) [ 10421 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0418 / 2001 - 2000 / 0183 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Harbour ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Commission for its excellent and constructive involvement in the consultation on this telecommunications package .
I would also like to sincerely thank the Belgian Presidency , which has shown enormous commitment in its efforts to facilitate a compromise between the Council and Parliament , and I think that if we are able to reach agreement on Wednesday , and I very much hope we will , it will be entirely due to the excellent way in which the Belgian Presidency has handled the negotiations .
Thank you very much indeed .
However , I also , of course , owe very special thanks to all the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs who have not only co-operated in such an outstanding way over a period of many months , but have also worked together on the compromises so constructively .
Over the last 12 years , the EU has achieved an enormous amount in the telecommunications market .
The monopolies of the established service providers have been broken , and there has been complete liberalisation and deregulation of the market in many areas , which has benefited both consumers and the economy in general .
One clear result of all this has been a fall in prices and a variety of new products and services from the various providers .
But there is , of course , nothing that cannot be improved further .
This was evident from the 1999 telecommunications report and from the seventh implementation report recently published by the Commission .
I would just like to mention a couple of key concepts : local loop unbundling for the benefit of alternative service providers , where further action is still needed in the Member States , and the subscriber 's link to the network , which is still unsatisfactory in some Member States .
Some established service providers are still offering dumping prices and there are also still bottlenecks as regards leased lines .
The new legal framework for telecommunications regulation should guarantee some remedial action here .
I would first like to briefly present my two reports on the telecommunications package and I would then like to turn to two other critical points regarding the other directives .
First , then , the Authorisation Directive .
The whole point of the Authorisation Directive is to harmonise authorisation arrangements in the Member States .
I would like to stress once again , as I said at first reading , that the Commission has produced some excellent proposals here , proposals that I welcomed at first reading and which I specifically wish to support at second reading also .
Up to now there have not been uniform procedures for operating communications networks and providing communications services .
There have been a variety of different conditions , including , in particular , varying obligations on providers to supply information , there have been variations in the length of the procedures , and the cost and substance of the authorisations has varied .
This situation will come to an end with the new Authorisation Directive .
The directive also envisages a step change in the authorisation system .
Up to now , it has been the practice to issue individual authorisations , but when the Authorisation Directive comes in , there will be a switch to general authorisations , that is to say that , in future , communications network operators will not have to obtain an official licence beforehand , but will only have to demonstrate that they intend to operate a network . However , they will have to comply with the requirements of the general authorisation scheme or of the directives .
Obligations on providers , particularly those regarding information , will be simplified by the new directive , with requirements being limited to the essential . So we are talking about a very provider-friendly solution here .
One of this Parliament 's achievements has been the introduction of greater transparency in the granting of rights of way , for example drawing up a register setting out the procedures for granting rights of way in the Member States , and we have also managed to ensure that legal protection against rulings on rights of ways is guaranteed in all Member States .
We would have like to have achieved even more , especially as regards costs .
In this case , Parliament stressed the importance of providers , if at all possible , not being burdened with excessive costs in future , if I may put it that way , with regard to rights of way , numbers , the granting of licences and frequencies .
As far as this issue is concerned , our discussions have not yet been completed .
Should it be necessary to reach a compromise on the whole package , Parliament will surrender its own position in favour of the Council 's recommendation .
My second report is on the Radio Spectrum Decision .
The essential objective of this decision is to involve the Commission more closely in the granting of frequencies in future , which is how it should be .
Radio frequencies are sought-after commodities , and frequency allocation involves taking highly political decisions , and we must accordingly ensure that the decision makers who bear political responsibility are involved .
The granting of frequencies , frequency assignment and frequency allocation are no longer just a technical matter , nowadays , but a real political game .
There are two points on which the Council and Parliament are not yet totally in agreement , and I am therefore particularly pleased to see Mr Daems , the President-in-Office of the Council , here in the Chamber today .
Perhaps he could say something about the two points which I am particularly concerned about later on in the debate .
One point which Parliament has tackled repeatedly is whether it should itself be involved in future decisions on radio spectrum policy .
This House had requested that whenever frequency reallocation , in particular , was at stake , Parliament should , through the codecision procedure , be consulted and involved in the decision-making process .
To this end , we also adopted an amendment in committee at second reading that would guarantee us this right in a binding article contained in the directive , in the decision .
Now , the Council only wants to include this article or this proposal as a recital in the decision .
I would therefore like to ask Mr Daems to consider once more , if we are agreed on this , that Parliament should also be involved in radio spectrum policy via the codecision procedure , in which case we could be included in the decision itself and not just mentioned in a recital .
My second point relates to the extent to which the Commission should be concerned with the granting of frequencies .
Parliament requested that in the case of frequencies with Community coverage , the Commission should be called upon to intervene or put forward proposals .
In the decision , or rather in the Belgian Presidency proposal that I now have before me , I see that by deleting two little words in Amendment No 1 , that is to say ' in particular ' , the decision-making power is in fact to be considerably extended .
So I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council in this case , too , if he could consider whether we could not agree to delete those two little words , which would mean that we would be respecting the principle of subsidiarity and thus achieving a solution between the Council and Parliament .
I find it hard to believe that the Council could not accept this too .
I would now like to touch on two other points , concerning the framework directive and the Universal Service Directive .
First of all , I absolutely must thank the Belgian Presidency very sincerely once again .
The Belgian Presidency has worked out an excellent compromise for Article 6 .
This is about who will have power of decision in future when there are questions about telecommunications law - the Commission or the Member States .
I believe that this House can accept the compromise that has emerged .
Many Members would have liked us to go further in this area , but that was just not achievable .
However , the compromise that has now emerged , according to which the Commission can intervene in matters of competition law , and in particular in matters of market definition and with regard to what constitutes significant market power , is , I believe , a very fair one .
I would now like to turn to a point that I regard as particularly significant , and then I shall conclude .
We have been concerned for many years as to how we can promote digital television still further in Europe .
The amended proposals from the Belgian Presidency have been one of the greatest disappointments in all this , so that we will achieve nothing or very little in this area .
Two points have emerged .
The first is whether we can extend transmission obligations to APIs and IPGs .
This Parliament unanimously advocated this in all the negotiations . I would ask , once again , that great thought should be given to this or that the Commission should consider how we can achieve this .
Furthermore , on the subject of a commonly agreed standard for digital television in the European Union , I believe that we need to go further than the Belgian Presidency has indicated so far .
Perhaps the Commission could give a clear signal here , too , in order to help digital television to make a genuine breakthrough in Europe .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , my colleagues , Europe 's greatest change is , of course , the networking which has taken place ; this certainly unifies us Europeans more than a common currency .
It is of everyday and full-time significance , and its importance is growing all the time .
The core philosophy of the entire grand project for an electronic Europe is that the digital divide should not take hold in Europe in the way that it threatens to take hold in many other parts of the world ; and we , as well as Parliament , the Council and the Commission all share a common line here .
The Commission 's draft framework directive and the other statutes belonging to this telecoms package follow the correct line and are very balanced , and I am highly satisfied with them .
In this rapidly-moving period of change , we will make up for lost ground ; and particular attention has been paid to the importance of convergence , of rapprochement .
This means that , to an ever increasing extent , the same content can be prepared on the same hardware , be transferred along the same routes and be received on the same apparatus .
This creates a wholly new information space , or perhaps I should say information world , since this is a part of us , it is a part of us in the workplace , at home and when we are travelling .
Here , in Parliament , we desire that this world be regulated , but that at the same time competition be secured , so that no monopolies , duopolies or cartels are generated .
This will maintain a low pricing level , easy access , and employment and growth in this area .
I could venture to say that if we had had these regulations in force at the time when we decided on the ' electronic Europe ' at Lisbon and when ( at the same time ) the auction in frequencies was initiated , then it would not have been possible for the catastrophe of the frequency auctions to unfold in the way that it did .
It would have been possible to standardise the bid auctions and to harmonise practice , and consequently such irregularities would not have taken place , the sector would not have been driven to its knees and we would have saved many hundreds from bankruptcies and the unfortunate unemployment consequences linked to these .
A telecoms package which consolidates the Union 's telecommunication legislation will have great significance in competition with others outside the European Union .
It will result in us having more harmonised markets for this sector which in itself is already international and border-transcending .
We will then also obtain the benefit of the European Union 's advantages of scale , which in turn will surely have an impact on both employment and on the success possibilities of firms and on pricing .
Of these five statutes , I regard the framework directive to be the most important .
The most difficult matters have been dealt with here .
Now we have before us my draft report which has been processed by the committee , for which I thank my colleagues ( it was approved unanimously ) , and then also the presentation of the Presidency State .
It has gone far in order to meet Parliament half way , and in my opinion we should approve it .
It takes account of Parliament 's stance in two central matters which we have been taking up for discussion throughout this summer and autumn : Article 6 and Article 4 .
The latter concerns the appeals procedure and the former concerns the relationship between the Commission and the national regulatory authorities .
Now for the first time , and this can be regarded as a breakthrough , the Commission can intervene in a national statute , if this statute is not in harmony with the general statutes , both in the definition of the market and in the definition of a significant market position .
These are the two matters which we wanted to see implemented , and now , thanks to the Presidency State , they are in your proposal . Furthermore , I hope that the Presidency State can tell us whether it is also possible that the Council may commit to this as well .
If this is so , then this package should in my opinion be approved .
I have been given to understand that the Commission is also of this view .
Madam President , Commissioner Liikanen , the new regulatory framework for telecommunications replaces the Community system which opened up the national markets in Europe and brought the era of monopolies to a close .
By way of justifying the revision of the Community telecommunications framework , the European Commission stated its intention to reduce the regulatory burdens according to the liberalisation objectives achieved on the basis of the model still in force .
The aim was , in fact , to secure greater confidence in market forces in order to boost the competitiveness of the European market and encourage investment in the emerging markets , facilitating the provision of innovative services .
The purpose of the revision of the prevailing model should , therefore , have the aim of gradually moving the telecommunications market on from its liberalisation phase to a phase of genuine , consolidated competition .
The relationship between the development of the regulatory framework and the dynamics of the markets should be pursued using a forward-looking approach which favours competitive conditions , ensuring the rapid distribution of innovative services , in order to provide direction for the market and the future exclusive application of the procurement rules which are gradually replacing ex-ante rules .
The new model should introduce a transitional phase that fosters this transition to a telecommunications market that can be managed in the same way as any other economic sector in strict respect for competition rules .
This end can be achieved by a body of ex-ante rules harmonised at European level which are characterised by the fact that they are temporary and exceptional ; in other words , the regulation that we are discussing and approving ex ante must provide for it to be abolished when a sufficient level of competition has been achieved .
These ex ante rules must be kept to a minimum as regards requirements and strength , in order to ensure that intervention is proportionate to the regulatory objectives .
In view of the flexibility of the new model , which very prudently extends the scope of intervention of the international regulatory authorities , the main thrust of the new regulatory framework must be the need to guarantee the supervisory power that the Commission has laid down in respect of the national authorities , in order to ensure correct interpretation of the new framework and thereby avoid distortion of the competitiveness of the European market between geographical areas .
In fact , with the absence of a centralised authority at European level making it possible to assess the ultimate consistency of national decisions with Community objectives , the new regulatory framework is in danger of not achieving its objectives .
To this end , Mr Daems , Commissioner Liikanen , allow me to illustrate an amendment which I tabled together with 51 Members from different political groups precisely to Mr Paasilinna ' s directive .
Mr Paasilinna has worked very hard on his proposal on the framework directive on telecommunications .
This amendment seeks to make things clearer for operators , to avoid fragmentation in the application of Community law in the various Member States and to ensure the development of a genuine internal telecommunications market .
The adoption of my proposal would facilitate harmonisation , which can only be achieved by establishing unambiguously defined power allowing the European Commission to intervene to guarantee that the application of Community law is coherent with objectives and pursues the same goals in all the Member States .
Harmonisation and centralised power are the basis for the development of the pan-European telecommunications market .
This what the operators want , this is what the market wants , Mr Daems , Commissioner Liikanen .
The market wants the development of a pan-European telecommunications market , whereas the short-sightedness of the national authorities often tends to slow down that process of development in this phase ; that is why I tabled this amendment which , I hope , will be taken into due consideration by the Belgian Presidency , the Council , the Commission and this House .
Mr President , in the concluding part of this package of directives , the universal service and users ' rights directive , for which I have been privileged to be rapporteur , are very much at the cutting edge of the whole package .
These are things that will really mean something to all consumers and users of electronic communication services .
The common position that we received from the Council was a major advance over the first reading text and I would like to thank the Council and Commission for accepting so many of Parliament 's ideas and suggestions .
The new text has been substantially restructured and clarified which is important for effective transposal in Member States .
As part of that restructuring , the aspects of market intervention contained in this directive - and this is very strong market intervention at a retail price level - are clearly set out .
It is worth reminding all of us in this House that these are very much seen as transitional measures towards a fully open market in which competition rules will reign supreme .
That is the direction we want to move in .
I would like to pick up on some further enhancements that we have made as a result of the second reading .
I would like to thank the Council for working so closely with us and also to thank my colleagues on the Legal Affairs Committee who worked very closely with me in making suggestions .
I hope that they will be pleased with the results that we have achieved .
It is worth reminding ourselves that the whole essence of this universal service directive is to ensure that a core service is available to both able-bodied and disabled consumers across the single market , and also that the users ' rights provisions must ensure that consumers have a right to clear contract terms , to comprehensive transparent pricing information and also a guarantee of other important services .
The changes that we have particularly focused on at second reading concern some further important enhancements to the provision for disabled users .
I am pleased to say that at the common position stage , we have a clear indication in a separate article about the importance of Member States providing for disabled users on a wide range of services , in particular ensuring that disabled users have the sort of choice and range of services that all other consumers expect .
Those are broad-ranging provisions that will develop as services expand .
The new area - that I am pleased we have introduced , and I would like to thank the Council for accepting this - is to encourage the development of clear quality standards related to disabled user provision .
That is something that we have added in at this stage because it seemed to us that it was all very well having some common provisions but unless we have a way of monitoring those and making sure that those evolve with the rest of the range of services involved , then things might just stand still .
We will not see disabled users being able to take advantage of new technology and new services in the way we would like them to .
This is a very important provision which I am sure will have the support of all colleagues .
The second area that we focused on in second reading was to ensure that small- and medium-sized enterprises also benefit from the sort of users ' rights that are required for individual consumers .
In a rapidly developing world , we already know that small- and medium-sized enterprises are a key target for enhanced electronic communications .
We want SMEs to really buy into e-commerce , into the new possibilities afforded to them by enhanced electronic communications .
They do not necessarily have the negotiating power of larger companies and therefore provision is made for them .
In conclusion , I wish to talk about a third aspect which has involved us in a lot of tough negotiation with the Council , namely over " must carry " obligations which are included within this Directive .
These allow Member States to impose obligations to carry public service channels and channels of specific interest on electronic communication systems .
Many colleagues felt that there should be a specific extension of this to satellite and conditional access systems .
The Council and Commission have told us that this is already covered fully in the access and interconnection directive , but colleagues have not agreed with that .
When it comes to the compromise package that we will vote on I am prepared to recommend to colleagues that we do not support this area but on condition that the Commission assures us that it will continue to keep this under very close scrutiny when it comes to looking at the Television without Frontiers directive and also to encourage the fair access provisions .
If we do that , I am sure that we can move forward to approve the whole package in what will be a major advance for the European economy and for Europe 's competitiveness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , in turn , to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs for the work they have carried out in tandem with the presidency , in the search for a common platform on the basis of which we can reach agreement . This will allow us to take a reasonably prompt decision at long last , thus promoting the development of the entire telecom sector , and hence the development of the internal market .
I should also like to include the Commission in my thanks , which , together with the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , helped us in every way possible to reach a common position .
Allow me to outline the process we went through .
By process , I mean the procedure we followed to reach a package which is hopefully acceptable to Parliament .
You have to bear in mind that it is not easy to reconcile very different opinions , especially where Member States are concerned , in order to be able to produce a package at the end of it .
It is therefore in this context that the response , prepared by the presidency , to the recommendations for second reading concerning the directives which are now before us , can , in fact , be seen as a very balanced response , which in the view of the presidency might be acceptable .
Needless to say , a number of additional explanatory statements will have to be drafted , for it is impossible to include everything in the body of a directive , for example with regard to comments by the first rapporteur , Mrs Niebler .
In my view , it is indeed self-evident that a new policy requires information and involvement by , for example , Parliament , certainly when it comes to the use of the existing spectrum .
Despite this , I believe that this general principle will necessitate a clarification from the party applying it , namely the Commission , and I therefore also believe that explanatory statements by the Commission , not simply on this score but also on a number of other aspects , could prove useful , as a number of rapporteurs have already stated .
I believe my present role to be as follows : if you , as Parliament , could ensure that this common response by the Council ' s presidency will be accepted by you , then this is what will actually happen in practice .
In other words , it is , in my opinion , very important to me that I can officially say to you that , if the Commission can indeed fully support our response and if Parliament can fully accept this common position of the Council , the Council will accept this accordingly .
In other words , it is a package , as was stated a moment ago .
A package entails the risk that if you tug at one string of the package , the whole thing may fall apart .
I am not saying this because I like saying this , but because political realism , with which we are all familiar , teaches us that , if we want to proceed swiftly , we need to adopt a common position which offers a huge amount of benefits .
Let us be honest , the Council ' s flexibility towards Parliament has been exemplary , and contained a crucial message which was news to me , namely that the concept of the internal market is clearly being prioritised , even by the Council .
If you ask me , this is a very special new message .
It is in this context that the response of the Council ' s presidency is being presented to you here , and I would not like to see my colleagues who have asked me to tell you this , revisiting their previous common position by running a risk and tugging at a string - and I am saying this in all candour - for I then believe that we would be at a complete loss as to know where we would end up in some future procedure or other .
In my view , we have now reached a point where we can make enormous headway , where the Council ' s flexibility is , I dare say , rather exemplary , where we stimulate industry , where we contribute towards establishing the internal market and , via the internal market , create advantages for the consumer in all its diversity and with all its aspects , inter alia , via universal service , which we all set so much store by .
In other words , the Council gives you the formal pledge that , if the Commission supports this fully , and if you deem this package to be acceptable , the Council will actually implement this package without any exception .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank the President-in-Office for his straight-forward language , for he is simply saying ' take it or leave it ' .
But first and foremost , I admire his enormous perseverance , particularly in the light of the fact that we have arrived at this result .
I have to say that one important sentence in the speech of the President-in-Office stood out for me , namely the emphasis he placed on the internal market .
Unfortunately , we have had to work for too long with a Council that no longer appeared to embrace the concept of internal market .
Thanks to you , and I should say , thanks to many of my fellow MEPs here in the European Parliament , this has now been rectified , fortunately .
Needless to say , what is at issue is that we will face more competition , more players , Mobile Virtual Network Operators , etc . , and there is nothing wrong with that , of course .
It is about striking a fine balance between rules on the one hand , and scope for further market development on the other .
We are in this transitional phase , and we must aim for normality as quickly as possible , away from ex ante , towards ex post , to put it in simple terms .
This means , therefore , that we must weigh up the whole set of rules and market interventions against the question as to whether this is really future-proof .
In my opinion , this will need to be one of the assessment criteria for the Commission , to constantly monitor whether we could proceed any faster towards what I refer to as a more normal market , ex post , in other words .
This also naturally leads on to the question : what will the consumer gain from this ?
Will we receive more service and lower prices , in particular ?
I am therefore pleased with the Council ' s compromise proposal with regard to international roaming , and I would ask the Commissioner now : what steps will the Commission take in order to ensure that next year , during the summer holidays , we will not be inundated with complaints by our voters that it is still very expensive , that the cost of ringing from a landline to a mobile line is still too high .
These are the questions which are important to our citizens , and we must simply get results on this score .
Article 6 has been mentioned many times .
One can appreciate it at different levels .
I am pleased that the Council eventually took the bull by the horns and has stated that an internal market requires an independent role by the Commission .
We will continue to fight in the next round , because what you are now offering is too little in my opinion , and more is needed for an internal market , but also on that score , we must of course establish a certain kind of realism .
As I understand it , you have on that basis , in fact , interpreted the revision clause along the lines of ' move towards this single internal market ' .
Although you have not adopted Amendment No 36 , you have done so at a practical level , and I am extremely grateful to you for this .
Finally , in my view , it is very important for us to hear from the Commission what steps it intends to take with regard to digital television , so as to be able to lay down this one European standard as soon as possible .
This is about Europe ' s future , about achieving the objective of Lisbon , and I believe that the Commission now also has a key role to play in this .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to touch on a few points in the short time I have available .
Mr Daems , you quite rightly pointed out that you have achieved a great deal in the Council and you also referred to the flexibility on the part of the Council that this involved .
You said that we have reached a good compromise .
I agree , and I think that many of my colleagues in my group will see it the same way .
It is an acceptable compromise .
There are a good many points on which further negotiation is needed .
Mr van Velzen hit the right note .
We will have to carry on negotiating and fighting to achieve a common internal market , because this is just one step and further work will be needed .
I believe that we in this House have one particular problem with this , and I have already heard a lot of people saying that it is difficult to have an informal trialogue as part of the second reading .
That requires a great deal of work and needs a huge investment of time given all the linguistic difficulties involved .
The whole package that we have before us is very complicated and needs a great deal of detailed work .
I think that we here in Parliament - and I am addressing this comment more to Parliament than to the Commission and the Council , although it indirectly affects them too of course - will have to make a greater investment in ensuring that we have whatever support is required to tackle such a complex task from a political point of view .
This will still not guarantee completion of the internal market .
It is right that in future the Commission will have more power and scope for action .
We have not used the word ' veto ' .
That is probably very clever in political terms , but nevertheless it is something along those lines .
Nevertheless , by means of cooperation and consultation , the national regulatory authorities have the power to ensure that they can take appropriate action to influence their national markets .
There is an interesting definition of transnational markets .
Nevertheless , there are two further problems to which previous speakers have referred regarding the interoperability of standards .
I believe that the proposal does not go far enough in this respect .
I cannot understand our countries , why they are not in favour of interoperability in the area of standards .
I hope that something more will emerge in this field .
There is also still a great deal more to be achieved , via consultation with Parliament , as regards Parliament 's participation concerning technical measures , and that includes , in particular , Mrs Niebler 's report , for which I am shadow rapporteur .
I would simply venture to point out that Mr von Wogau will , I hope , be bringing forward an interesting report next year dealing more fully with the issue of Parliament 's participation in such consultation processes .
Once more , we have until Wednesday to consider things further , and the Council and the Commission have a further opportunity to comment on these points .
I would be delighted if they would do that today .
Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner and Minister Daems .
Needless to say , I would naturally like to echo the words of praise expressed by my fellow MEPs for Mr Daems for all his efforts , to which Mrs Marcel has also greatly contributed , of course .
I will return to this in a moment , for I would also like to thank all my fellow MEPs , and especially the rapporteurs , for the pleasant and close working relationship so far .
For we must realise that what is before us was only possible thanks to the unanimity with which we in this Parliament have worked on this package .
It was , of course , abundantly clear to the Council that we were not going to yield an inch on essential points , especially on the score that we want one internal market where companies and consumers can benefit from the achievements of that one Europe .
And we can only achieve this in this way .
That is why it is crucial for us to agree on sound procedures that are ultimately monitored by the Commission .
What I miss in the Council ' s package before us , is a clear stand on one European standard for digital interactive television , something which my group deeply regrets .
What is clear is that Europe does not seem to be learning from past experience .
Indeed , the overwhelming success of the mobile phone standard , from which consumers and companies have benefited and will do so in future , apparently failed to convince the Council enough to dare adopt a clear stand for once , namely in the field of digital television .
I would therefore ask Commissioner Liikaanen whether he , following in the footsteps of his predecessor , Mr Bangemann , would be prepared to do this and would like to promote the MHP platform . I would ask him at the same time to present a clear timeframe for this .
You will have understood by now that the package that is before us , this compromise , is acceptable to my group , and I only hope that Mr Daems is prepared to confirm this .
For then it will be implemented to the letter of the law in all Member States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wishes to add its voice to the chorus of approval for everyone who has worked so long and hard to enable us to inch forward module by module .
All of the previous speakers , and above all you , Mr President-in-Office , were right in saying that we need to see all this in the light of the e-Europe initiative and of the internal market .
I would like to express my appreciation of your efforts not only personally , but also on behalf of my group , and I know that sometimes things get sorted out in the corridor , over a coffee or in other informal ways , over a sumptuous meal , for example .
I am sorry to tell you that I have a bit of stomach ache .
Not because I have spent so much time recently with lobbyists from one side or another over sumptuous dinners , but because depending on how you look at it , what is on offer is either too much or too little .
Too much in the sense mentioned by Mr van Velzen : ' eat up , that is all you are getting ' , or too little in as much as when we reach compromises we have to accept proposals from the European Parliament being slightly amended , with small , nebulous changes involving little words like ' shall ' and ' may ' , which are then taken out , so that I suddenly feel that the amendments are not so minor any more .
I would like to briefly pick out one point , as I had an excellent exchange of information throughout the whole period of cooperation with Mr Harbour .
I would like to highlight just one point in the context of the Universal Service Directive , and that concerns consumers with disabilities .
We are not giving anything away here .
We live in a society which for reasons of solidarity and on economic grounds takes whatever steps need to be taken .
What is at stake here is that after many years we are giving some very important signals in this area , in order to give people with disabilities full access to the information and communication society as fully integrated consumers . This political willingness , this political awareness and this political will would simply not have existed to the same extent 20 years ago .
I just wanted to mention that point to demonstrate to you all that time is a great healer .
However , that will certainly not cure my stomach ache .
I think that because of this stomach ache I would very gladly vote for this compromise , because , just like all of you , I am in favour of this internal market , and I would have been happier if it had already been established now , not at some point in the near future .
However , I too will close by mentioning the crucial points that other Members have already touched upon , and which I do not really think are solved in the compromise : interoperability , digital television , transmission obligations , and Article 6 of the framework directive .
Whether this fare is too much or too little , I think it takes us forward an inch or two .
I would be very interested to hear what else you may have to say to us , and then , even if it upsets my stomach , we would be happy to say ' yes ' .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs on behalf of my group and on behalf of Parliament for the tremendous work that they have done on their joint reports .
When we look at what the Council agreed upon in Lisbon and the new European initiative in particular and consider utilising the advantages which would accrue to Europe from the telecommunications revolution , we can see that there are many great opportunities out there to be grasped , but they require proper order , proper rules and proper regulation to ensure their use for the benefit of all .
At this point I would particularly like to congratulate Commissioner Liikanen for the innovative measures that he has brought forward and the way that he is striving to bring Europe into the 21st century .
I suppose it is appropriate that a man of his origins should be doing that .
However , there are a number of dangers and risks and in particular , I want to deal with two aspects .
First there is the universal service aspect - the universal obligation that my colleague Malcolm Harbour was talking about .
I will take a slightly different perspective .
There is a risk relating to competition , with new regulations and new rules being brought in , that there will be cherry-picking of the most valuable markets , the most valuable layers , and suddenly larger urban areas will benefit whilst rural areas and peripheral areas will lose out .
On top of that , as already mentioned by Malcolm Harbour , there is the question of disabled access .
Companies and institutions must be forced to adapt their services to suit the needs of the consumers and particularly those consumers to whom the Internet and the telecommunications revolution could open the most possibilities of all by bringing them into the real world and bringing them into dialogue .
A third area that I wish to focus on is the risk of creating new illiterates or new gaps between those people who have computer and electronic skills and those who do not .
We have a population in Europe today that is ageing : we have a huge middle-aged and ageing population that may not have the training and the skills necessary to usefully adapt to computers , electronic commerce and so on .
What is happening in our schools and providing access in education is very important , but we must look to new ways of bringing in the middle-aged and the aged into the process .
Finally , the eSchola initiative is a great one .
I hope it can be extended to bring in older people and more peripheral areas .
My last point is that , when we speak about consumers , let us ensure that we speak about all of the consumers of Europe not just those in the largest urban areas .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , rapporteurs , I wholly support the objective underlying the raft of proposals we are about to vote on , that of supplementing the internal market with liberalisation and the introduction of a system of genuine competition in a sector such as the telecommunications sector which is vitally important for Europe , its economy and the well-being of its citizens .
However , I feel that no one , including the Commission , should be under any illusion that this raft of proposals , although a substantial step in the right direction , might represent a positive , definitive solution .
I do not feel this will be the case ; indeed , the fate of the regulation on unbundling the local loop , despite its almost unanimous adoption , and the difficulties encountered in its implementation bear witness to this .
An underlying contradiction still remains in many Member States , specifically in those where publicly controlled telecommunications companies are still very influential and where , as a result , the State finds itself acting as both player and referee at the same time .
There is a great conflict of interests within most public administrations which , in my opinion , is one of the greatest barriers to the process of liberalising the telecommunications sector .
In order to alleviate the negative effects of the present imbalances in the different national markets , it might be appropriate to confer upon the Commission greater power to monitor and guide the national regulatory authorities , and to create mechanisms for cooperation and coordination between the national authorities .
That is why the Italian Radicals will support Mr Brunetta ' s amendment .
Although not the final solution , it could be an appropriate path to take .
If we want an open , competitive , effective telecommunications market , we need to fulfil an essential requirement , and that is to reduce the States ' power as managers in the telecommunications sector .
The State and the administrations must play a single role : the role they need to play of regulators .
Playing two roles , being both players and referees at the same time , slows everything down and places the success of the liberalisation process in jeopardy .
Mr President , the importance of the package as a whole is clear , both for a major European industry and for its customers and users .
But are we moving fast enough to keep up with a changing market ?
I would like to congratulate colleagues , especially the PPE-ED team , for getting to this point where much of Parliament 's position has been taken on board in the Council text .
I particularly welcome progress on Article 4 of the framework directive so that the principle of appeals against NRA decisions on the substance of an issue , not just on whether procedure has been followed correctly , has been accepted .
This gives some comfort to operators and provides a more balanced situation .
I also welcome moves improving Article 6 of that directive so as to achieve a more even regulatory framework across Member States through the requirement for cooperation and coordination between NRAs and the Commission .
Personally , I prefer the voluntary approach to adopting common standards in digital television technology rather than seeking to impose one solution .
I say , let the market provide the answer .
The package , as now formulated , seems a big improvement on the original proposal but we are still looking for consumers ' concern about levels of competition and service to be addressed through faster transition to a true internal market governed by general competition rules .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , for the cooperative and pragmatic way in which he has worked on the universal services directive .
In particular , his efforts to achieve a consensus have led to the Socialist Group 's amendments - both to strengthen the ' must carry ' provisions and to give stronger rights of access to disabled users - being carried in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
The fast pace of technological change in the telecoms sector means that legislation must keep up with the pace of developments .
But it must reflect growing expectations of users and consumers for a minimum set of services at an affordable price , guaranteeing access for all .
The telecoms revolution has created a rise in consumer expectations .
It is our job to respond and ensure that our legislative framework in the EU can deliver competition and consumer benefits .
Consumers , for example , have not benefited from the existence of multiple competitors in the mobile phone market .
Tariffs have not fallen in line with lower costs of running networks , now prompting in the UK an Oftel inquiry and a European Commission investigation .
This directive must ensure genuine universal access and extend to all users , especially those with special social needs , those on low incomes and those with disabilities .
The disabled will be excluded from the opportunities if there are not sufficient guarantees of access across Europe to public payphones , directory services and electronic programme options .
In my country alone , two million blind and partially-sighted people could benefit from this directive if the Council and the Commission accept our amendments .
Finally , on ' must carry ' provisions , we need to find a means to allow services and channels in the public interest to be carried on cable and satellite platforms .
If we do not , then I fear the future of satellite television might be dominated by the TV culture of quiz shows featuring stripping housewives , squeezing out educational and public interest programmes .
Let us be clear : Amendment No 26 does not promote a free ride for public broadcasters on conditional access services nor indeed on imposing or mandating this .
The fact is that market conditions do not always provide ' must carry ' .
It is appropriate to allow Member States to intervene if and when it is appropriate to do so .
I trust the Commission and the Council will see the merits of supporting this .
We favour a quick deal but it is conditional on the Council and the Commission accepting our amendments , which are a genuine and committed attempt to ensure that the brave new world of electronic communications is genuinely universal .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Daems , if we reach an agreement this week , it will be one of the few decisions in which the European Council ' s timetables are put into effect .
That is a good reason why we should try to achieve something in this area , in contrast to what has sometimes happened with regard to other decisions about liberalisation .
I especially want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , with whom I have worked closely .
I want to agree with those speakers who have said that we are now introducing important rules for disabled users .
In certain contexts , I have felt ashamed at the fact that our rules have not been as advanced as the rules in other large markets .
I also want to emphasise what Mr Harbour said about the ' must carry ' principle .
The intensity with which we have debated TV issues in recent weeks shows that it is not entirely acceptable to distinguish between content and the principles we had when we first debated convergences .
We are talking here about important cultural values in respect of which the Commission and the Member States must be able to depart even from strictly commercial rules .
We should support the compromise in the Paasilinna report .
In that context , I also hope that the Commission will apply a fairer competition policy between large and small countries than that we have seen , so that small and different markets too can continue to exist .
That is something to which perhaps not enough attention has been given .
Turning now to the issue of digital TV , I really regret the Council ' s position on API for digital receivers .
In many contexts , the European Parliament has clearly given its backing to an open common and approved standard .
In this area , there is no market , as on many other issues .
The market cannot therefore be researched .
I hope that , before we vote on Wednesday , the Commission will be able to say when it is intended to take measures to bring about interoperability and genuine freedom of choice for consumers , and what it is intended that these measures should be .
I therefore hope that the Commission will be able to come up with a declaration before we vote on Wednesday .
That is important for this sector ' s competitiveness in relation to other sectors within the telecommunications sector .
Mr President , I would particularly like to join in thanking the Commission , the Council and all those Members involved .
Thanks to their commitment , they have achieved considerable progress in the EU 's telecommunications market .
However , in contrast to what the word suggests , the term telecommunications market represents something that has not been dealt with properly , particularly in the Council common position we have before us .
What I have in mind is digital television .
I very much welcome the fact that not only the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , whose views I am conveying here , but also the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have unanimously indicated that it is simply not enough for us just to talk about attempting to avoid the danger of a digital divide in the European Union .
I am not talking about access for people with disabilities , an area in which I think significant progress has been made .
I am talking about the principle of digital access for all , and also about the interoperability of equipment , application interfaces and services .
I very much I regret this , whilst praising the Belgian Presidency for everything else it has achieved , but this is the drawback of this outcome : the course is now being set for equal access via a common standard for digital television , and we naturally need to strike a balance between developing the market and public interest obligations , and these two points of view have been taken into account by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market in their opinions .
That is why I am urgently appealing to the Council , in view of this need to take cultural considerations into account , to ensure equal access for all .
I call on you to improve this part of the text , and we will then all be able to give it our unqualified support .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as everything has been said , but not by me - as they say - I will make two or three points simply to underline what has been discussed by the previous speakers .
I belong to the minority who , at first reading , were not satisfied with Article 6 of the framework directive .
The compromise that has now been presented meets with my approval .
I think a balance has been achieved between the national regulators ' shadowing of the market and the Commission 's right of veto , in order to stimulate the progress of the internal market , of which we are all in favour , even my group .
This represents , in our view , very much another fragmentation of the market .
I want to say something general about the modus operandi itself .
Yes , we are dealing with a very fast-moving market and rapidly evolving technology , and we have tried to take that into account by acting relatively speedily .
I want , though , just to say another word of admonition .
Parliament - by which I mean , we - should not always deny ourselves our rights in the legislative process .
We realise that from time to time , when the worst comes to the worst , but I think it must remain an exception .
I would like to highlight another point .
Mrs Hieronymi made it very clear - and , as a member of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I can only underline what she said - that a unitary standard for digital television , and its interoperability , are issues not only for industry policy , but also for consumers .
I have promised consumers and the general public in my constituency that we would ensure that there was a standard that would enable them to receive on one TV set everything that they wanted to see and that they would not have to install several sets .
I believe we have to go a bit further down that road .
I would like to emphasise the very demand that Mrs Hieronymi made when she spoke just now .
Perhaps the Commission and the Council can leap a bit further over the shadow thrown by digital television and reach a compromise .
Then I , too , would find it easier to vote in favour of the package as a whole .
I will end my speech there and point out that I have stuck to the speaking time allotted to me .
Mr President , it seems to me that the outcome is a vindication of the Community method .
Much of the process was kick-started and propelled by the declarations at the Lisbon Summit , but nothing would have happened if those declaratory statements had not been turned into excellent and workable proposals by the Commission .
They were then propelled forward by some superb cross-party work by rapporteurs in this Parliament and fixed as a result of innovative negotiating skills on the part of the Belgian presidency and from Mr Daems - who contrived to include a gastronomic tour of Brussels in his valiant efforts to secure consensus .
This combination was successful in dragging Member States and national regulatory authorities - some of them kicking and screaming - towards a workable pan-European approach .
That seems to me to offer some lessons for the Barcelona Summit next year : if we want to push forward the economic reform agenda in this sector and in others , we need to continue to rely on the tried and tested Community method and not resort to the intergovernmentalism that frankly was implicit in much of what the Council seemed to suggest in the negotiation positions it took on this package .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this package is actually one of the things that are absolutely crucial to the Council Presidency , and I would like to congratulate them on the commitment they have demonstrated .
We need sensible compromises , and we need them in quick order .
This is a very fast-moving market , and so we need fast decision-making processes that produce binding rulings and , above all , more legal security as well .
It is on that basis that there will be long-term investment , which is what we need in the current economic climate .
Let me just remind you that there are , at present , eighty cases pending in Austria alone , of which only two were decided by the Supreme Court .
This can hardly be the way into the future .
As I see it , the authorisation directive is about harmonisation being a very positive thing , but also at the same time about the need to guarantee rights of access .
It must be possible for the authorities to be helpful in implementing these rights if one is paying for it .
In the access directive , the open interface is of particular importance .
The independence of the alternative operators , and especially of the interface , is something that we should not underestimate in the future .
The possibility of future dynamic development in this area is of the utmost importance to small and medium-sized enterprises .
As regards universal service , we need clear definitions of universal service provisions , especially with respect to what has to be financed by the operator and what by the State ; and finance by the State raises the question of whether there is to be a public invitation to tender .
I believe that these liberalisation measures are of quite particular importance to the public - in both the internal and domestic markets .
I cannot actually explain to my constituents the difference between a telephone call from Kehl to Strasbourg and one from Strasbourg to Paris .
Here , I believe , there is a lot more work for us to do .
Mr President , I very much hope that even at this very late stage , right up to the wire , we can achieve a compromise on this package between the three institutions .
Others have mentioned the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit but there are other needs for a conclusion : the needs of industry for early clarity about the new rules , the need of European citizens for cheap , efficient competitive telecommunication services , the needs of European Union businesses for education , for research , for societal applications .
I particularly want to ask about the rights of disabled users and to put a specific question to the Commission on the compromise presidency text .
It is important , not just for social reasons , but for access to employment for disabled users .
I would like to ask Commissioner Liikanen whether in his view the presidency compromise encompasses those points of principle contained in both the framework directive and the universal service directive .
There have been serious criticisms by disabled users about non-implementation of the RTTE directive and this is a crucial point for many of us .
Parliament has rightly supported carefully delineated powers for the Commission and understands also that some qualification is essential .
There is a need for clear rules consistently applied within national regulatory authorities and between regulatory authorities .
The powers for the Commission need to be circumscribed and time-limited , as indeed they were in Parliament 's amendments and in the presidency compromise .
I very much hope that when we vote on Wednesday we will have reached an agreement between the political groups and between the three institutions .
These reports will play a critical role , not just in shaping the future of telecoms but also in ensuring a greater choice in competition in the European market .
Even more importantly , I hope they will go some way , in our drive for the knowledge-based society , towards lessening the divide there is between those who have access to information technology and those who do not .
I am speaking on the access and interconnection directive which is extended to provide a pro-competitive and harmonised framework to stimulate competing network infrastructures and interoperability of services .
I hope it will ensure that bottlenecks in the market do not constrain the emergence and growth of innovative services , especially for people with disabilities and services that will benefit users and consumers .
To achieve these ambitious objectives , we first need to influence the way in which Member States regulate access and interconnection and secondly we need operators with SMP to grant other network operators interconnection facilities in a transparent way .
An area where we have had problems and where the harmonised approach between Members has been difficult to obtain under the current framework is international roaming and call termination in mobile networks .
I know that this directive may not be the place for such detailed information , however , in the absence of any movement from the operators , I believe it is important for us to highlight this issue .
The fact is the cost of terminating calls in mobile networks is ten times as much as terminating in fixed networks .
I can appreciate some of the problems in the international roaming , but the differences are too wide to be credible in terms of actual costs incurred and there is a huge spread of prices across Europe for the same service .
The most expensive country is almost twice as expensive as the cheapest .
I want to try to ensure , when we are looking at a level playing field and a single market , that the retail prices are cost-based and transparent and are of benefit to the consumer especially the SMEs who are trying to gain access across Europe and take advantage of the single market .
I hope the Commission will have greater success than they had in implementing the local-loop directive across the fifteen Member States , because this directive needs to be implemented forthwith because lower prices , wider choice and better services are an absolute priority for the EU if we are to achieve a more socially-inclusive Europe and a one-speed Europe .
Mr President , since the European Council in Lisbon , we have travelled a long way in a relatively short space of time .
The three institutions , Council , Parliament and Commission , were aware that the time factor was vital in the case of one of the fastest-developing technologies .
The directive on e-commerce has already been approved , we approved the directive on the unbundling of the local loop - which , by the way , the Member States have not yet fully complied with - but now the telecommunication business , which seemed secure , is encountering more and more problems , which is clearly not beneficial to users .
A new framework is therefore necessary .
And that is what this package of directives we are dealing with provides .
It is not a question of more regulation .
It is a question of regulating what is necessary , with a balance between consumers and operators .
But , above all , it is a question of regulating in the same way , in an equal way , in order to prevent what was happening - a fragmentation of the internal market .
That is why the European Parliament tried to resolve this problem , and the Council , in its common position , made a counter-offer , which I believe was insufficient , but now the Presidency has achieved a package which is more sufficient .
What we are being offered is clearly not ideal , it is not what we would all like to achieve , but as the saying goes , the best is the enemy of the good , and , for the sake of the certainty of the operators , for the sake of the need to have a filter in the Commission to deal with the problems of the internal market , and also , it should be said , for the sake of the good image of the operation of our institutions , I recommend that we approve this package .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite all the praise , in which I , of course , wish to join , there are still some large flies in the ointment , which have indeed already been mentioned .
I am speaking in my capacity as rapporteur of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , with responsibility for consideration of the authorisation and radio spectrum directives , and also as my group 's shadow rapporteur on the framework directive .
All these reports have been adopted unanimously in the Cultural Committee , and we have managed to bring substantial points from our position to bear in the leading Committee as well .
In the Council , on the contrary , all the Committee 's concerns have been utterly cast to the winds , which it would be an understatement to describe as disappointing .
To get to the point : even though the package of directives we are discussing is called the ' telecoms package ' for the sake of brevity , it must be clearly pointed out that it certainly does not deal only with telecommunication issues in the strict sense of the word .
Technical convergence does indeed mean that electronic services cannot be divided up by reference to their channels of distribution or the devices used to receive them , but this is specifically , in our view , about digital television and other services related to journalism .
What matters to the Committee on Culture , therefore , is that the whole wide range of Europe 's cultural diversity should find a place on the networks and not be merely subject to the laws of the market and of competition .
This means that we see the issue of interoperability , like that of obligations to transmit , as being essential .
By these means alone will Member States and participants in the market have the legal security to guarantee services of general interest and only thus will the provision of the full range of services for everyone be guaranteed in terms of both supply and demand .
It is self-evident that Europe , for its part , does not have a duty to regulate the content of transmissions , but it is obliged to see to it that culture is not beaten into submission by commerce .
The bottom line is that doing without interoperability does not only impose limits on culture , but positively militates against the internal market .
So the Council 's compromise is inadequate in every way , and we assume that there will be more change in this area .
Mr President , I , like everybody else , or perhaps most other people in this House , want a single market .
But I do not want a market where competition rules supreme .
Regulation is necessary both economically and socially .
If you have no competition , you will have no service innovation , but if you have cut-throat competition , you will not have service innovation either .
It is necessary therefore to get the balance right .
So , I would suggest to the Commission and Council that Parliament is offering them an opportunity to improve the balance of the package before them , and I would urge them to accept the proposals being put forward by Parliament .
By coincidence , the Commission came forward today with a working document on the performance of industries providing services of general economic interest , and this also covered telecoms .
That document indicates that liberalisation in general is having a net beneficial effect , but I would suggest to the Commission that they need to come forward with a lot more research and hard evidence in relation to specific sectors to convince me that it is true in all cases .
Finally , I would suggest that the Commission needs urgently to take on board the suspicions regarding price-fixing with regard to roaming mobile telephone calls .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , whenever a debate draws to its close and as important a package as this one on telecommunications is adopted , one should be , indeed must be , permitted to look into the future .
In this instance there are a number of questions that present themselves at the same time .
Is the Commission already able to assess how much the market will now change - not only in the direction of more competition ?
What effects can we expect to see on jobs ?
Can you , on the basis of the package about to be adopted , already estimate whether the digital divide really will be reduced ?
Would what is currently going on not be an ideal opportunity to actually put transparency into practice , both as regards costs and at the consumer end ?
We are indeed currently finding that the new directives mean that we will have to deal with a flood of confusing information about telecommunications charges , and transparency should surely be at least as important in economics as in politics .
The Council and the Commission exerted considerable pressure on Parliament to consider their proposal as set in stone .
However , eight amendments have been tabled by members of five different groups , which in fact proves that the basic text is insufficient .
Those who signed these amendments , supported by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , particularly want , in order to be technically fair , the broadcasting or ' must carry ' obligations to also apply to satellite , the conditional access systems and to businesses providing access to digital television .
In order to safeguard legal consistency , we demand that the conditional access systems and the other associated facilities are also included in Paragraph 2 , which is the purpose of Amendment No 26 , the only amendment tabled by our group .
We would like to stress to the Minister that we , like everyone here , welcome the speech on reducing the digital divide , but we would also like Parliament to be permitted , now and again , to have the power of co-decision .
Mr President , electronic services are a public commodity in a modern knowledge society .
Consequently , quality , affordable services , irrespective of geographical location or the user 's personal profile , must be reconciled with the demands of competition , although the basic objective must be to guarantee universal access .
Particular attention is therefore quite rightly being given to making access easier for people with disabilities .
Consultation with users is essential in order to ensure we have optimum regulations from a social point of view .
I particularly welcome the amendment requiring the Member States to hold public consultations in order to define users with disabilities .
This means initiating a broad debate with individual representatives of people with disabilities , depending on their particular requirements .
So we need to focus on measures for minority users , such as providing public telephones at fixed locations or equivalent measures for deaf or speech impaired people .
At the same time , once this parameter is accepted , we need to develop quality of service standards for services for minority groups alongside general quality of service standards , because that is the only way we shall be able to monitor the degree of access which these people have to electronic services .
The four directives with you today , together with the Spectrum Decision , make up the new regulatory framework for electronic communications - a cornerstone of the eEurope strategy , the information society for all agreed at the Lisbon European Council .
Since Lisbon , successive European Councils have called on the Commission , Council and Parliament to ensure that the new framework is in place by the end of this year .
We still have two weeks to go .
Time is running short , but the EU still has the chance to meet this deadline .
The package of compromise amendments before you today has a broad level of support in the Council , as the presidency told us today .
It is , of course , a compromise .
Nobody gets everything they want - neither Parliament , the Council nor the Commission .
But the Commission nonetheless believes that it is a balanced compromise .
My assessment is that neither institution is likely to get more from conciliation .
Agreement on this package will send an important , positive signal externally .
We all know that the communications sector has had a rough ride over the last year or so .
Early agreement on this package will be a welcome boost .
The package will have a positive impact on the sector in a number of different ways .
The new framework will deregulate , requiring regulators progressively to remove regulation as it becomes unnecessary , so that they regulate only when there is market failure .
In this way , the package provides a transition to the final objective we all share : reliance on competition law to control market power in the electronic communications sector .
The new framework simplifies and deregulates national licensing regimes , removing prior regulatory control over market access for network and service provision , and focusing such controls only on frequency and numbering resources .
It preserves and strengthens universal service , striking the right balance between the rights of users and the need not to impose disproportionate burdens on operators .
In particular , it makes it clear that functional Internet access is a key part of the bundle of services that must be affordable and available to all EU citizens .
Mr Martin asked me about the impact of this solution for the digital divide and employment .
It is very clear that universal service has a key impact on availability .
But we also need policy measures which concentrate on the skills of all citizens and on content .
We need availability at a low price ; we need skills and content in everyone 's own language to close the digital divide .
Finally - and crucially - the new framework , with the amendments contained in the compromise package , would include the necessary safeguards to ensure that regulators act consistently across the EU , so that companies can expect to be treated similarly in similar situations throughout the EU .
Here I particularly want to thank the European Parliament for its strong support , without which we would not have been able to achieve this kind of compromise with the Council .
I will explain how the compromise package deals with the three fundamental issues that dominated discussion between the Council and Parliament during second reading : right of appeal ( Article 4 ) , the transparency mechanism ( Article 6 of the framework directive ) , including matters related to radio spectrum , and finally interoperability of digital TV equipment - which has been raised by many colleagues tonight .
On right of appeal , the compromise package takes Parliament ' s line by requiring Member States to ensure that the merits of the case are duly taken into account .
On the transparency mechanism , the compromise package goes a long way towards Parliament and the Commission ' s position .
The text gives the Commission hard powers to require national regulatory authorities to withdraw draft measures in the key areas linked to the functioning of the single market : definition of markets and designation , or otherwise , of undertakings with significant market power ( SMP ) .
Commission decisions are subject to an advisory committee procedure .
Radio spectrum is covered by Article 6 , paragraph 2 , whereby regulators are required to cooperate with each other to ensure consistent application of the regulatory framework .
The compromise does not provide for hard powers of intervention by the Commission on spectrum matters .
Nevertheless , the Commission believes that this provision , together with the Spectrum Decision , will improve co-ordination of radio spectrum policy matters across the EU .
With regard to the Spectrum Decision , the Commission is very satisfied with the compromise proposal , as the major objectives pursued in the original Commission proposal are met .
The adoption of the Spectrum Decision in this form would constitute a major step forward .
Furthermore , it demonstrates how far positions in this important matter have evolved , given the failure not so long ago of legislative proposals along similar lines .
The Spectrum Decision in its present form will set up a general and permanent framework for addressing radio spectrum policy and legal issues in the context of all relevant Community policy areas .
It thereby reflects the increasing importance of radio spectrum in the context of Community policy objectives which depend on the availability and efficient management of frequencies as a vital resource for the provision of economically and socially important wireless usage in electronic communications , transport , broadcasting and so on .
The Spectrum Decision makes it possible to take appropriate action to ensure efficient use of spectrum and spectrum management .
It also provides for technical implementing measures to be adopted under the Spectrum Decision as a mechanism to ensure legal certainty .
Many Members of the European Parliament have raised the issue of digital television .
We clearly have got the message from the European Parliament .
On digital TV interoperability , the compromise package goes towards Parliament ' s position , by taking over much of the European Parliament text .
A new article and corresponding recital would be inserted in the framework directive , dealing specifically with interoperability of digital interactive television services .
It would impose an obligation on Member States to encourage the use of open application programme interfaces by platform operators and equipment manufacturers .
In addition , Member States would also be required to encourage API owners to make available , on fair , reasonable and non-discriminatory terms , all such information as is necessary to enable service providers to provide all services supported by the Application Programme Interfaces .
Clearly an obligation to encourage does not go as far as an obligation to ensure .
But - and I emphasise this - the provisions of Article 16 on standardisation allow standards to be made mandatory one year after entry into force of the directive if interoperability cannot be ensured by the use of voluntary standards .
The combination of these two provisions constitutes a step forward for the interoperability of digital television , which we all agree is a desirable outcome for European consumers .
Article 16 means that one year after entry into force of the directive , the Commission must organise public consultation then propose the comitology procedure , followed by Commission adoption .
Furthermore , as we have really understood the strong will of the European Parliament to go forward with interoperability , the Commission is ready to start actively to promote European standards for interoperability with all stakeholders concerned .
Mrs Read and Mr Fitzsimons raised the issue of the disabled here today .
Firstly , on the amendments on the disabled , most of them have been accepted in the Council position , except perhaps for two , which overlap with the Council text .
Secondly , I am personally convinced that information technologies give us better chances than before to give equal possibilities to the disabled .
When we make society better for the disabled , it is better for all of us .
Last week we had the information society technologies conference , in which Mrs Read also participated .
We saw fantastic new applications which make life for the disabled better .
We must absolutely encourage their use .
The same was true with the e-government conference .
We proceed along those lines .
The accessibility guidelines recommendation from the Commission a few weeks ago is another example here .
As far as the link between the RTTE directive and this package goes , we are ready to consider and study that issue .
I will come back to that later .
The compromise package is always a compromise .
No institution gets everything it wants .
But this compromise is a balanced one .
It represents a proper balance between the views of the Council and Parliament .
As such the Commission would recommend that the House accept it .
The Commission will transmit to the sessional services of the European Parliament the detailed position on the amendments , including those not covered by the Council compromise .
Finally , I thank the European Parliament and the presidency for their particularly close and substantial cooperation on this file .


My particular thanks go to the rapporteurs , Mrs Niebler , Mr Paasilinna , Mr Harbour and Mr Brunetta , the rapporteurs for the five telecom directives , as well as the chairman of the committee , Mr Westendorp y Cabeza .
But I do not want to forget the shadow rapporteurs and those other Members of the European Parliament who have participated so actively in the discussion of the telecoms package .
It has been an excellent example of how Community method at its best can work .
It has been an extremely complicated legal package .
Everybody had a role to play .
We worked towards the same compromise solution and - if it goes through this week - very rapidly .
The outcome of this would be that Europe would have the most modern , technology-neutral legislation for the future .
I am sure it would be good for jobs , good for growth , good for equal access for all .
I hope that this package will be accepted this week in Parliament .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I would inform Members that the services of the Bureau have a list of the amendments accepted and not accepted by the Commission .
The services of the Bureau will supply this list to any of you who wish to have it .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Report on financial assistance for innovative and job creating SMEs
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0422 / 2001 ) by Mr Bushill-Matthews , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report to the European Parliament and the Council : Growth and Employment Initiative - Measures on financial assistance for innovative and job-creating Small- and Medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 399 - C5-0459 / 2001 - 2001 / 2183 ( COS ) ) .
This is Parliament 's second report on the growth and employment initiative which is a multiannual programme .
But it is also , perhaps unusually , the second one this calendar year and the reason for this is that the 1999 report was delayed until January of this year in essence because the Commission had been somewhat sluggish - a point I recollect I observed in my speech in January .
This year , I am delighted to say that the Commission has produced a very thorough and generally much better report and I would like to thank them for the cooperation they have shown .
Ironically , the timing has been more of a problem this time around with Parliament and that is partly because the Industry Committee decided that it wanted to produce an opinion and wrote to the Employment and Social Affairs Committee and asked if the vote in committee could be deferred .
The vote was deferred and then the Committee on Industry decided it did not want to produce an opinion after all .
But these things happen .
Anyway , I would like to thank colleagues in the Employment and Social Affairs Committee for their amendments which have generally improved the report substantially .
I would like to thank the Economic Committee for their opinion which the committee fully supported and which is utterly embraced within the body of the report , and I would also like to thank the Employment and Social Affairs Committee for adopting this report unanimously a few weeks ago .
Parliament clearly hopes that its views as expressed in this report when voted on tomorrow will be of genuine help to the Commission and the EIF in determining any programme changes for the coming year , in which case the report each year needs to be presented annually in good time well ahead of the year to come so that it can influence what happens in the year to come .
The challenge for everybody in the year 2002 is therefore to present the report in the November plenary rather than in the December plenary .
The Commission can help , as I hope they will , by speeding up the inter-service consultation which still seems to be a rather dozy process .
I have it on good authority that the Commission 's own report rested in certain DGs in-trays for several weeks before being lifted out so progress can be made there .
It can also help by sharing with Parliament the quarterly information from the EIF and I thank the Commission for agreeing publicly in the Employment Committee to do this .
This will be very helpful , but Parliament can certainly help in sharpening up its own act in terms of getting the timetable much sprucer next time around .
Meanwhile , I would just like to highlight three points from the report : paragraph 13 where we would like to see in next year the Commission report much more concrete evidence of the employment gains that this multiannual programme has produced , not because we doubt what those employment gains might be , but we would like to see some hard data next time around .
On paragraph 14 , there are a number of references to other stages in the development of SMEs in their business cycle .
We would like attention to be paid to this too .
Finally , to go back to the earlier part of the report , in Recital F , where a deliberate comparison is made with the United States , because there , less regulation allows for a much more entrepreneurial spirit .
In the EU we believe that we have to get a much more similar mindset to America in the way in which we approach SMEs .
I note with great interest the Minutes of the Industry Council meeting on 4 and 5 December , which proudly proclaimed real progress under the Belgian presidency towards " better practices geared towards elimination of red tape " .
If this is true it is most welcome .
I want to believe it .
I would love to see the evidence .
Certainly we all have to do our best to make it true .
SMEs currently account for two-thirds of all workers - the majority of all workers employed in the European Union .
But European employment laws are substantially shaped by the social partners who represent the big employers and the big trade unions but the minority of the workers .
We all need to recognise that SMEs are the biggest employers overall , that SMEs are the biggest engine of growth for the European economies .
It is not enough just to say that we have looked after SMEs , that we have the employment and growth initiative .
It is a great help but we have to do much more .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks , Mr Bushill-Matthews , for this excellent report .
I would like to present briefly the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I do not want to devote myself to long explanations about why small and medium-sized enterprises are the economic backbone of European society .
SMEs find access to finance ever more difficult , and a look at the agreements that Basle II will bring with it leads us to assume that this finance will become even more problematic .
New methods of finance , such as venture capital , initial public offers , or all the other things currently being tried out or referred to , certainly represent a feasible way ahead , and one to which we in Europe will have to give thought , but not one to be used similarly by all SMEs .
It is for that reason that I am glad that the Commission is taking up this issue on Europe 's behalf .
I would like , on the basis of my practical experience and of my discussions with many owners of SMEs , to tell the Commission of my principal concern , which is that future promotion of SMEs should also be tailored to their needs .
Many owners of SMEs have no idea , or it is very hard for them to find out , where any kind of support at a European level is to be had .
Support is meant to be transparent .
Then I often hear complaints that support at a European level is very complicated , that compliance with the requirements imposed on SMEs is very difficult and that this often made the whole thing very expensive .
Thirdly , all this should also be calculable in good time .
Very lengthy application procedures stretched over many years result in small entrepreneurs quite simply running out of breath and not making it through to the final stages of the process .
This means that everything possible needs to be done by the Commission to ensure that support for SMEs meets the needs of applicants from the target group , that is , the owners of the enterprises themselves .
At a European level , though , we can ease the burden on SMEs or do justice to them not only by offering finance , but we should also consider how we might remove the burden from them by avoiding additional bureaucracy and regulation , which weigh down on them more and more .
I believe it would be highly appropriate to put in place a screening procedure in the Enterprise Directorate-General which would make it possible to lodge a veto in good time , permitting the passage of regulations beneficial and appropriate to SMEs and excluding those detrimental to them .
Mr President , Council , Commission and Parliament at last agree on something .
The promotion of SMEs contributes to greater investment and innovation , and to the creation of new philosophies of enterprise .
A multiannual programme was started to benefit an initiative towards growth and employment .
Parliament approved a budget of EUR 450 million .
SMEs are an engine for jobs in Europe .
Seventy per cent of all workers are employed by them , and over 80 % of all apprentices trained by them .
In order to give them a better chance in the market , however , more financial and fiscal burdens have to be taken off their backs .
They need improved access to risk capital .
The European Investment Bank should apply its funds not only to the knowledge-based enterprises in the multimedia and biotechnology sectors , but also to cutting-edge technologies in the environmental and energy sectors and to innovative service-providers in craftsmanship , trade and tourism .
Interest-rate subsidies paid out amount to over EUR 93 million rather than the EUR 100 million that had been envisaged , yet , all the same , 54 000 new jobs were created where 33 000 had been expected .
If that is not a success ...
The excellent report that Mr Bushill-Matthews has produced meets with full support from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and my committee was unanimously in favour of it .
I echo his criticism that the report reached the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs far too late .
Obviously there were too many services dealing with it .
Parliament can , though , only take responsibility and perform its supervisory function if information is available in good time .
Future reports will have to concentrate on aspects that make effective analysis possible .
What about the quality of jobs in innovative fields ?
How is sustainability ensured ?
How many women - who , at the end of the day , are a significant element in the European employment strategy - are involved ?
The Commission 's report is encouraging , this criticism notwithstanding , providing , as it does , evidence that it is worth investing in these forward-looking sectors , and that is entirely in the employees ' interest .
Thank you , Mr President .
I too should like to congratulate Mr Bushill-Matthews on his report .
He has made every effort to add this report to the agenda at the earliest opportunity and , as he has already indicated , he is not to blame for the fact that that is not the case .
Even the Commission has made more of an effort to ensure that that is done in time , and moreover , the content of the report presented by the Commission is more substantial than when we discussed it the first time round , because we have since gained more experience with the Growth and Employment Initiative .
The report is about this Growth and Employment Initiative and about the three financial instruments which have been developed with this initiative in mind , namely the ETF start-up facility , the JEV programme and the SME Guarantee Facility .
Just like last year , on behalf of my group , I should like to underline the social dimension in this respect .
This initiative is the brain child of the European Parliament that was developed in the wake of the Luxembourg Summit in 1997 , and right from the outset , it was made very clear at the time that the initiatives should not only focus on this highly advanced technological sector , but should also embrace the social sector , and I am of the opinion that we cannot repeat this enough .
There is only one point where I cannot completely follow the rapporteur in this report , and that concerns recital F which he quotes .
He refers to the United States of America in this respect .
More investments are made in new initiatives over there , and the decision to set up one ' s own business is made more easily .
I acknowledge that this is the case , but I disagree with his analysis that the reason for this would be the US ' s milder regulatory climate .
In my view , this is much more related to the whole culture of entrepreneurship , the fact that people over there are used to taking initiatives , that it is not of such major concern to fail once , to go bankrupt once and start again .
In my opinion , cultural factors of this kind play a much more significant role than simply the regulatory climate .
This remark is not really appropriate , in my view .
I hope that we can find a compromise on that score at tomorrow ' s vote , for it would be unfortunate if this report were not adopted unanimously .
Mr President , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group I welcome the report and I congratulate the rapporteur .
I agree with the criticisms made of the Commission 's report and many of the points made in relation to support that SMEs need , both by the rapporteur and by other speakers here tonight .
But the report does not deal adequately with the crucial issue of whether jobs were actually created by these financial instruments .
The amendment by my group makes explicit reference to this .
The stated intention of the SME guarantee facility is to stimulate job creation by supporting the investment activities of SMEs within the EU through increased availability of loan finance .
The estimate for job creation is an average 1.3 new jobs per SME over 2 years which is described as substantial .
But we do not have a cost / benefit analysis and enough concrete information .
I would ask colleagues to support this report but also to support the amendment which makes this point clear .
Mr President , I am going to use my speaking time to contradict the procedural page and the previous speakers who , while claiming that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs unanimously voted in favour of the Bushill-Matthews report , have attributed to me a vote that expresses the exact opposite of what I believe in .
This report is a plea to grant greater financial assistance to small- and medium-sized businesses .
I am even more opposed to the idea of giving public money to private businesses since large financial and industrial corporations are often lurking behind the all-encompassing SME cause .
It would never strike Mr Bushill-Matthews , who is known for his fervent support of the so-called free market , to propose financial assistance for workers who have been made redundant by the very same industrial and financial corporations or their counterparts .
On the contrary , the rapporteur brings out the begging bowl without compunction , so that public money can be shifted , through the SME Guarantee facility or pre-start financing , into the coffers of large corporations so that it ends up swelling the private wealth of shareholders .
To prove that Member States and the European institutions are no strangers to a bit of hypocrisy , this increased financial assistance is proposed in the name of job creation .
I shall of course vote against this report .
Public money should go to public services , to health , education , and public transport , which could and should create many more useful jobs for everyone than these start-ups , which swallow up money without showing how they are of use to society .
The health sector has been reduced to collecting public money in order to contend with some diseases .
I would like to see employers come round to collect public money .
It is not up to Parliament to give taxpayers ' money to help them .
Mr President , we received with great interest the report by Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs concerning the second annual report on growth and employment initiatives .
I very much appreciate the spirit of cooperation with the rapporteur and the favourable comments made on the annual report .
In particular , I know that the committee 's report - and I quote : " welcomes generally the content and analysis within the thorough and more comprehensive 2000 report and commends the Commission and the EIF where progress has been made " .
I would like to address the main points raised by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in the report prepared by Mr Bushill-Matthews and have grouped my comments under three headings : provision of information to Parliament and its timing , geographical coverage and an updating of the instruments .
Firstly on the provision of information .
All the completion of the formal Commission procedures for the adoption of such a report may appear too long and , frankly , sometimes it is .
The Commission has helped the rapporteur by providing an advance copy of the report before publication .
We intend to continue this practice of keeping the rapporteur informed prior to the completion of the formal Commission procedure .
We also explored to what extent we can share with the rapporteur the quarterly information received from the EIF without the need for a formal Commission procedure .
It should be noted that this quarterly information is mainly used for operational purposes .
It is to ensure appropriate monitoring of the programmes by the Commission services and cannot be relied upon to provide the same degree of accuracy and detail expected by the annual report .
Secondly , on geographical coverage .
The geographical distribution of the project signed under both the ETF start-up and the SME guarantee programmes varies considerably .
The difficulties of implementing ETF start-up in all countries of the Union stems from the different stage of development of the venture capital market in various countries , coupled with the requirement that ETF start-up only invests pari passu with at least 50 % of capital provided by the private sector .
In those countries where little venture capital activity exists it is difficult , if not impossible , to meet the second condition .
In the meantime the take-up of the facility has successfully continued with another foreign investment signed and three more being processed , all together corresponding to a geographical coverage of eleven countries .
As you can see from our annual report the distribution for SME guarantee is most satisfactory .
The initial high take-up in Germany and France was attributable to the existence of well-developed national guarantee programmes in those two countries which were able to take advantage rapidly of this facility .
Thirdly , on the instruments .
The three instruments of the growth and employment initiative have been integrated into the new multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship and in particular SMES 2001-2005 .
A change in market conditions prompted the Commission to suggest a refocusing of ETF start-up further upstream : seed , early stage and incubators .
Similarly , it led the Commission to propose diversification in the SME guarantee portfolios , for instance towards microloans in favour of the smallest enterprises and ICT loans that allow small enterprises to take advantage of the potential of electronic commerce .
Finally , with regard to the simplification of joint European ventures , our legal and budget experts have come to the conclusion that the Council decision on the multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship does not allow simplification in significant terms .
To achieve this , a new Council decision would be required and such a decision would also need a new budget appropriation .
Before submitting an appropriate proposal to the Council on which Parliament would be consulted , the Commission services are working on a full assessment of a joint European venture .
In the light of this assessment , the competent Commission services may submit a proposal to reduce considerably the life of the joint European venture programme and so that the whole budget will not be used .
But I and my services will keep you informed accordingly of any developments in this regard .
Circulation of compound feedingstuffs
The next item is the report ( A5-0421 / 2001 ) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the European Parliament to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 79 / 373 / EEC on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs and repealing Commission Directive 91 / 357 / EEC ( PE-CONS 3653 / 2001 - C5-0491 / 2001 - 2000 / 0015 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have succeeded in gaining the acceptance of open declaration of foodstuffs .
By ' we ' I mean Parliament , assuredly also with the Commission 's support , but the Commission manifested a mild attack of weakness during the procedure with regard to what we considered necessary to the labelling of compound feedingstuffs .
I think that honourable Members will back me up when I state quite clearly that , if Parliament had not had the right of co-decision in this area , we would not have been able to push this through .
Quite apart from the matter under discussion , I wish , then , to emphasise that we need the right of co-decision in all agricultural policy matters so that , as we have done in this instance , we can come to sound and sensible results and make use of the expertise and political wisdom that reign in Parliament to support the Commission - and , I would expressly observe , to support a strong position taken by the Commission - to achieve satisfactory outcomes in the debates with the Council .
This issue of open declaration has come a long way .
We are now amending a directive dating back to 1979 , when open declaration , which existed in Germany at any rate , was abolished at European level , and since which time I have also been active in this field , attempting to make good what went wrong then .
It is a long time , 25 years , since then , but patience is needed in politics as everywhere else .
That we have achieved this result is surely due to there having been the BSE crisis , which made it clear that farmers have to know what they are giving as feedingstuff if they are then to take on the responsibility for the feeding of their animals .
This catastrophe has taught us , in the meantime , that everything we feed to animals is itself in the food chain and is - admittedly by a circuitous route rather than directly - fed to human beings as well .
This makes it a matter of urgency that farmers should know what the feedingstuffs contain .
We then asked you , Commissioner Byrne , and also Mr Fischler , within the framework of the parliamentary procedure to install the Commission in office , where you stood on open declaration .
At the time you said : " Yes , open declaration should come into being . "
Indeed it did , but it took another two-and-a-half or three years for the legislation to be tabled .
But a good thing is worth waiting for .
As I have said , the Council then withdrew the good proposal from the Commission , in which the only improvement we had made was to the positive list , and the Commission agreed to the Council 's proposal for a less precise declaration to be implemented .
The result we have achieved is a change of direction - a change to the right direction .
We now have open declaration .
The 15 % tolerance takes account of the industry 's supplies and actual practice in order to avoid the possibility of partial rejection of feedingstuffs , but we have also made it possible for farmers to be told on request the exact composition of fodder and feedingstuffs .
We have likewise obliged the Commission to supply us with a positive list , or at least a draft positive list , by the end of next year , so that we can achieve a positive result in this area within the life of this Parliament .
There must be stipulations as to what can find its way into feedingstuffs .
I would like , finally , to express my warmest thanks to my colleagues , most especially to Mr Friedrich , the Vice-President , who chaired the Committee , but also to Mr Kindermann .
The three of us made up the negotiating delegation , and I must say that if we had not brought such determination , such a common mind , and what was almost joy , to the work in order to show for once that we too were in a position to turn our thoughts into words and laws , then all this would not have been possible .
So , many thanks .
I believe we have done a good job , and it was interesting to take part in a conciliation procedure of this sort .
We did , admittedly , say that a mountain had roared and brought forth a mouse , for , in view of what was up for negotiation , a gigantic effort was involved .
But it was good , too , to get an insight into something like that .
So , to all who took part , including our other colleagues , many thanks .
This result is something we can face our countries and our electors with .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is a saying that what is good is worth waiting for , and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the rapporteur , has referred clearly to the never-ending story of the matter under discussion .
It is specifically with reference to co-decision that it has at last been made clear that Parliament keeps on coming up with good ideas that find their way into work like this report on the never-ending story about the declaration of compound feedingstuffs .
We must be clear in our own minds that we are dealing here with large quantities , and therefore with a lot of money - not the European Union 's money , but that of our partners in the market .



We are dealing with a volume of some 400 million tonnes of feedingstuffs , and it will help us to grasp how much we are talking about if we note that half , about 200 million tonnes , is made up of commercial feedingstuffs , and compound feedingstuffs make up two-thirds of that , some 115 million tonnes .
As Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf pointed out , the conciliation procedure eventually achieved a satisfactory result on the most important points at third reading stage by involving all interested parties - something which I should like very much to commend .
As Parliament demanded , there is now open quantitative declaration , and , although the 15 % is in my opinion at the upper edge of the margin , consensus has nonetheless been reached .
It was also clearly stated that the producer , must however , and I see the ' must however ' as very important here , state the exact percentages involved at the customer ' s request .
Thirdly , there is the positive list .
About 20 000 components have been mentioned , and the drawing up of this positive list may well be a difficult task , but it will , I think , be an interesting and important one .
More time has been conceded , and even more for formulation following the directive 's implementation , but it is , I think , important that it should happen that way .
Perhaps the evaluation report would present the right opportunity to introduce further improvements , such as , for example , the possible certification of the producer of the compound feedingstuffs .
There is one more point I would like to mention , namely that the first positive list , to look at things in a European perspective , was the so-called purity law for beer .
As I have said before , it was instituted in 1486 in the area I come from , and made applicable to the whole of Bavaria in 1516 .
It was a fine positive list for the production of beer , and you should put all your drive and ambition into drafting an equally good positive list for compound feedingstuffs .


So , then , particular thanks and appreciation to the rapporteur , to the chairman of the Conciliation Committee , Mr Friedrich , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and Mr Kindermann for the tough and persistent negotiations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , most of us agree that we achieved a very good result in the Conciliation Committee .
I therefore wish , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to congratulate , above all , the rapporteur on his commitment to the matter in hand and , most of all , warmly thank him for cooperating so well with his other colleagues , too .
If the result is confirmed by this House as a whole , it will represent a further significant step towards greater transparency and safety in the production of feedingstuffs .
In addition to this proposal for a regulation , though , there are other reports which also deal with feedingstuffs and with regard to which negotiations are currently in progress between Parliament , the Council and , above all , the Commission .
I am thinking here only of the draft regulation on animal by-products not intended for human consumption - especially Category III , but also of the future use of leftovers from meals and waste from the production of foodstuffs .
I do think that it should continue to be possible to use these by-products , processed under secure conditions and subject to strict controls and , above all , with the stages in processing being effectively monitored , as high-quality feedingstuffs in pig and poultry production , unless the results of future scientific research suggest otherwise .
I look forward to the same willingness to compromise , not only on the part of Parliament , but also on the part of the Commission and of the Council , as was demonstrated in the process that we are discussing this evening .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the ELDR Group I too would like to start by warmly thanking chairman Graefe zu Baringdorf and our consultative committee , which carried out very valuable work and demonstrated in an exemplary fashion that when one believes in what one does and makes strong efforts on its behalf , one will reach one 's goals .
Here , Parliament achieved what it wanted .
This is a very important matter from the point of view of the farmers ; these are the people who in their everyday work have to deal with these matters , and this information is very important to them .
As Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf stated , in Germany open declaration was eliminated in 1979 , while here in Finland it was eliminated in 1995 .
Now it is being reinstated .
The only matter which generated debate and which deserves a moment 's consideration is this list of permitted substances , and , in particular , the fact that the various ingredients change all the time .
These include the byproducts of the food industry which Mr Kinderman mentioned ; new feedingstuffs arrive all the time , while others disappear .
For this reason , some sound common sense will be called for here .
We must take thought and find out what is right and what is good , and only after that , on the basis of experience , must we go about implementing matters .
Once again my warm thanks go to the consultative committee , which carried out splendid work from the viewpoint of Parliament and , particularly , from that of the farmers .
Mr President , I , too , am of the opinion that this was a good report , and that the result from the Conciliation Committee opens the way to implementation , which , however , I am sure will take some time yet .
The Community 's Member States are still , in any case , responsible for the monitoring of feedingstuffs , and , as the parties in this whole process represent very diverse interests , it will be necessary , within the foreseeable future , to discuss monitoring programmes which will standardise supervision of feedingstuffs composition and norms across the board .
I am grateful for the key data laid down in the Conciliation Committee , which is in line with my own experience .
What worries me , though , is the apportionment of costs , specifically the costs of the declaration itself and for the monitoring of it .
I wish to put on record my opposition to the costs continuing to be offloaded onto the farmers .
I take the view that the transparency principle means that implementation of the procedure must involve the producers of feedingstuffs , its importers , dealers in it , and , above all , those who monitor it - who will be numerous - also themselves guaranteeing the apportionment of their costs .
It is also my opinion that there should be safety standards in the production of feedingstuffs to guarantee and safeguard the health of people and animals , ensuring that no products come onto the market that are dubious from the point of view of health and consumer protection , which , of course , presupposes the principle that good technical production practice does not start , and is not interrupted , at purely arbitrary points .
I do think that apportionment on this basis at every production site must prove itself in the next few years and I hope , after this report and after the positive result achieved in the Conciliation Committee , that there will not be another scandal somewhere or other in the foreseeable future , whether in wine , honey , or the many feedingstuffs we can expect to be listed , be they positive , negative , coloured green or anything else , for the list will surely be an enormous one .


Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to congratulate the European institutions and the members of the conciliation committee who , under the presidency of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck - who I would have liked to have been here - , who have been able , sparing no effort , to unite differing views in order to reach a reasonable compromise between the two basic positions which initially seemed incompatible .
That is to say , firstly , the obligatory declaration of all raw materials , with a tolerance level of 15 % , and the obligation of feed producers to communicate the exact percentages , whenever required by animal farmers , to which I believe we should add a time limit , set previously in this legislation , and , secondly , the positive list - which all the previous speakers have mentioned - which the Commission must present before the end of 2002 , once the viability studies have been carried out .
When it comes to restoring consumer confidence , following the recent food crises ( BSE , dioxins , etc . ) absolute transparency is necessary , even indispensable .
However , ladies and gentlemen , this is an example of how , within the scope of the codecision procedure , it is possible to reach reasonable agreements - good agreements , I would say - and we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will therefore continue to ask the Council to gradually extend that procedure to all legislative actions in the field of the Community ' s agricultural policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by warmly congratulating the rapporteur and Parliament 's Conciliation Committee , whose stubbornness has in the end produced a creditable result .
Almost two years of negotiations with the Commission and the Council within the framework of the conciliation procedure have at last enabled us to reach a compromise on regulations on the labelling of compound feedingstuffs .
When this House votes tomorrow on this directive , it can do so , I believe , with its mind very much at ease .
I see this directive as proof that Parliament must in future have a right of co-decision in agricultural matters as well .
As we are all aware , the crucial issues were the open declaration , the positive list and an evaluation report .
Parliament 's main concern was to lay down exact regulations on labelling that would provide for compulsory details of both the quantity and quality of ingredients .
Even with the Council , which did not originally share this position , a compromise text could eventually be agreed on , according to which the ingredients must now be stated by percentage of weight with a margin for error and according to which farmers must be given the exact percentages if they request them .
This binding statement of permissible ingredients is the only guarantee that consumers can in future have greater confidence in farmers ' products , and we farmers know how much we need consumers ' approval and trust .
The positive list to be produced by the end of 2002 should make that possible .
On the positive side , I would like to make the additional observation that Parliament must also be involved in any future amendments to the directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having gone through two readings and the conciliation procedure , the report on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs now prescribes the open declaration , and the Commission has to produce a proposal for a positive list for feedingstuff ingredients by the end of 2002 .
Both these points had been at the core of Parliament 's concerns , but had initially been rejected by the Council .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report is the very model of successful legislative work by Parliament and the Council .
In spite of all the differences between the political groups , constructive collaboration made it possible to draw up points that were important to us members of Parliament 's agricultural committee , and the final result was a positive one thanks to circumspect negotiations in the conciliation procedure , guided by our Vice-President , Mr Friedrich , whom I would like to take this opportunity of warmly thanking .
This was the right step in the right direction .
Not only was it possible for Parliament to see its two core concerns accepted , but the Council also had positive elements to contribute .
The possibility of a + 15 % tolerance margin for feedingstuff ingredients is something I see as acceptable , in that the manufacturer must state the exact percentages at the customer ' s request .
Equally in line with good practice is an evaluation report after three years and , if need be , adjustment of the tolerance margin in the light of scientific and technical developments .
It would be desirable if we could make greater future use of the co-decision procedure on CAP matters and continue to work together as constructively .
Whatever our successes , I would like to conclude with the single warning that good European rules are of no use unless they are monitored .
The BSE and dioxin crises do not in some way reflect faults in European regulation ; they were , rather , the result of criminal and questionable practices , which we must counter with determination and in new ways .
Mr President , honourable Members , we all agree that agribusinesses in the EU should maintain their commitment to satisfy the legitimate expectations and demands of both the farming community and consumers .
The marketing of compound feedingstuffs today has certainly improved in terms of traceability and transparency of composition - two issues of great concern for our major customer , the European citizen .
These principles can apply to all feeds to animals .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf says farmers must know what is in their feed , Mr Kindermann applies this to slops and waste and catering waste and I fully agree with those statements .
This piece of legislation is one of the milestones needed to build certainty and confidence .
Farmers are entitled to basic information to be able to properly inform their customers .
From the very beginning , the Council encountered great difficulties in agreeing on a common position .
Most Member States were opposed to this obligation and the positions of Parliament and the Council were quite far apart .
At the time , with a view to reaching a compromise , the Commission accepted the Council 's position which finally had the unanimous support of all the Member States .
This led to a difference in view between Council and Parliament after the second reading in April .
I am pleased , however , that an acceptable solution has been found in the conciliation with the declaration of all feed materials under their specific name indicating the exact percentages with a tolerance level of around 15 % .
However , as regards the demand for a positive list of feed materials , I have already on several occasions outlined the Commission 's reservations .
This concerns especially the deadline of presenting a proposal by the end of next year .
This task is very complex .
The Commission has already launched a feasibility study on this issue .
The call for tenders was published last June and the contractor is currently working on the matter and will also contact Members of this Parliament .
I accordingly undertake to send the report on the outcome of this study to the Council and Parliament as soon as possible and in any case before 31 December , 2002 .
I cannot , however , guarantee that I will be in a position to present a legislative proposal on the establishment of a positive list .
For this reason , it has been necessary for the Commission to make a declaration on this subject .
Thank you very much Commissioner Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 9.30 p.m. )
Vote on requests for urgent procedure
I now give the floor to Mr Katiforis , who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Katiforis ( PSE ) .
Madam President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has considered how we should continue to work on this directive after we rejected the Commission proposal in the last plenary by a considerable majority .
According to the regulation , we have two months in which to deliberate and then come up with a reply .
The Economic Committee has given me until Monday to complete my negotiations with colleagues , the Commission and the Presidency .
From what I see , there is no urgency in the matter because in any case the political agreement supposedly reached in Council on the matter is not set to begin before July .
There is therefore plenty of time for negotiation and for making contacts , and 15 January - when we shall reply - is not too far away .
Therefore , I see no particular need for urgent procedure and my proposal is that we reject the urgency request .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Proposal for a Council decision on an exchange of letters between the European Community and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ( UNRWA ) concerning additional funding in 2001 under the current EC-UNRWA Convention for the years 1999-2001 [ COM ( 2001 ) 741 - C5-0663 / 2001 - 2001 / 0288 ( CNS ) ]
President .
I will now give the floor to Mr Wynn who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible , the Committee on Budgets .
Madam President , last night the Committee on Budgets and , I understand , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy discussed this matter .
There is no problem with urgency being granted and we can do it without report and without debate .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Draft Council regulation on specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities with a view to combating international terrorism [ COM ( 2001 ) 569 - C5-0665 / 2001 - 2001 / 0228 ( CNS ) ] Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs
President .
I will now give the floor to Mr Watson who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Colleagues will recall that we dealt with this matter in urgent procedure in October .
I am pleased to be able to report that the Council has now accepted the legal base that was being proposed .
However , we would contest the fact that neither of the two appendices is attached to the proposal , although we understand the reasons why .
Nonetheless , we discussed this in committee last night and we recognise the urgency .
We would propose an urgent procedure without report .
It would then be up to the political groups to put forward amendments , which might be similar to those we adopted in October .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Presentation by Mr Prodi of the Commission work for the 2002 programme and the communication on the future of the European Union and strengthening the Community method
The next item is the Presentation of the Commission work for 2002 programme and the communication on the future of the European Union and strengthening the Community method .
I now give the floor to Mr Prodi , President of the Commission .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the annual debate on the State of the Union is one of our most important debates and , this year , it is taking place at a key moment for the European Union .
In recent days and months , a Greater Europe has truly been taking shape .
In less than twelve months , it will be possible to conclude the negotiations with the candidate countries that have satisfied the criteria set for enlargement , which will mean that the Union will be able to welcome up to ten new Member States before the next European elections .
In less than three weeks , the euro , the strongest and most visible sign of both the economic and political union of Europe , will become a tangible reality .
Lastly , before the end of the week , the Laeken European Council will take the decision to set up a Convention , which will do the groundwork for the reform of the Treaties and , for the first time , bring together representatives of governments , national parliaments , the European Commission and this House .
This greater Europe which is taking shape is a united , democratic , forward-looking Europe .
The Commission has been working towards this in the year now drawing to a close and intends to continue to do so in the year that will shortly commence .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , before moving on to the work carried out by the Commission in 2001 and our programme for 2002 , I would like to stress once again my belief that full , transparent cooperation between the institutions is essential for the smooth running of the Union .
With this in mind , as early as January this year , I told you of the Commission 's intention to revitalise our method of working together in order to make cooperation between our two institutions even more effective and transparent .
Before setting out these proposals , I would like , however , to go through the fundamental principles on which , I believe , our cooperation must be based .
Firstly , the Commission 's right of initiative must be safeguarded , as it is one of the pillars of the Community structure and the guarantor of its integrity .
A strong Commission means a strong European Parliament .
Secondly , the tripartite nature of interinstitutional cooperation must be safeguarded .
Indeed , it will only be effective if the two legislative bodies - Parliament and the Council - can enter into dialogue with the Commission on a common basis of transparency .
I would now like to turn to my proposals for revitalising the system , which , I am sure , will help to greatly improve dialogue between our institutions .
Firstly , from this year on , the work programme will no longer be a catalogue of planned legislation for that year ; it will , as you have requested , be a genuine political programme .
This programme , which the Commission hereby undertakes to follow closely , sets out both the priorities for the year in question and the initiatives needed to accomplish them .
I know that some of you were surprised not to receive an annex to the 2002 work programme listing planned legislation , as has been the case in previous years .
However , I want to point out that we listened very carefully to the views many of you expressed in this Chamber on 13 February .
You asked the Commission , quite clearly , to abandon the method of listing legislative proposals employed thus far and to adopt a new method .
We have made sure we complied with that request .
For these reasons , which were also set out in writing by Mrs Fontaine on 10 September , we have replaced the catalogue with the much more reliable instrument of quarterly programming , which is what the College uses to plan its work and of which you will be informed at regular intervals .
To maintain perfect transparency , however , I have also asked the Secretary-General of the Commission to forward immediately to the Secretary-General of Parliament the preliminary list of proposals put forward by the Commission departments which formed the basis for the work programme for 2002 .
If this approach produces positive results , we are willing to use it in future years as well .
Secondly , it is equally important to point out that , in future , the preparation of such a programme will need to be based on a more structured dialogue between our institutions .
This is why we have planned a multi-stage approach for the forthcoming year , with the preparation of the work programme for 2003 starting at the beginning of 2002 .
The two key dates for this political dialogue will be in February , when I will come to present to you the political priorities approved by the Commission for 2003 , and November , when I will come to set out to you the work programme the Commission has adopted on the basis of these priorities .
The discussions at the Conference of Presidents have shown me that we are in agreement on the broad outline I have just described .
For our part , we will make a start as soon as possible on establishing the details and commencing practical implementation .
Mrs de Palacio , who , at my request , has begun a dialogue with you on this matter , will continue her work and the dialogue with the aim of concluding our agreement next January .
Lastly , I feel it is important to stress that breaking the process down into stages should not increase our respective workloads but should enable us to continue to assume our respective responsibilities .
With regard to the 2001 budget , the list of what has been done over the course of a year is too long for me to give you a detailed account here and now .
I shall therefore confine myself to focusing on the areas in which the Union , with a decisive contribution from the Commission , has achieved its greatest successes in 2001 : the preparations for the changeover to the euro ; the progress made in the enlargement negotiations ; relations with the Balkan countries ; the dialogue with Russia ; the opening of a new round of trade negotiations at Doha ; the adoption of a strategy for sustainable development which goes far beyond the mere adoption of a series of specific measures and which will gradually bring us to review all our internal policies ; and lastly , the reinvigoration of the process of creating a common European area of justice and security , which has had a particularly high profile since 11 September .
Throughout the year , in each of these fields , the Commission 's actions have benefited from the crucial support of this House .
Looking ahead to 2002 , to give you a clearer picture of our tasks for the coming year , I am also sure that you will allow me to present the seven priorities indicated by the Commission in its work programme for 2002 by grouping them under four key headings .
These four major areas are internal security , the euro and economic and social matters , enlargement and , lastly , the Future of Europe debate and the process of reforming the Union ' s institutions .
The annual strategy we drew up last February revolved around six priorities .
However , the events of 11 September - and you will all understand that any programme must be flexible if it is to deal with unforeseen circumstances - forced us to adopt a seventh .
Therefore , in 2002 , the Commission will present a number of measures to combat terrorism and organised crime and to safeguard the security of our citizens .
They will include the launching of an integrated system for external border controls , the development of civil protection , public health measures and steps to improve transport safety .
As I have already had the opportunity to say , when speaking at Bruges on 12 November , improving judicial and police cooperation will lay the foundations for the creation , in the longer term , of an integrated police force to combat organised crime and terrorism .
Ever since the beginning of its term of office , this Commission has included among the four cornerstones on which its work is based , the aim to extend Union action , hitherto primarily economic , to cover economic , social and environmental concerns .
The programme for 2002 will not depart from this objective .
The introduction of the euro will be the most significant as well as the most tangible step towards European integration .
In this connection , I am particularly pleased that it has been possible to overcome all the political differences regarding cross-border payments , with the result that President Fontaine will shortly be able to announce the adoption of a common position .
Thanks to the efforts made to prepare for the introduction of the euro , our economy is now strong , stable and , at the same time , the most open in the world .
What would have been the impact of 11 September if we had not had the euro ?
Stability is the basis for our future policies and we must safeguard it .
The current economic situation is , of course , by no means easy , but I feel sure we will be able to overcome any short-term problems .
We have the instruments to do so , and here I am referring , in particular , to the Stability Pact and the broad economic policy guidelines .
We must , however , consider the need to improve the coordination of the budgetary policies of the countries in the euro zone .
With the introduction of the single currency , our economies have never been as interdependent as they are now .
With this in mind , I said recently that it might be advisable to concentrate on developing a code of conduct which would take specific account of the interdependence of the budgetary policies of the countries in the euro zone and would improve the overall coherence and the credibility of our economic policy .
My major concerns relate more to the long term .
Europe does indeed need structural reform .
It is the prerequisite for sustainable growth and job creation .
We already have the right recipe .
In two fundamental steps , both completed during the first part of this Commission ' s term of office - at Lisbon in March 2000 and at Gothenburg in June 2001 - the Member States undertook to work towards sustainable development that can combine competitiveness , social justice and respect for the environment .
The Commission ' s work programme for 2002 confirms this line of action .
The implementation of the undertakings given at Gothenburg is one of the seven priorities identified for next year .
Our commitment to preparing for and making a success of the meeting in Johannesburg on sustainable development is consistent with this course .
So where do these worries stem from ?
From the delays between the official adoption of the decisions and their practical implementation .
The boulder blocking the course of the development of Galileo , an essential initiative and technology for the growth and competitiveness of the European economy , is only the latest on a list of obstructions that is now simply too long .
There is no need to mention them all ; one example will suffice : the European patent .
The inability to fulfil solemnly given and announced undertakings and the lack of will to proceed along the road towards final completion of the single market are costing Europe very dearly .
The cost of the failure to deliver on Europe , which we could call the failure to deliver on Lisbon , is rapidly becoming intolerable .
The annual economic report that the Commission will present in just over a month ' s time , indeed as part of the preparations for the Spring Council , will contain a detailed analysis of the situation , and substantial progress will , at last , have to be made in Barcelona .
However , as I pointed out in Bruges , on its own , the Commission can do nothing . The Member States need to assume their responsibilities and make the decisions that are incumbent upon them .
Parliament too , moreover , will have to play its part : I am still convinced , for example , that the failure to reach an agreement on the new public procurement legislation has hindered the development of our financial markets .
In this sector , the European economy is clearly weaker than its American counterpart .
The Commission is aware of the numerous factors that combine to make the economy healthy and , in 2002 , it will present particularly important legislative proposals regarding banking and financial services .
We will also present a strategy for consumer protection and measures to support private investment in research and development .
One currency , one financial market and one economic policy , this must be our objective .
In any case , our main worry concerns an essential requirement for social cohesion , employment .
This will be the case in 2002 and will remain so for many years to come .
This is why , in Barcelona , we will present a communication on the social aspects of the restructuring of companies , aimed at the social partners , as we are convinced that there is a positive correlation between social protection and competitiveness .
Completing the enlargement process and making it a success for the whole of the Union , that has been the Commission 's number one priority since it first took office .
It was on 13 October 1999 when , addressing this same House , I called upon the European Council to complete the reforms necessary for enlargement before the end of 2002 and stressed that the Commission was confident that negotiations with the countries fulfilling the accession criteria could be concluded by that date .
Today , the date of 2002 has been formally endorsed by the Union .
The progress achieved in the course of two years has been impressive .
We still have before us , as I am only too aware , further stages in the negotiations that will be extremely sensitive - I need only mention the chapters on the Structural Funds or agriculture - but over the next twelve months , to those countries whose efforts have brought them to a state of readiness , the door will , at last , open , allowing them to join before the next elections to this House .
Two thousand and two will be a pivotal year , then , and the Commission 's programme faithfully reflects its importance .
This is not only because , as I pointed out just now , we must forge ahead with the negotiations and bring them to a successful conclusion ; it is also because we must gradually begin to identify , for each of the common policies , the objectives and instruments made necessary by the new situation of an enlarged Union with new Member States .
In the course of 2002 , but even more so in 2003 and 2004 ( and the same will apply to our successors in the years after that ) , we will have to bring about a genuine ' intellectual revolution ' .
It is our discussions , our plans and our action that will shape the greater Europe .
It is essential for the Commission to adjust to the new dimensions of Europe , but it is just as important for the other EU institutions and for the Member States of the Union to do so as well .
We must explain this new situation to our citizens to help them overcome their anxieties and make them aware of the human , cultural and economic opportunities offered by enlargement .
From an economic standpoint , enlargement is one of the few games in which all the players stand to win .
It will bring an increase in growth not only for the new Member States but also for the Fifteen .
Of course , the impact of enlargement within the Union will vary from one country to another and from one region to another .
Thanks to the single market , however , the benefits will be visible everywhere .
However , it is not enough for this greater Europe just to expand geographically to the east and the south .
It must continue on the path of gradual rapprochement with the Balkans and project an arc of stability from its own gates towards Russia and the Ukraine and towards the Mediterranean .
In preparation for the meeting in Valencia in April , the Commission will table proposals for improving the functioning of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , particularly in the fields of education and culture .
Also in the course of next year , it will propose measures for stimulating investment , improving cooperation in the field of immigration and strengthening the Union 's role in the Middle East peace process .
Enlargement is an accomplishment of historic significance .
However , it must not lead to paralysis of the Union .
This is the background against which the debate on European governance is taking place , a debate that the Commission helped to launch with its White Paper .
It is crucial that the dialogue between our two institutions on the issues raised by the White Paper and the ensuing action should continue , and the work programme for 2002 lays down the details of this .
The debate on Europe and on the future has , however , spread well beyond the confines of the White Paper and has taken on a more clearly Constitutional tone .
Moreover , right from the beginning of its mandate , this Commission has fought for renewed vigour to be injected into the institutional debate in the Union .
As early as September 1999 , addressing you here in this same Chamber , I insisted that the Intergovernmental Conference to be held in 2000 should adopt a broader agenda , above and beyond the ' Amsterdam leftovers ' .
At that time , I told you of my fears that the IGC would merely tinker with the machinery and not give us effective tools to take decisions .
After the essential but undoubtedly minimal agreement reached in Nice , the Commission , along with Parliament , immediately lent its support to the idea of a Convention , something which has now been generally agreed .
I warmly welcome this development because I am firmly convinced that this is the right path to take if we are to build the new , more democratic , more transparent Europe .
In the meantime , a wide-ranging debate on the future of the Union is already taking place in all the European countries , and that debate must be ongoing and must provide input for the work of the Convention .
The time when we could go on putting off the necessary reforms until tomorrow , as if events would always unfold slowly enough to await our decisions , is over .
A major contribution to this discussion has already been made by the Mendez de Vigo and Kaufmann report and by the plenary debate which Parliament held on the topic .
In preparation for the Laeken Council , the Commission presented a communication on 5 December .
As we explained in that document , which is intended merely to provide a few pointers for the debate , the key to the problem lies in renewing and strengthening the Community method .
Our aim should not be to interfere with the balances that have been built up over the last fifty years .
Rather , what we should be doing is modernising our system and enabling the peoples of Europe to identify with it .
What the Convention should , in my view , produce is a coherent text , underpinned by its own logic , not a mere shopping list ; a text adopted by consensus , which therefore does not seek unanimity at any price and which , to avoid scaling down its essential ambitions , voices minority views where necessary ; a simpler , more easily readable text which clearly sets out not only the principles guiding our action - and the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be at the heart of those principles - but also the goals to which we are aspiring ; a text which makes the way in which the European public authorities work more transparent , that is which gives a clear description of both the institutions and the instruments necessary for achieving the objectives they are assigned ; and lastly , a text that is capable of evolving and is therefore , to this end , a combination of a set of fundamental rules and some more technical provisions .

Before the Convention begins its work , the Commission will state its position on many issues , such as the powers of the Union and of the Member States , the strengthening of Parliament 's legislative role , the distinction between the Council 's executive and legislative functions , and the Commission 's executive tasks .
The extension of majority voting , the procedures for revising the Treaties and the Union 's own resources are other issues that also form part of the political debate and will have to be addressed in the near future .
Before leaving the subject of the forthcoming Convention , I would like to focus for a moment on an issue that is usually summed up by one word : the Constitution .
For me , what is essential is not the name eventually given to the text that grows out of the work of the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference . My objective is that that text , by virtue of its content and thanks to the open , democratic nature of the process that generated it , should ultimately be regarded by everyone as having the force of a Constitution .
I am confident that the work programme for 2002 will provide the foundation on which , over the next twelve months , our two institutions can build a relationship of close , constant , fruitful cooperation .
Thank you Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
I would like to thank you for your previous kind words and for the positive assessment you have made of the cooperation between your presidency and the European Parliament .
I think it is fair to say that we share this assessment and I would also like , in this regard , to underline to Members of this House that , to my knowledge , this is the first time that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council has participated in the debate on the Commission ' s work programme for 2002 .
This is a very positive step , and I would like to welcome you and thank you .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it is not really all that common for the political group chairmen to express praise and appreciation .
Normally , if we praise someone and express our appreciation for anyone , it is for the President of this Parliament .
We often have occasion to express our thanks and praise for her .
However , today I would like to say a word of appreciation to the Council , and to you , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , for being here today for the first time , as our President has just said .
Last time round I was critical because the Council was not represented .
If the Council pursues a good policy , even if it concerns working methods , then that deserves our appreciation .
You are a Belgian ; you represent the Belgian Presidency .
I would like to thank you very sincerely on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats not only for being here today , but also for the committed way you have worked during your presidency .
I would now like to address the President of the Commission .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have a very high regard for the President of the Commission , for his personal integrity and for his positive attitude .
However , if we want to achieve joint successes , these successes have to be based on truthfulness and on sensible working methods and structures .
Mr Prodi , you know of course that the political groups in the European Parliament prepare each part-session here in Strasbourg by means of their work in group meetings in Brussels .
Many members of my group said last week in Brussels , when we were doing our preparatory work , that the 2002 work programme was on the agenda , but where was the document that we could have used to prepare for this debate in Strasbourg ?
Many members were in favour of striking this debate from the agenda .
Mr Prodi , I have to tell you that this should not happen again , we must never again find ourselves without a working document for such an important debate .
I would ask you to ensure in future - and this is not just your task as President but rather one for the Commission as a whole , and for your staff - that documents are made available in good time and that the European Parliament is treated seriously , so that we can work in a reasonable way , which is in both our interest and yours .
( Applause )
Reasonable working methods are essential if we are to succeed here .
If we do not have reasonable working methods and structures , we do not have any chance of succeeding .
We want to work towards joint success because we are firmly convinced that the Commission and this House , as committed advocates of the Community method , need to work towards the same goals .
So if you have any colleagues who do not take Parliament so seriously , it is therefore in their own interest to consider whether working methods should not be restructured in their field .
We are not just offering you and your fellow Commissioners a hand ; we also need a sensible form of cooperation if we are to achieve joint successes .
For that reason , relations between Parliament and the Commission need to be in good order .
That is something that you want as well , but in that case the fine words that we certainly appreciate also need to be matched by specific practical action when it comes to cooperation .
A programme like the one we have before us deserves to be supported by all the Members of the Commission , and indeed we have five Members of the Commission with us today , which is more than usual , but this programme covers all areas of work in 2002 .
You yourself said that you are effectively the European government , an idea with which we in our group have a great deal of sympathy .
However , if you are effectively the European government , then the whole government should be here , with all your Members .
I would very much welcome it if that were the case next time .
Mr President of the Commission , when we are setting our agenda during the meeting of political group chairmen , we often hear that Commissioner A , B or C cannot be here in Strasbourg at such and such a time .
I really must urge you , given that we are only talking about four days each month - Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday - to ensure that all Members of the Commission keep those days free .
If Parliament asks for Commissioners to be here , then they should come , and the excuse that they have other commitments is not acceptable .
Parliament should have priority over any other commitments the Commission may have .

There are of course exceptions - I say that because I see Commissioner Lamy is with us - when there are major world conferences on the international calendar , such as the Doha Conference , which Mr Lamy and Mr Fischler of course have to attend .
We are not insisting on this point 100 % , but basically speaking Parliament must have priority over other Commission activities .
If I may now turn to the substance of the programme , Mr President of the Commission , we largely support what you have said .
We are in agreement , and for that reason we should cooperate sensibly and effectively . We now expect , like you , that next weekend in Laeken the Heads of State and Government will give the Convention an ambitious mandate so as to achieve a really positive reform of the EU institutions .
We recommend that an early start should be made on this work , at the end of February or the beginning of March , so that the Convention can be concluded at the end of 2003 under the Italian Presidency .
We also support what you have said about enlargement .
Up to 10 new countries could be included in the first round .
This is not the time to say which those countries will be .
However , we do not agree with the French Minister for Foreign Affairs when he says that we should accept all the Central European countries , as when we make a decision on this in autumn 2002 , we can only accept those countries which meet the conditions .
Those countries that do not meet the conditions cannot yet expect to join the European Union .
It is not acceptable for countries like Hungary to have to wait because other countries are not yet ready .
Those countries that do meet the conditions should not be held back because other countries are not yet ready , and we hope that the decisions made at that point will be the right ones .
We also fully support your comments about the Mediterranean region .
We need to work with great commitment under the Barcelona Process , which is becoming ever more urgent and involves an ever greater contribution to stability .
You mentioned how important stability is for us if we want to make Europe truly competitive , because it is not enough for us simply to declare that the European Union is to become the most competitive area in the world .
We also have to take the necessary structural measures , and that means in particular strengthening Europe as a location for investment .
There should not just be tax incentives for major corporations , but also for medium-sized companies , so that they too can invest , and when investments are made that leads to the creation of jobs .
I shall wind up now , Madam President .
We have an ambitious programme , we support the Commission and we call on the Commission and the Council for us all to work together , as there should not be any competition between our various institutions , because we are all committed to the same Europe , and that is why the Commission , the Council and Parliament must each fulfil their own responsibilities .
We are prepared to do so , and will support the other institutions when they do the same .
( Applause )
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her management during the Belgian Presidency and say that it truly demonstrates , in this case , that being a former Member of the European Parliament is good training for managing European affairs within a government .
I believe that this is a type of training with a future .
Having said that , Mr President of the Commission , we must resolve the disagreement between us with sincerity and frankness .
At the beginning of the legislature , my group asked the Commission to present a political programme for the purposes of the vote on its investiture , and that programme , as we said at the time , had to lead to an adjustment of the annual programme , not only in legislative terms .
What happened the other day in the Conference of Presidents , however , and what has happened again today , requires clarification .
We have not asked you not to present the legislative programme , nor after the deadline .
What we have asked is that you present a political programme , and you have produced a working programme : this is all very well , and we take note of it , but we also want a legislative programme , because we are one of the parties to codecision .
And proof that we were right lies in the fact that I was told , last night , by e-mail , that the legislative programme had arrived as an annex .
It is important that we are able to respect the deadlines and agreements we are party to and , on that basis , you can organise the work as you see fit : by means of ' planning ' , ' programming ' , ' rolling on ' , or whatever you want .
I very much fear that the number of officials filling in forms is going to increase .
But that is your problem .
You must fulfil your commitments to Parliament .
In this respect , Mr President , I must say that you must improve the department or service of your secretariat which deals with mail , because we have raised a parliamentary question on how you are going to deal with the issue of the flax fine , specifically in Spain , and four Group Chairmen , despite the fact that the Liberal Group and the PPE-DE Group have blocked this question , which should have been seen in this House , have written to you and we are awaiting a reply .
It is important - and I am happy that the Vice-President of the Commission is here - that we do not allow issues to fester .
I would therefore be grateful if you could be more diligent with regard to this issue .
These problems relating to the programme are mere child ' s play compared to the current situation .
We are on the eve of the Laeken Summit and the fundamental issue is the defence of the Community method .
And I say this because dark clouds are appearing on the horizon .
Yesterday in this House , on behalf of my group - and I am pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council is here - we strongly supported the Belgian Presidency of the Council and the Council itself with regard to an issue which we feel is very important - I believe that President Verhofstadt is in Rome today - and that is that we manage to introduce , as fifteen countries , the anti-terrorist legislation which this Parliament , the Council and the Commission have supported .
We believe that this is an important defence of the Community method .
If it is not done by 15 countries , it will be done by 14 .
We would prefer it to be 15 , but this is an issue on which we clearly support them .
We are also currently concerned about the fact , and I am referring to a point which Mr Poettering highlighted yesterday , that certain governments , of Austria and Italy , are opposed to democratic criteria appearing in the statute on political parties .
With regard to Laeken , Mr President of the Commission , the most interesting part of your speech was the final part , when you not only supported the Convention , but you gave it content , in complete agreement with the approach contained in the Leinen-Méndez de Vigo report .
In relation to the Convention , I would ask you to defend what you have said here today in the European Council in Laeken , to make a coherent proposal and that that proposal , even if it has to be cooled down and digested , is not left on the shelf .
I would like to know how that is going to be coordinated with the timetable for enlargement and the reform of the Treaties before 2004 , and what your position is with regard to the membership of the praesidium of the Convention .
Furthermore , finally , do not leave the secretariat of the Convention to the Council ; we must all participate in it , because a broader distribution always brings the best results .
And , in this respect , Mr President , I would ask you to expand on the replies you have given in relation to the Convention .
You call on Parliament and the Commission to work together - and I believe we can do great things in defence of the Community method - but it is important that you have the courage and the capacity to make use of your monopoly on initiative , which must not simply be a monopoly on operation , but which must be a means for achieving what you have proposed : texts of constitutional value and , above all , which reflect the democracy and transparency which we want in this enlarged Union .
Madam President , when we discussed this last week in the Conference of Presidents , my group - the Liberal Democrats - voted to have a debate today and not to postpone it .
I regret that my remarks today will mostly be about process rather than content , because I think that we still have not found the correct process .
I would , however , like to salute the work the Commission has done this year and to acknowledge the enormous progress in the preparation of the launch of the euro ; the very substantial progress on enlargement which we very much welcome ; the work which is being done in south-eastern Europe ; the break-through on the World Trade Organisation and the very stimulating programme on sustainable development .
All of those and the work on the common area of justice and security are to the credit of the Commission .
I very much agree with the focus of next year 's priorities which are sensible and acceptable , particularly in that we need to work closely together on promoting the Community method in building the future of Europe .
There are , however , questions in the legislative programme to which we need answers .
Why last year was only 45 % of the programme processed by this time of the year and 55 % not ?
How is it that 117 or 118 new items not foreseen were added ?
I do not mind flexibility - that is good in politics - but this seems rather more chaotic than one 's definition of flexibility .
I fully respect the Commission 's right of initiative , but I would urge that the Commission should not simply start in February with a general statement of priorities and then , in November , bring forward a specific work programme .
We need an intensive dialogue between times and some intermediate staging-posts at which to make evaluations .
We believe , Mr President of the Commission , like you , in good governance and this Parliament will commit itself to being a high quality player in terms of the input and impact on co-legislation , but that requires criteria .
We need to discuss with each other - and this is not an attempt to interfere with the right of initiative of the Commission - is the law necessary ?
Is it proportionate ?
Does it respect subsidiarity ?
Is it transparent and accountable ?
What are the options for implementation ?
Can we do some kind of regulatory impact assessment before we go down the line ?
The Commission already has a wonderful process of consultation in place with social partners .
Share this process with us as well , not because we want to interfere with your right to make the final call , but because we too are players and we cannot be left to one side or not get documents till the eve of a debate .
Our President has communicated to you a scheme that we would commend .
Our Conference of Presidents backs what she has said .
Our Committee on Constitutional Affairs backs what she has said and if we can do that , next year we will discuss politics more and process less .
We have got to get it right .
We have to do this early to avoid a repetition of this unnecessary mutual incomprehension which helps none of us to bring good governance to the European Union .
Mr President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to share my thoughts on the main topic we are discussing today : the legislative programme and the Commission ' s working programme .
Mr President of the Commission , you told us that you wanted full and transparent cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
That is all very well . You told us : ' To be strong , the European Parliament needs a strong Commission ' .
We agree . But you must understand that we cannot accept being treated as the Commission ' s obedient stooge .
We of course unreservedly acknowledge the fact that it is very important that the work programme is clearly comprehensible politically , which is the case here ; this does not , however , exempt you from presenting a legislative programme .
And yet , today we have to deal with a work programme that was sent to us at the last moment and a legislative programme of which we had no knowledge before last night .
It is difficult for us to work under such conditions .
The European Parliament is already suffering from having no right of legislative initiative , even in areas where the Commission is failing to act - which is , in my opinion , an institutional anomaly that should be corrected in order to reduce the democratic deficit .
However , Parliament does enjoy the power of active cooperation , which is recognised by the Commission .
I would remind you that , from the start of this Parliamentary term , a framework agreement exists between ourselves and the Commission , an agreement that clearly defines the role of Parliament in the legislative process .
In accordance with this agreement , the legislative programme for 2002 should have been presented to us in October , accompanied by an assessment of the previous programme ; in this way we would have been able to make criticisms , remarks and proposals at a politically appropriate time and within reasonable timescales .
I must also underline the extent to which it would be appropriate , on a political level , for political debates on the budget and the legislative programme to mutually support and complement each other .
October or November would be an appropriate time for this to take place .
Today , we are two months late and there is no legislative programme , or rather , we have only just discovered one exists .
Under these conditions , I think that Parliament is de facto deprived of its powers of control and influence , which is not a good thing .
I would also like to remind you of some concrete facts : on 30 November , just a few days ago , less than half of the programme for 2001 had been executed .
In addition to this , half of the initiatives taken were not included in the legislative programme for 2001 .
This is astonishing at the very least .
It must , of course , be admitted that the unforeseen events that took place , which completely turned the political agenda on its head , justified the tabling of proposals to take account of such upheavals , but a careful reading of the texts shows that , to a great extent , these new proposals have nothing to do with the present situation , or , in any case , could have been tabled at some other time , rather than within the context of the programme for 2001 .
In my opinion , this reveals , and I think that most Members in my group would agree , that there is quite a significant degree of disorder within the Commission and a lack of common vision of the guidelines that should direct the common work of our institutions .
The explanations that you give us to justify this , which relate to the Commission ' s internal reforms , will not satisfy us forever .
I would point out that these explanations have been given since the start of this legislature .
We cannot accept , Mr President , that the European Parliament be deprived of its powers of control , which are clearly recognised ; this situation is not good for either Parliament or for the Commission itself .
At a time when we are talking about good governance , of reconciliation with the European citizen , the most fundamental thing is that commitments made and Parliament ' s prerogatives be respected .
Madam President , I too would like to thank the Belgian Presidency , and I hope that we shall all have a really successful summit in Laeken .
Today we are debating the Commission 's work programme , and I wish to say that my group supports the general resolution by the various political groups concerning this programme .
Why ?
Because there is an interinstitutional agreement between two institutions , and I do not think this House is being unreasonable in expecting the Commission to adhere to the undertakings it has given Parliament .
Mr Prodi , in your White Paper on European Governance there is much talk about how Europe could be better governed .
However , you are not performing one of the most elementary tasks , that is to say the presentation of a legislative programme .
I heard this morning that an e-mail with an attachment arrived last night .
The text that I am familiar with so far is a work programme which as far as I can see is simply full of platitudes .
It includes announcements about comprehensive packages of measures , other measures are to be proposed , specific measures are being prepared , and so it goes on for 20 pages .
But what the Council and Parliament need to know above all , and in good time , is what legislation will actually be presented , and , first and foremost , why .
We need to know what the basis for this legislation is so that we can act in unison here .
I must not forget to point out that the national parliaments , which also have a certain role in this process , and a not inconsiderable one at that , have some problems with the whole process . This is a problem that has to be solved , Mr Prodi .
I also have a few more comments about your communication for the Laeken Summit .
I consider that it contains some extremely interesting ideas that are worth supporting .
It is true to say that limiting ourselves strictly to the four priorities identified in Nice would weaken the credibility of the Convention , in other words the list of issues to be addressed needs to be widened in order to meet the public 's expectations and to ensure that the enlarged Union will have a viable future .
However , I also have to say that with this paper too , I kept asking myself why the Commission was showing so little courage and vision in the run-up to such an important summit .
What will the public think if the Commission talks about defending a certain European ideal , as it does in the document , in such an unambitious way ?
What ideal are we talking about then ?
What is the process of deepening that we are all in favour of to be like , and why should it just relate to democracy , as the document suggests ?
I really find it rather mysterious why , with an eye to Laeken and particularly when we are envisaging convening a historic convention , we do not quite simply say , yes , our common goal is to create a truly democratic Europe . Furthermore , Mr Prodi , I expect , in view of all this , that in future the Commission will act far more energetically in its capacity as the motor of European integration .
Madam President , allow me to begin with a prediction : the present Commission will scarcely survive into 2004 .
It may be toppled by new scandals involving fraud , because the former cases of fraud have not been cleared up and because the reforms that might have prevented new cases have not been introduced .
The Commission may also be toppled by Parliament through a vote of no confidence .
I believe it is heading for the end of the road if it does not change course now .
Parliament ' s committee chairmen have asked for what are known as the screening reports on the negotiations with the applicant countries .
Parliament ' s group chairpersons have repeated the request .
Still we have not received them .
MEPs sit every day in committee meetings without the relevant and up-to-date papers from the secret legislative process .
There is solemn talk of Parliament as co-legislator , but the legislative power has , in reality , been taken over by officials and ministers in the Council and the Commission .
We are humiliated the whole time .
People who are humiliated can one day deliver a vote of no confidence to the Commission .
After the ground rules had been agreed , we should have had the Commission ' s legislative programme in October .
We have now been given an essay containing general reflections and , yesterday evening , a summary containing little detail .
However , we have still not been given a proper catalogue of laws . The Commission should present its annual programme , stating its proposed legal base for this , so that , in the case of each proposal , we can adopt a position on whether the Commission is respecting the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
That is not only a right we possess .
It is a duty imposed by the Treaty on each individual institution .
All the institutions must ensure that the EU does not adopt rules which the Member States can devise just as well or better .
We are asking for an independent discussion of the annual programme as it relates to the proximity principle , and we agree with the other groups in criticising the way in which the Commission keeps its plans secret .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that upholding the Community method has become a habit for many people and I would go as far as to say a religion for some , with its greater and lesser priests : President Delors , you , President Prodi , and Ferdinando Riccardi , who preaches his daily sermon in Agence Europe .
Yet it is a religion , ladies and gentlemen , which has lost its god , for the Community method that you are all upholding was based on the centrality of the Commission , and the Commission no longer has that pivotal status .
The Commission is no longer at the centre of our European integration , it is no longer - as it was when there were six or nine States - the driving force of European integration .
The 15-State Europe has already brought a number of institutional innovations : Mr CFSP is totally outside the Commission ' s control .
Well then , ladies and gentlemen , I would like my friend Mr Méndez de Vigo and a great many others to answer this crucial question : do you really think that countries like France and Germany , in particular , not to mention the United Kingdom , of course , will place their confidence in a 25-member Commission , working according to the principle of collegiality , and trust it to take fundamental decisions ?
That is impossible .
The Commission as it was conceived , to be the central , driving force of the Community method , is no longer , and unless we change the system of European integration radically , the Commission will be increasingly reduced to playing the role of Council secretariat .
It is , therefore , a Commission that needs to make an effort to change .
However , I feel , Chairman Poettering , that we are , so to speak , firing on the relief workers , for the problem is institutional , it is Laeken ; we need to make radical changes to the institutional system to restore the Commission ' s former power and legitimacy .
Only with the American system - with a separate Executive , with the President of the Commission being directly elected , with a scrutinising Parliament safeguarding our Constitutional framework - can we have a properly functioning Europe , a strong Commission , a strong Parliament and a strong Assembly of Member States ; otherwise , our Commission ' s role will increasingly be reduced to that of Council secretariat .
Mr President , although I agree with many of the comments that have been made today about the year 2001 having been reasonably successful , there are real grounds for concern about the way in which this debate is taking place today .
Firstly , as a matter of principle , we have the institutional agreement of 1993 , which says that the programme should be presented by October , and then our agreement of 2000 , under which we are to have a broad debate about the programme before it is implemented .
Neither of these have been fulfilled in this particular case .
Why is this totally insufficient ?
Firstly , the programme which is presented to us lacks focus .
It is somewhat difficult to see priorities when you have seven of them and , within the priorities , lots of themes which are generating new ideas .
If you have more than three priorities , as Bob Zoellick , the USTR , said , you lose yourself in detail and you can never focus on what is really important .
Secondly , we have a lack of detail .
I understand that we now have a legislative programme sent by e-mail , but Parliament has not been associated with this and it seems , as other speakers have said , that we had a legislative programme which was not implemented this year .
Mr Barón Crespo is right that we did not want it .
We wanted a political programme and legislative programme and Parliament to be associated with that .
Thirdly , there is a lack of coordination : not just coordination among ourselves but with the national parliaments .
As Mrs Kaufmann said : how is it possible to establish a programme for the European Union if not all the actors who are concerned at political level are associated with it ?
This leads me to say that we were better off with President Santer .
We were better off with the last Commission as regards the way in which the programme is presented .
At least we had a programme in its outline and there was a real effort to try to get institutional priorities , and we had a legislative programme with details , which we could see in front of us .
My conclusion today is that the Commission is there to propose .
It has the right of initiative but it is not the European government .
It cannot come to us and say this is what the European Union 's programme is going to be and expect us simply to accept everything that is in its documents .
Do you not agree , Mr President , that it would be better for the success of the European Union if we were to go back to presentation of the proposals of the legislative programme in October ?
We would then be able to discuss , debate , consult on and conclude a programme which the Union could put forward for the year ahead .
If you have all of us with you , you will be better off than if we have interinstitutional wars , which you seem to have started this morning .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , we are faced with two dilemmas here .
The first dilemma we face is that as President of the Commission you have quite rightly , and we must be fair about this , presented a political programme .
However , the political programme needs to be underpinned by the legislative programme required to implement the political objectives , and that is what is missing .
Secondly , your programme does not really address the problem that we have , in fact , implemented very little of the 2001 programme .
You did at one point suggest that Parliament and the Council were to blame , but I believe that the Commission is really responsible for this .
Thirdly , this House has , particularly this year , either rejected or substantially amended various Commission proposals .
How are you going to cope with the framework that this Parliament has set ?
Your Vice-President , Mrs Loyola de Palacio , could perhaps help you here , and particularly in the fields of the environment and of transport there are very few proposals and indications as to how " sustainability " is to be made a reality .
We all know that there is a whole raft of problems with implementation .
In your paper you do indeed refer to implementation problems .
But the Commission , too , has implementation problems .
From the time when the Commission takes decisions and makes financial commitments to the time when monies are actually paid out , it is not uncommon for not just months but whole years to go by .
That is why it is also important for the Commission to consider how it can improve its own implementation , and , of course , also how national governments can improve implementation of their legislative intentions or the legislative intentions of the European Union .
That brings me to the dilemma over the Laeken communication , a dilemma that I have personally and probably share with most of us here .
It is a good paper and its goals are good .
The only problem , Mr President of the Commission , is this : why it is so ambivalent , so tentative , and so vague ?
There is one sentence in which the Commission considers that it is opportune to examine the possibility of providing the Union with a constitutional text .
Why do you not come out and say quite plainly that you are in favour of such a text , whether you call it a constitution or a charter or whatever ?
This kind of language typifies the way in which the Commission fails to clearly express what it stands for .
I believe that at this particular moment this is especially important , as we are to have a convention .
Except that this convention will chiefly consist of Members of Parliament from the individual Member States .
We are talking here about representatives of our national governments , whereas for the Community method , which is quite rightly a matter of concern , there are Members of the European Parliament and representatives of the Commission .
If the Council - and I am addressing this comment to you , Madam President-in-Office - on top of all that decides to appoint a former prime minister , or as now seems likely , a former president , as president of the convention , rather than a former President of the Commission , then I fear that the convention will from the outset be stigmatised to some extent by the fact that the majority of its members will not be guided by the Community method , and that the majority will perhaps not be particularly interested in strengthening the Commission and the European Parliament .
Mr Prodi , I believe that at such a stage and in the present situation , the Commission document that you adopted at the end of December should have used clearer language .
You partly admitted that in your speech to us today .
It is not a question of saying we could , we ought to or we should - it is question of the Commission saying that it believes we must strengthen the Community dimension , and of the Commission saying that it believes Parliament should be strengthened as the central legislative institution of the European Union .
To that extent we are faced with a dilemma about saying that you are right .
It would be unfair to reject what you have said today .
But the dilemma we face is that in such a sensitive political situation we need a Commission and a Commission President who are willing to say in even stronger , clearer and more unambiguous terms what needs doing - namely that the European Union as a whole needs to be strengthened , and that the Community method will take Europe into the future .
Mr President , my fellow MEPs have presented a great deal of justified criticism concerning the procedures in relation to today ' s programme .
Allow me , however , to welcome the fact that a kind of evaluation from the year gone by is included and that there is more strategic thinking when it comes to the Commission ' s intended way of working .
Now let us talk about the future , however .
President Prodi outlined , of course , how it will be possible in future to deal with the issue of the annual programme .
As Parliament ' s rapporteur , I have had the opportunity to monitor this matter for quite a long time .
I hope we can conclude it soon and begin work on the programme for 2003 .
As the co-decision procedure has developed , Parliament and the Council , too , must also play a larger role in devising the annual programme .
That does not mean that the Commission ' s right of initiative is being questioned , but that all three institutions should be more in step in encouraging both openness and efficiency in our joint work .
Moreover , it would then be easier for national parliaments and citizens to follow the process .
Where the timetable is concerned , it looks as if we can now perhaps agree .
There is an introductory presentation of the general priorities , followed by thorough discussions between the Commission and the committees concerned with a view to establishing the details .
It is important for the parliamentary committees to be involved at an early stage because it is the committees which will then deal with the proposal .
We can then present the definitive proposal by no later than the beginning of November .
When it comes to the content of the programme , last year ' s criticism does not mean that we do not want any legislative proposals .
On the contrary , our common framework agreement states that what we are concerned with here is the annual legislative programme .
Parliament has demanded clear proposals in order of precedence , explanatory statements with timetables , budget references , legal bases and information about who is responsible .
Follow-up and evaluation must also be improved .
As we have seen , a very great many proposals are being re-introduced , at the same time as other proposals are disappearing .
It should be possible to set up a joint database to monitor the decision-making process for each topic .
A process which is clear , open and predictable should benefit all the institutions and also the citizens we are here to serve .
It is our joint responsibility to ensure that this happens .
Mr President , the Commission ' s communication to the Laeken European Council , with regard to the organisation of the debate prior to the IGC , seems to us to be mistaken in both its objective and method .
With regard to the objective , it states that we must , and I quote , ' draw up credible guidelines in order that an enlarged Europe can achieve political , economic and social integration ' .
And yet , if the different peoples of Europe really do want common cooperation and work at a European level , none of them has , to my knowledge , ever asked for this extreme type of integration , that is to say political , economic and social unification , by means of a democratic consultation .
The objective today is not to strengthen this ' integration-unification ' , headed by supranational institutions , which we do not want , but to better organise and make more effective the nations ' control over Brussels .
Under these conditions , the Community method , useful on occasions , should not become the rule , for it is too supranational , too rigid , and removes the Union from the reality of its citizens .
It should be provided with procedures which are more flexible , founded on respect for national democracies .
This is why the forthcoming Convention should mainly rely upon national parliaments , which should work within networks .
And to start with , it is these national parliaments which should have the task of organising the debate with their citizens and to put forward proposals without having to pass through an artificial forum of associations , which are European in name but not at all representative .
Mr President , in my opinion , the priorities of the Commission ' s working programme for 2002 must focus on the European Union ' s immediate challenges , both in the internal field ( the internal market and Economic and Monetary Union ) , and in the external field - especially following the attacks of 11 September - including , of course , the fight against terrorism .
These challenges are very clear - how to revitalise our economies just a few weeks before the introduction of the single currency , how to take advantage of the challenges and opportunities offered by accession , with 13 countries seeking entry to the Union and , at the same time , how to reinvent Europe in a situation and at a moment when we are about to begin the work of a convention aimed at preparing a new Intergovernmental Conference , the objective of which must be to prevent the ' Old Continent ' becoming an outdated continent .
This Commission ' s working programme for 2002 is accompanied by a communication on the Community method .
I believe that that is an absolutely fundamental issue and we would be making a grave error if were to devote ourselves entirely to incidental issues and allow what is really crucial at the moment to stagnate .
Next year there will be elections in several countries of the European Union and we need an institution which not only cares for the coming generations , but which takes account of their concerns and challenges .
And that institution must be the European Commission , Mr President .
This is not the time to analyse the decimal points presented to us by financial analysts .
This is a time for considering the broader picture and I believe , Mr President , that it would be a serious mistake for this Parliament to exaggerate the errors which may be made by the European Commission .
I want to say this , Mr President , because it is in the interest of Parliament and the Community as a whole to have a strong Commission .
It therefore seems to me that , before preaching about how to sort out the world ' s problems , we should take a good look at our own institution and respect the work and decisions taken in the field of our parliamentary bodies .
I say this in relation to something Mr Barón mentioned - I regret that he is not present at the moment - and frankly I do not believe that we should take advantage of this debate to introduce extemporaneous issues which are not currently amongst our concerns or relevant to this debate .
I also believe , Mr President , that it would be a serious mistake for the Commission not to direct all its efforts towards restoring that alliance , that harmonious partnership between Parliament and the Commission , which has led to all the progress made within the Community .
Mr President , I hope that , by means of this working programme , the disagreements of the past may be transformed into the agreements of the present and I hope that that method will prevail in the work between the Commission and Parliament .
Anything else would be to confuse what is incidental with what is fundamental .
We should mobilise all our forces in order to consolidate , as I have said , this strategic alliance .
President Prodi stated that he was attached to interinstitutional cooperation and full transparency .
I , of course , welcome such a statement : it is essential for this process to work .
But you have to start by respecting the procedures that are agreed already , that are known and that are laid down in writing .
I have here the Framework Agreement between Parliament and the Commission agreed just two years ago .
I also have Rule 57 of our Rules of Procedure which lays down how we deal with the annual legislative programme and reflects the agreements that have been entered into in the past with the Commission .
That rule states that the Commission shall present its Annual Legislative Programme in October .
Of course , we know that there can be delays , that has happened before .
But it specifies that this Annual Legislative Programme must refer to all proposals of a legislative nature and every act included in the programme must indicate the legal basis and the timetable envisaged for its adoption .
On these points , what we have had before us this week fails to respect our Rules of Procedure and existing agreements reached between the two institutions .
The one positive innovation is that Rule 57 ( 6 ) has for the first time been implemented with the statement made by the President-in-Office which I like others welcome .
In fact we have a work programme , a work programme - not a legislative programme - outlining priorities .
To outline priorities is fine and the priorities chosen are good ones - perhaps obvious ones , but nevertheless the right ones .
But we need the detail , we need the detail that is required in our Rules of Procedure and in the Framework Agreement .
We need it for our committees to be able to get to work and plan their work and appoint rapporteurs who can work with the Commission in the pre-legislative phase .
It is in the Commission 's interest as well as in our own interest .
I understand that we are now receiving the detail by e-mail , but even that , as far as I can see , fails to mention the legal basis and the timetable of each proposal .
General debates are all very well on broad priorities , but we have that several times a year when the Commission presents its programme , when each Presidency presents its programme , and we tend to have that sort of debate surrounding each European Council meeting as well .
What we are supposed to get there is the nitty-gritty detail as well .
President Prodi is right to say that the procedure needs improving , but we have a procedure to negotiate such improvements , the Malmström report in our committee for example .
Mrs Malmström is already in dialogue with the Commission on that and , frankly , we should have waited for the outcome of that before changing procedure .
The President of the Commission cannot unilaterally take existing agreements and tear them up .
New procedures must be agreed by both institutions .
Mr President , Mrs Neyts-Uttebroeck , ladies and gentlemen , this has , I feel , been a useful debate which has served to make things clearer .
A number of extremely clear messages have emerged which the Commission will take into account , for we have the same objectives and there is a harmonious alliance between Parliament and the Commission .
There may have been times when our instruments were slightly out of tune , but we have worked extremely well together .
I have several things to say on this point .
I assure you that the Commission has been concentrating explicitly on cooperation with Parliament , and I feel , moreover , that a Commission President has never been present at so many plenary sessions or attended all the committee meetings and meetings of committee chairmen to which he is invited .
Each Commissioner stands before the relevant Parliamentary committee on average seven times a year to discuss political issues relating to his or her responsibilities , to his or her portfolio ; 80 % of subjects are dealt with in plenary by the committee responsible ; a record-breaking number of confidential documents has been sent to Parliament ; each year , to date , we answer over 3 000 questions from Members of Parliament and dealt with 200 petitions referred to us by the Ombudsman .
We are therefore genuinely making an enormous effort to respect our commitment to maintaining a responsible relationship with Parliament .
Of course , there are problems and areas that need improvement , and it is precisely in order to remedy these that we have reformed our way of working .
Today , I hear people saying , and I know what they mean , that we need more than the political programme ; establishing the political programme was a step forwards but it is not enough , for it must go hand in hand with the legislative programme .
We are finding it difficult to achieve this , and when we realised that this is what is required , we immediately took steps to establish the legislative programme , albeit with a slight delay .
However , we are aware that the driving force of our relationship with Parliament is the political programme , for it is on the political programme that we must work together .
People are saying we must not start in February and conclude in November and then let the relationship fall by the wayside .
I fully agree with this sentiment .
What I would ask , however , is that we be informed of dates for meetings with the committee chairmen a long time in advance ; indeed , I assure you that on the few occasions when we were unable to meet , it was because we already had absolutely unbreakable commitments .
However , if we establish the schedule together , I am sure we will be able to achieve our aims .
Moving on from the subject of cooperation , I would now like to focus very briefly on the issue of the role of the Commission and of the forthcoming Convention , starting with something which may not appear to be a key point but which I consider to be extremely important , namely that we need to work alongside the Council as regards the Convention ' s secretariat .
It will be an extremely important time .
Of course , the Convention will not take any decisions itself , but it is such an innovative way of working and the fact that it is going to work transparently before our entire continent , before the entire people of Europe , is so significant that it will ultimately acquire huge importance .
I would like to make a further point in this regard as well , the view has been put forward on a number of different occasions that the Commission should be stronger .
I , too , am of this opinion , but I would like to look at what we have achieved , although our achievements are sometimes understated and difficult to understand , so to speak .
In my opinion , it is the results that count .
The Convention did not just appear out of nowhere , it was not presented to us on a plate ; the Convention was a working relationship between Parliament and the Commission immediately after Nice , at a time when both institutions were in the deepest despair .
It is precisely this work , carried out together , which enabled us to rise again towards the goal which we had lost all hope of achieving .
We must acknowledge the substantial help we received from the Belgian Presidency , which really took the project to heart , but it was the Parliament-Commission cooperation which won for us the chance - and I would stress , this is a chance which has never before been available in European history - to reform the institutions by means of a broad , open debate with no time pressure , so that all the European citizens can listen to us and understand what we are talking about .
When the European citizens realise that this debate is the debate on the efficient running of the institutions , on unanimous voting or the different vetoes , the debate on the need to proceed with all speed in the interests of serving Europe itself , well , then the significance of this debate will be understood and , indeed , become crystal clear .
Our problem was that the decisions were being taken in fora and by bodies whose significance was not understood .
Well then , this is the strength of the Commission and the strength of Parliament - patience , and also never losing sight of our primary objectives .

To Mr Swoboda , whose comments were extremely constructive , I would point out that , in terms of the debate we conducted on the basic text , our proposal dates from January 2001 - that is when we made every effort to ensure that the text could , slowly but surely , become the focal point of all our work .
2001 has been a year in which we have redefined the boundaries of our work and outlined the strategy .
Certainly , there is a great deal at stake , for our whole future , our entire future , hangs upon the Convention , but we have , at last , taken this debate to the appropriate forum where the citizens will be able to listen to us .
Finally , on a lighter note , with regard to institutional reform , I would like to inform Mr Barón Crespo and the other four group chairmen that I replied to their letters on 5 December and that my response bears the reference number 850511 .
I therefore feel we need to reform the postal services , although whether those responsible for collecting the mail or those responsible for delivering it , I am not sure .
In any case , for my part , I duly replied to the letter , as is my custom .
The debate is closed .
WTO meeting in Qatar
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the WTO meeting in Qatar .
Honourable Members of Parliament , as you know , the fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation took place at Doha in Qatar one month ago .
This meeting can be considered a success for the world community , and certainly for the European Union .
It was not an easy task , for the European Union left for Doha with an ambitious , broad agenda .
Some of you witnessed the progress of the negotiations in situ .
As President-in-Office of the Council , I exchanged ideas on several occasions with MEPs who moreover - and that was very practical -had their meeting room immediately adjoining that of the presidency .
I assume that everyone who was there undoubtedly sensed the great scepticism displayed initially by many WTO members with regard to the EU ' s broad agenda .
On 19 November , the General Affairs Council has been congratulated on the results obtained at Doha , and on the excellent work carried out by our negotiators , Commissioners Pascal Lamy and Franz Fischler , and their colleagues .
It is thanks to this work , as well as the cohesion and solidarity shown by the Union through these negotiators , that they were able , in spite of the fact that the situation of the European Union within the WTO was not favourable at the start of the process , to get things back on an even keel and obtain much better results than we might have hoped for .
The Union , which at all times remained a major player in the conference , was finally able to achieve the main objective it had set itself , of launching a new round of multilateral trade negotiations focusing on trade liberalisation , the strengthening of regulations and the acknowledgement of development needs .
In fact , the development dimension is the main thread of what we now call the ' Doha development agenda ' .
This is the name , in fact , that has been given to all of the texts adopted .
The work programme adopted in view of the multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of the ministerial declaration includes a package of important implementation measures and takes up those unresolved implementation issues that aim more or less for a re-balancing or an amendment of existing agreements within the context of the negotiation agenda relating to single undertakings .
In addition to this , all chapters in the agenda are focused on specific measures to assist developing countries , with regard , for example , to the access of their products to markets , to their special or differential treatment , technical assistance or capacity building .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot over-emphasise the importance of this fifth ministerial conference for the development dimension .
It should take place before the end of 2003 and will be a key point in the negotiations .
We will need , in fact , to make decisions with regard to further negotiations , notably with regard to investments and competition , issues that will have been studied during the first phase .
It is obvious that this will be , for developing countries as well as for others , a very important time for assessment .
Furthermore , the Union should be particularly pleased with the approval of the derogation with regard to the partnership agreement between the European Community and the ACP countries .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioners , the European Union has made a considerable effort in the field of access to medicines .
It has managed to bring initially very diverse opinions closer together and has contributed greatly to the final text which was met by approval by all parties .
Indeed , the statement about TRIPS and public health has given the developing countries the desired assurance that the TRIPS Agreement is indeed offering flexibility , even without amending that Agreement .
Even NGOs have received the Agreement favourably .
As for further legislation , an important step has been made in order to develop the environmental dimension of world trade .
The European Union managed to ensure that negotiations on the environment start without delay , and that the link between the WTO rules and the trade rules of the multi-lateral environment agreements which form part of them becomes more transparent .
This is a very important breakthrough .
Furthermore , the negotiation agenda offers scope for expanding the environmental themes during the Fifth Ministerial Conference .
However , as is always the case in negotiations , not everything went according to plan , of course .
For example , it appeared impossible , despite efforts , to alter the developing countries ' resistance to the introduction of basic labour standards in the trade negotiations .
It appeared impossible to make a reference in the ministerial statement to the development of a permanent forum between the ILO and other international organisations , including the WTO .
However , the European Union did manage to have the phrase scrapped which would have restricted the dialogue about basic labour standards to the ILO , and that enables us to continue our quest for a permanent forum .
Moreover , at the suggestion of the presidency , a statement was added in the shape of this phrase to the conclusions of the General Affairs Council of 14 November in Doha , Qatar , in which the Council and the Commission confirm this objective .
The principle of future negotiations was also laid down for the so-called Singapore themes which form part of the priorities of European industry and which concern investments , competition , trade facilitation and transparency regarding government contracts .
These will be initiated following the Fifth Ministerial Conference on the basis of explicit consensus with regard to its modalities .
There is also reason for satisfaction in the field of agriculture .
The negotiations will aim to further improve market access and dismantle the different types of trade-distorting aid .
In addition to the pure trade aspects , serious consideration will also be given to non-trade concerns .
Some of you have followed the export subsidies saga from very close range .
You know the outcome , but let me assure you that it was nevertheless a difficult journey , and that for a long time it looked like the Commissioners would not succeed in reaching a sound agreement .
But they did anyway , and they deserve all our congratulations on that score .
( FR ) Finally , a last word on transparency .
The organisation of internal works at Doha was exemplary .
The alternation between plenary sessions , on the one hand , and issue groups , on the other , ensured the necessary combination of transparency and efficiency .
During the plenary sessions , the delegations had the opportunity to express their opinions and to listen to the positions of others , as well as listening to the assessments , I quote , of the President ' s friends .
These individuals chaired the issue groups , whose objective was to facilitate bilateral and multilateral discussions between WTO members , to harmonise positions and to draw up written agreements .
It should be noted that none of the President ' s friends were citizens of the European Union or the United States , and that these two regions were not represented at the time further balances in the text were drawn up .
I am underlining this because , all too often , there is the tendency to believe that everything that happens at the WTO is a result of constant collusion between the United States and the European Union , and that other countries do not have a say , so this is proof that this is not the case .
Therefore , our respective representatives read the texts at the same time as all the other delegations .
Several delegations from developing countries showed their appreciation and satisfaction with the working method used during their closing speeches .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that today we can safely say that we have put the failure of Seattle firmly behind us .
The credibility of the WTO has been restored .
Furthermore , in the current international context , the success of the conference is a positive sign of international solidarity and confidence in the positive development of the world economy .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission feels that the ministerial meeting in Doha ended in success - success in terms of the objectives that had been defined for the Union , success also in terms of the interests pursued by the developing countries and success , lastly , in terms of the needs of the global economy and the multilateral trade system .
We came back from Doha with a WTO that was both stronger and more balanced , which was the key objective of the mandate that the Council and your Parliament had given to the negotiators .
So the results very largely lived up to many of the concerns you had expressed in this Chamber , in particular in your two resolutions of 25 October .
I will try , in a few words , to show you how they lived up to these concerns , in the light of the Union ' s three key objectives : integration of the developing countries , better governance of globalisation and better access to the market for all .
Let us begin with the first objective , integrating the developing countries in the global economy .
That objective is fully and constantly present in every part of the negotiating programme we adopted in Doha .
From the point of view of development policy , we have made progress on the four aspects of trade policy that are crucial to development - better access for the developing countries to our markets , better domestic policies , in particular with regard to the investment , competition and public procurement aspects of our work programme ; a stronger role for the developing countries in the multilateral negotiation process and , lastly , boosting these countries ' capacity to derive benefit from the liberalisation of trade .

One point I want to emphasise is the negotiation process .
As the President-in-Office of the Council just pointed out - and I agree with her 100 % - the working method in Doha was more transparent , which did indeed enable the developing countries , some of whom , as you may remember , had left Seattle frustrated , others furious , to play their full part in the decision-making mechanisms .
That is an important new development .
As for technical assistance for the developing countries , the Commission , together with the Council and , at the appropriate time , Parliament , will have to rethink the way the Union both when it is acting as such and when it is acting through the Member States , is handling the technical assistance programmes for the developing countries in the field of trade .
Turning to a subject close your hearts , namely the special situation of the least-developed countries , let us remember what was achieved at the third United Nations conference for the least-developed countries in Brussels , which has now been incorporated in the WTO ' s work programme .
That , too , is good news .
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck referred to the declaration on intellectual property rights and health , which , I believe , is fairly typical of what we have achieved , given that the Union made the rather difficult but , in the end , positive decision to try to strike a balance between the United States ' concerns on the one side and the concerns of third countries on the other .
That is a specific case in which we acted as intermediaries and basically each side saw the other ' s point of view , which finally proved the right approach to take .
The EU ' s second goal is to improve the governance of globalisation .
You know what the Commission ' s views are on this .
Today we face a deficit of multilateral rules , which calls into question the equality between economic players , the transparency of transactions and the preservation of certain social values . This has given rise to fear or concern in some quarters .
Markets have become globalised more rapidly than institutions and regulatory instruments .
This is true in the economic field as in the social and environmental field .
As I said , you know our views in this area ; we need to establish coherence between all the aspects of the multilateral system and we need more constant , clear and definite relations between its various pillars .
The WTO is one of those pillars .
It is not the only one and it cannot support the entire weight of this coherence by itself .
In this regard and , once again , in line with our mandate , Doha represents a considerable step forward .
In terms of regulating the markets , global rules on investment , on competition , on public procurement and on trade facilitation now form part of the work programme .
Regarding the environment , Doha will help establish greater international coherence by providing for negotiations to clarify the status of the multilateral agreements on the environment in the context of the WTO .
As you know , the Union had to struggle hard to obtain this decision .
I believe it was right to do so because this is a first step towards establishing greater coherence between the various pillars of international governance , in this case between the trade and environment pillars .
In the event of inconsistency or potential conflict , we did not want this pillar to continue depending entirely on the WTO instrument for settling disputes , whatever the virtues of that instrument .
With regard to one aspect of the international governance issues , we did not hide our disappointment at the outcome of the negotiations , although we accepted it .
I am referring to the social issues .
We did not achieve general agreement on forging the kind of clear link we had hoped to see between the International Labour Organisation and other organisations , including the WTO .
We regret that .
The developing countries were politically opposed to this idea and we could not overcome their opposition .
That is not a reason for giving up .
On the contrary , I believe we have to draw on every available multilateral means of putting this idea forward , because it represents the Union ' s view and formed part of our mandate , especially as regards strengthening the multilateral aspect of the World Trade Organisation .
Having failed to succeed in relation to this multilateral aspect , we will be developing the other aspects of Community policy , as we have now begun to do , in particular the bilateral and the unilateral parts .
From that point of view , the agreement we reached yesterday in the Council , by a qualified majority , on renewing the system of generalised preferences - an agreement that quite considerably strengthens the social conditions on which trade preferences depend - is good news .
It shows all those who believe this point is important that if we do not manage to make progress on every front , or at least on the unilateral front , this agreement on the part of the Council , with the assent of your Parliament , which had supported and upheld this position , and with the agreement of the Economic and Social Committee , marked a major step forward yesterday .
On the question of the way the WTO operates , your Parliament had expressed certain concerns .
Here we have one piece of good news , namely that Doha was indeed more open and that thanks to the rather clever variable system of plenary meetings , restricted meetings and regional participation , the African continent , for instance , was able to play a very good part in the decision-making .
The not so good news is that for the time being no decision has been reached during this negotiating round on reforming the World Trade Organisation itself .
To tell the truth , nobody was in favour of this reform , given the inevitable risk of deadlock .
I think the question has simply been postponed and that it will come up again before the round we launched in Doha is concluded .
On the specific question of relations with the national parliaments or your Parliament , the proposal to incorporate a reference to closer association between Member State parliaments was not accepted .
This was because of pressure by a number of developing countries that were not really in favour of the idea and because of the American position , which could be described as reluctant , to say the least .
In any case , there were not enough representatives of the American parliamentary authorities to deal with this question seriously .
So that is where we stand at the moment .
In fact , the Commission and Parliament have already been working in the spirit of transparency , information and consultation that we had hoped to promote within the WTO .
I believe we are doing so to the satisfaction of those of you who are interested in these matters and I fully intend to continue along these lines .
Our final objective is the pursuit of liberalisation of trade as such : to liberate trade in goods , services and investments , to contribute to global growth and , therefore , to reducing poverty , provided we make progress with the rules on the fair distribution of trade benefits .
In this respect , the results are entirely in line with what we had hoped .
In regard to abolishing customs duties on goods , for instance , we are clearly targeting tariff levels .
This applies to the liberalisation of services - the timetable has been decided and the negotiations should open up considerable opportunities to EU companies .
As you know , and those of you who were in Doha made sure of this , your concerns about consumer protection , health , education , public service and cultural diversity were taken into consideration .
The negotiating programme adopted in Doha certainly does not commit us to go beyond the limits that were set both by the Council and by Parliament in this area .
My final point concerns agriculture .
I will now hand over to Franz Fischler who can tell you a little more about this subject .
Here too , however , I believe we achieved our main objective , which was to ensure that the Union remained capable of taking forward the common agricultural policy at a rate that is and will be decided by the EU institutions .
To conclude , in my capacity as , shall we say , principal negotiator , let me tell you that one of the keys to success in this business was our work with the Belgian Presidency and , via the Belgian Presidency , with the Member States , whose presence is not always entirely convenient in such circumstances , and with those of you who were there at the meeting .
I have said it in public . I think it is perfectly acceptable for me to say it to you in a definitive manner .
( Applause )
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in order to convey a realistic impression of what the Doha agreement means for agriculture , I would like to very briefly touch upon the individual points of the Doha declaration .
The first part of the declaration concerns the general objective of agricultural negotiations within the framework of the WTO , that is to say the creation of a fair and market-oriented trading system .
At the same time it also acknowledges the work that has been done since the beginning of 2000 under the ' Article 20 negotiations ' .
The next section deals with the traditional three pillars of trade : market access , exports , and competition and domestic support measures .
In the case of market access , the text settled on was " comprehensive negotiations aimed at substantial improvements in market access " .
This reflects the conclusions of the Agriculture Council on 27 September 1999 , in which the importance of further liberalisation of agricultural trade as a contribution towards sustainable economic growth was recognised .
The term ' comprehensive negotiations ' means that all agricultural products can be covered by the negotiations , and also that all issues should be covered .
In this connection we also made it clear that geographical information should also be included here .
With regard to export subsidies , the declaration talks about reductions in all forms of export subsidies , in other words exactly what this House called for in its resolution in October .
It is also stated that the negotiations should aim to phase out all forms of export subsidies completely .
However , the text also clearly indicates that none of the statements on the three pillars should anticipate the outcome of the negotiations .
There is therefore at present no commitment to negotiate the total elimination of export subsidies during this round .
However , we also know that there is a broad coalition against continuing export subsidies .
The Cairns Group , the USA and the 77 Group of developing countries all spoke out against continuing export subsidies .
As regards domestic support , the text refers to substantial reductions in competition-distorting domestic support .
This is also in line with your own resolution , which called for the rejection of competition-distorting measures , and it corresponds to our own mandate , which commits us to negotiate on domestic support while retaining the concept of the blue box and green box .
We consciously chose the word ' concept ' to indicate that we are perfectly willing to negotiate on the details of the blue box and the green box .
The extent of distortion of competition will be a key element of all discussions relating to domestic support .
Another important point is the special and differential treatment of the developing countries .
I know that one of your own priorities is to integrate the developing countries in international trade .
The wording of the Doha declaration is in accordance with this objective and it also matches the Council mandate of 1999 .
Lastly , the text deals with non-trade concerns .
The proposals that the WTO Member States put forward in Geneva in this area are specifically recognised .
As you know , the European Union too presented a raft of proposals on the most important non-trade concerns , such as the environment , the development of rural regions , food security , consumer affairs , labelling and animal protection .
By specifically recognising non-trade concerns , the Doha declaration allows us to pursue these objectives further in forthcoming negotiations .
The last section contains the timetable for agreeing on methodology , 31 March 2003 , and the deadlines for presenting the comprehensive drafts .
This is to take place before the next WTO ministerial conference , so that agreement on agriculture can be reached at the same time as the overall package , by 1 January 2005 .
Apart from the purely agricultural part of the text , I would also like to point out that the section on the TRIPS Agreement also deals with the issue of geographical information .
This will enable us to pursue our objectives in the negotiations on geographical information and in the agricultural negotiations , and also in the TRIPS negotiations .
Finally , in parallel to the decision on the start of the Doha development round , agreement was also reach on the ACP waiver , which allows us to conclude the solution negotiated with the USA and Ecuador to bring an end to the banana war .
This means that the proposal the Commission has already put forward can be accepted , as soon as you here in the European Parliament have adopted your position on this , which I hope will happen in the course of this week .
I would like to conclude with the comment that the satisfactory outcome of the Doha Conference does not necessarily mean that the forthcoming agricultural negotiations will now be straightforward .
The objectives of the other major WTO members are in some cases very different indeed from our own , but we will do our utmost to secure the European agricultural model and at the same time to negotiate a fair and more market-oriented trading system for agricultural products .
Things will very much depend on our continuing success in achieving a common approach on the part of the Member States , and your support will assist us in this respect .
Another thing that will help us is continuation of the excellent cooperation that we have had with the Council and also within the Commission on this issue .
We are going to have to interrupt this debate .
I propose to try to finish the list of political group speakers and then break .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Members of the Commission , the launch of the new , comprehensive , three-year round of talks at the Doha Summit is a very positive signal for both the World Trade Organisation and the present world economic situation .
The Doha development programme , which includes the liberalisation of trade as well as elements of new rules , stressed the commitment of the developed countries to capacity building in respect of the less developed countries and to helping them implement already existing WTO rules .
I am firmly of the opinion that the small but boisterous anti-globalisation groups have now had a clear response from the less developed countries represented at Doha .
We want to be involved in liberalising world trade and clarifying its rules , as that is also in the interest of the less developed countries .
Every country had the opportunity to torpedo any collective decision - nobody did so , however .
The presence of China and Taiwan at the WTO was also a significant milestone .
We must hope that Russia will be able to clarify its own internal structures in such a way as to allow her also to take part .
The Union ' s own goals at Doha at least were successfully achieved .
Commissioners Lamy and Fischler deserve our thanks for succeeding in seeing through to the end some tough negotiations that lasted a good number of days .
Furthermore , the Council ' s internal cohesion remained firm the whole time , something that was obviously necessary for the Union to be able to approve the outcome of the talks .
In addition to being involved in the negotiations process itself , Commissioners Lamy and Fischler , together with Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck also , kept us Members of Parliament , who were following the events , well aware the whole time of where things were going .
Sustainable development and the inclusion of environmental considerations in trade policy decisions were agreed to be an all-embracing objective in future talks , something that is certainly of crucial importance to us , the countries in the Union .
As talks on the trade in agricultural products are also to be conducted in accordance with a comprehensive agenda but without any predetermined conclusion having been reached concerning forms of subsidy and timetables , this difficult matter , too , can now be negotiated peaceably whilst the Union ' s common agricultural policy is being reformed .
Our parliamentary group , which held talks with several delegations that were present at Doha , thought it regrettable that the US Congress did not send their representatives there .
As we continue our efforts to develop WTO transparency and parliamentary monitoring of ministerial conferences , the presence of the US Congress is essential .
It is also realistic to state that we will only be able to move forward in this matter with the approval of governments .
Hopefully , Germany , as we unofficially heard at Doha , will before very long take the matter up formally in the WTO bodies .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , the WTO meeting in Qatar was a landmark achievement , especially for all those who realise that globalisation is one of the twenty-first century ' s greatest challenges and that it is a challenge to bring it under democratic and political control .
In the view of my group , globalisation desperately needs worldwide rules and global institutions .
This means that globalisation can also be at the service of people , and not the other way round .
As Commissioner Lamy said , Seattle two years ago failed on all kinds of fronts .
It was not transparent , the groups were imbalanced and participation was not well organised .
There was also a great deal of fear that , due to this failure , a number of matters which affect all of us greatly , including development , the right to adopt one ' s own domestic policy , workers ' rights , and the environment , would suffer badly as a result .
It is actually a real achievement for us to have witnessed true change in Qatar after those two years .
It constitutes a first step towards a new WTO , in a fight to equip globalisation with rules which are at the service of human values .
My group is therefore delighted with the outcome of this Fourth Ministerial Conference .
Not because we are pleased with all the aspects , far from it .
We shall continue to apply pressure and a whole host of things are still missing , but in essence , we made a significant step forward .
This fresh step is certainly also of importance in the removal of inequalities between North and South .
This is one of the most important things in the globalisation phenomenon as a whole .
It is certainly striking to note what we have achieved on the WTO agenda , both in the way in which all kinds of developing countries took part jointly in the debate in a well-organised manner , and with regard to the agenda itself .
We wanted a development round , and at least we can now say that there is a development agenda .
And needless to say , it will be specific results which will soon be at issue .
In this respect , the TRIPS account and public health care are of huge importance .
It has been recognised that when it really matters , public health care and the need for the same sometimes transcend intellectual property rights , and that allowance is made for this within intellectual property rules .
It is clear that this requires further elucidation , but what is important is what happened there at political level .
The recognition as such will persuade many to join a modern and new worldwide WTO .
Needless to say , the agreements involving the waiver for the Cotonou Agreement of the ACP and EU countries are of crucial importance , for this has helped us bring about an enormous breakthrough in our relations with the ACP countries , a breakthrough which we might not have had otherwise .
In the field of environment and trade , we managed to put a number of items on the agenda of which we feared right up to the last minute that they would not make it .
This is an enormous leap forward , a taboo has been shattered . It should not become green protectionism , but it is of the utmost importance for us that we have managed to bring it about .
According to our group , it is a sad state of affairs that we have not actually made any real headway on the score of democracy and transparency , as already stated by Commissioner Lamy too , and on the score of workers ' rights .
We may have prevented certain things from reverting back to the old ways , but we have a desperate need for more success in this area .

Allow me to conclude by saying that our group has greatly valued cooperation with Commissioners Lamy and Fischler , as well as the President-in-Office , and that the Commissioner ' s statement that this House must ultimately approve the Doha results , places us in a fully-fledged , grown-up democracy and a fully-fledged democratic role .
We greatly appreciate this , and we rely on a very fruitful campaign in the years to come .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I would also like to extend our thanks and congratulations to the Council and Commission , especially to Commissioner Lamy .
In our view , without the effective work of the Commissioner and the Council , in cooperation with Parliament , the new round would never have been proposed , let alone launched , and for that we are grateful .
It seems to us that the summit at Doha represented the coming together of two themes or two trends within the WTO .
The first theme is the first concerted attempt to accommodate the needs and legitimate complaints of developing countries .
We have referred already to the TRIPS Agreement , the text on implementation , US movement on anti-dumping , a chink of light in the European position on agriculture - these to us are very significant developments .
The second theme or trend is that the talks extended well beyond traditional market access preoccupations and moved towards the development of new rules , competition , investment and , above all , the environment .
That again seems to us to be a very welcome development and we are very pleased to see that a balance seems to have been struck - a sensible and workable balance between the needs of developing countries and the need to develop new rules within the World Trade Organisation .
Some have suggested - I think my Green friends and other critics of the WTO - that somehow these two things are incompatible with each other and that developing new rules on the WTO is anathema to the interests of the developing countries .
We found it particularly bizarre that Green Members of this House and Green campaigners rejected talks on the environment within the WTO , in the name of the developing countries .
To us , there is no trade-off between sustainable multilateral environmental disciplines and multilateral attempts at poverty alleviation .
Now is the time for delivery .
Some of the news over the last few days is a little mixed , particularly from the United States , over the concessions which were extracted from the Administration in the fast-track debate and the debate on trade and steel in Washington .
We must keep the pressure up to make sure that the momentum that was established in Doha is maintained in the years ahead and we will certainly strive to do so .
Mr President , it is no secret that the Green / EFA Group does not share the majority view of Parliament over the outcome of the Doha meeting .
For us , with a few exceptions , it was not a success .
It was an unedifying example of the richer countries bullying the poorer ones and has prompted many to assert that the so-called victory in Doha was a failure for democracy .
While it is certainly true the developing countries asserted themselves in a much stronger way than ever before - and that is to be commended - it is also true that the outcome from Doha falls far short of the development round which was promised us .
That is not only the view of the Green / EFA Group , but also of the vast majority of NGOs from both north and south , and of many of the southern representatives there as well .
Let me remind you of some of the interventions in the Doha plenary debate .
The Indian Minister of Commerce , Mr Murasoli Muran , said that the only conclusion that could be drawn is that developing countries have little say in the agenda-setting of the WTO ; it appears that the whole process was a mere formality and we are being coerced against our will .
Let me remind you of what Jamaica said .
Ambassador Mr Randsford Smith said that we regret that the draft texts presented to this ministerial conference , as at the outcome of the Geneva preparatory process , do not sufficiently reflect or capture the position and proposals of developing countries .
I could give you many more similar quotations .
Let us have a look in a bit more detail at what they really mean .
There was only a very brief acknowledgement of the need to review implementation issues : that was a key agenda issue for the developing countries going into Doha .
The language on the phasing out of agricultural exports subsidies has been substantially watered down , due to EU objections .
As a result , farmers in the south will continue to have their livelihoods devastated .
As Tanzania 's Trade Minister , Mr Iddi Simba , said , the wrong policy on agriculture might lose elections in France , but it loses lives in Africa .
There is no commitment to an early phase-out of textiles and garment quotas because of strong resistance from the United States .
Demands for development linked to the promotion of food security , which is being promoted by many developing countries , were completely ignored .
Commissioner Lamy , I do not expect you to agree with this analysis , but at the very least you should acknowledge the very real anger and frustration of the developing countries throughout the conference and pledge that in the negotiations that are now beginning their interests will genuinely be at the forefront of our priorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , good work was done in Doha .
I believe we have three good reasons to appreciate the results .
The first is the real involvement of the southern countries and the evidence that multilateralism is effectively beginning to happen .
Before Doha we did not have a pre-negotiated agenda ; after Doha we have to deal with a whole range of claims put forward by the southern countries .
As a result , the WTO , still fragile but better recognised , is therefore strengthened .
Of course this is not yet the kind of democratisation the NGOs and European parliamentarians had hoped to see , but there has clearly been progress and Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck is right to emphasise the transparency and improved method seen in Doha .
Unlike Caroline Lucas , I was not aware of general anger or frustration ; on the contrary , I noted a sense of relief all round because this method enabled us to finally reach some degree of consensus .
Let me add , and I was surprised that this was not mentioned in the opening statements , that we are committed to negotiating the reform of the instrument for settling disputes .
Secondly , a window has been opened for examining the coherence between social questions and trade rules .
Liberalisation is indeed continuing , in particular in order to respond to the southern countries ' interests with regard to market access .
Thanks to the European Union , however , and here I believe we can thank Pascal Lamy for his firm stance , we have the beginnings of a broad agenda - the environment , investment and competition can be negotiated on the basis of an explicit consensus .
In substance , this is still not much and we can understand why some of the NGOs wanted a more ambitious agenda , one that included the social aspect in particular .
If we are to achieve that , however , they and we will have to overcome some major inconsistencies .
Indeed we must not conceal the inconsistencies between different interests and claim to always speak in the name of the south .
Differences must be expressed if they are effectively to be overcome and that is how we managed to make progress on the question of medicines , when the north-south conjunction proved effective .
Similarly , we can make progress on the social aspect only if we carefully reflect on how to help strengthen international trade unionism .
Thirdly , for the first time , as much importance was attached to implementation as to the new subjects introduced .
Here again , I did not interpret the results in the same way as Caroline Lucas .
We made progress on the method and thanks to India we had a system not of prior evaluation but of ongoing evaluation during the negotiations : textiles , agriculture , anti-dumping measures , subsidies and even intellectual property were negotiated - with the possibility of renegotiation .
To conclude , we still have to make great efforts for the future to ensure that the process runs smoothly and in the right directions and here I have two points to make .
The first is that there is a strong risk that the Union ' s trade policy will be handicapped by the absence of a common policy .
We have a certain lack of cohesion here and it is up to us to clarify our agricultural and industrial social model .
My second point is that the social question is emblematic .
There is no question of giving up and adhering to the ILO .
The European Union must demand the establishment of multilateral social dimensions for development and solidarity .
So we still have a lot of work to do on this subject , but this should not frighten us .
Mr President , the current World Trade negotiations are important to the future development of the EU , particularly in the context of enlargement .
I am satisfied that our negotiators understand the extent of this challenge and - I hope - draw on the benefit of hindsight resulting from our experiences with the current regime .
From an agricultural perspective , we must not allow the United States to dictate agricultural policy .
On the last occasion they insisted on dismantling agricultural support and then proceeded to provide support for United States farmers at a level three times greater than that received by European farmers .
I am very pleased that in the preparatory talks we seem to have reached a satisfactory agreement on export refunds .
From an Irish perspective , export refunds are crucial because of our dependence on exports to third countries .
Equally we need to take a strong stand on food imports from outside the EU .
We are investing heavily in the implementation of food safety measures and have banned the use of growth promoters .
Yet EU farmers are expected to compete with imports from countries where those products are used .
Equally , in relation to sheepmeat , important to European , and particularly Irish , farmers - badly managed arrangements with New Zealand mean there are no controls to prevent a deliberate New Zealand policy to flood the EU market at peak production periods .
Mr President , I consider Doha a success , but I did think before Doha and I still feel now that the European position of the strategy of expanding the agenda was a serious mistake .
Indeed , overloading the WTO now and in the future with too many expectations for too many sectors will jeopardise the achievement of the organisation ' s single , fundamental objective : market access , revitalising the stagnant situation of international trade , in the interests of both rich and poor countries .
Lastly , Commissioner , with regard to agriculture - let us not forget , before we start to feel too pleased with ourselves , that , ultimately , Europe ' s negotiating position , as Mr Fischer explained , was actually an attempt to defend the indefensible , to defend the common agricultural policy .
We concern ourselves with working standards in Africa , Asia and South America , and yet , at Doha , we defended the wealthy French peasant farmers against the poor peasant farmers of South-East Asia , Africa and Latin America .
This is the bottom line .
Therefore , the agenda should not be expanded . Let us concern ourselves rather with the opening up of the markets , especially our rich agricultural and textiles markets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the delegation for relations with the South Caucasus , I would like to inform you that a member of the Commission 's diplomatic staff has been the victim of an insidious murder in Georgia .
I wish to ask the President , on behalf of the European Parliament , to send a communication to President Shevardnaze calling upon him not only to do everything in his power to solve this crime , but also to make sure at long last that constitutional means are used to ensure that people who work in Georgia and for Georgia are guaranteed appropriate protection , so that this essential work can be done effectively .
I regard this incident as a very serious one .
We want to do everything to help the South Caucasus , but the South Caucasus itself must also make efforts to protect people entrusted to its care .
We have taken note of your request , Mrs Schleicher , and I am sure it will be accepted .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote
Does the Commission wish to take the floor ?
Mr President , it was agreed with the Commission that before the final vote on the legislative resolution the Commission would tell us to what extent it is willing to accept our amendments .
Commemoration of the tragedy in the United States on 11 September 2001
Ladies and gentlemen , at the request of a number of Members we have decided very briefly to commemorate the tragic events that occurred three months ago .
With your agreement , I will therefore read out a message .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three months ago today , at 8.46 a.m.
New York time , the entire world was shaken by the horrific attacks that struck Manhattan and Washington .
At this moment , when I would ask you to reflect and remember , my thoughts , our thoughts , go first of all to the thousands of victims and their families , to the emergency services , to the military and civilian employees whose lives were suddenly shattered .
They also go to the American people , who , since these events , have been living in terrible fear of further attacks .
The European Union is playing its full part in the efforts we have made in solidarity with the United States to combat international terrorism .
The same is true of our commitment to finding urgent solutions to the conflicts that threaten world peace , especially in the Middle East .
Only if we show the necessary resolve and cohesion can we prevent such tragedies ever happening again .
My thoughts are with the victims of all acts of terrorism and war and I ask you to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
( The sitting was suspended at 12 noon and resumed at 12.35 p.m. )

Vote ( continuation )
Mr President , one word of explanation .
This report now has a series of agreed amendments which we believe will be carried .
There is one unusual procedure - the House has voted already on the criteria for the site of the European Food Safety Authority .
The Council was not prepared to admit that as a part of the report .
We , however , believe that it was necessary to state what the criteria should be and to insist upon that .
The best way we can do that without going to conciliation is to vote it as a legislative resolution , binding therefore only on Parliament .
We hope that the President of Parliament will convey that information and our view on the matter to the Laeken Summit in two days ' time .
Would the Commission now like to tell us its position with regard to the amendments ?
- ( FR ) Some 30 000 farms in the European Union cultivate grass and pulse seeds , the main species involved in this common organisation of the market .
This is , therefore , most important to employment , producers ' incomes , the socio-economic balance of many regions , biodiversity and security of supply .
On the one hand , however , the market prices received by the producers have fluctuated markedly in the last few years , while , on the other , the European Union still has a shortfall of about 15 000 tonnes .
We should , therefore , welcome the fact that aid for seeds will be maintained at the current level , knowing that this is necessary to maintain the balance between production and the market .
Under these circumstances , I do not think there is any need to introduce a budgetary stabiliser , since the market has shown that it is capable of regulating itself , all the more so as the Commission proposal on this stabilisation mechanism is general and vague .
Lastly , I also find it inappropriate to model it on the mechanism set up for rice seed , which can be adjusted to the food consumption market .
Finally , and above all , it would be unwise to share a guaranteed maximum quantity amongst the Member States , given that these seed producers often have branches in several countries .
That is the tenor of the amendments I tabled in committee , where they were adopted unanimously .
I am happy to note that the European Parliament proved equally wise in plenary .
Cunha report ( A5-0425 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) The fisheries agreements which the EU concludes with developing countries are bad for the environment and bad for those countries .
The fact that EU fishermen ostensibly feel forced to move their activities from EU waters to elsewhere indicates that the fish population in EU waters has apparently decreased by these activities , so much so that the yield is now no longer sufficient .
This environmental problem must be tackled at source , namely by reducing the fleet capacity , not by overfishing elsewhere now .
In addition , the agreements are bad for the local economy , since modern EU ships rob local fishermen of their catches .
It is absurd that as part of the agreement , the EU should pay money to the governments of those countries in order to help the fishermen to find other jobs .
The amendments which the Committee on Fisheries and the ELDR have tabled to the Commission proposal are an improvement on the text of the agreement .
D66 has therefore supported these amendments .
Since we are opposed to the agreement as such for the above reasons , we have voted against the legislative resolution .
Lage report ( A5-0402 / 2001 ) and Cunha report ( A5-0425 / 2001 )
We abstained on the reports on the fisheries agreements with Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde because although they provide these states with a certain amount of revenue , the large-scale fishing by European countries merely formalises the plundering of Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde ' s natural resources .
The only reason we voted for Amendment No 7 to the Lage report and Amendment No 5 to the Cunha report is because at least they have the merit of formally specifying the amount of financial compensation , without making any advance judgment on the question of whether this sum really makes up for the loss of this natural resource .
Gargani report ( A5-0428 / 2001 )
.
At the outset I wish to record my thanks to the rapporteur Mr Gargani for his report on the European Capital of Culture 2005 .
I fully support this report as I represent the City of Cork in the EP .
Cork has a long and proud tradition as the second city in Ireland and has been a centre of learning , industry , trade and culture for over 800 years .
As a major seaport it has also been open to many outside influences which have helped to evolve many new links and contacts .
The history of Ireland could be written in Cork , for it was affected in a similar way to all of Ireland .
Whether it relates to conquest and colonisation , the killing of the native Gaelic language and traditions , famine and emigration , Cork has been at the centre of all these tremendous changes .
Today Cork is a well developed modern city , looking to future technologies and opportunities for development .
However , despite this forward vision , it has never forgotten or neglected its past , indeed it treasures and protects its history and culture , in the ballet , the Opera House , the Everyman Theatre , Triskel Arts Centre , National Sculpture Factory , Crawford Art Gallery , Crawford College of Art and Design , University College Cork , Cork Institute of Technology , the School of Music , the College of Commerce , to mention just a few .
From its past citizens in the fields of music , dance , the arts and literature it takes pride in the new generation of activists in these areas .
We in Cork are proud of our hospitality and welcome to all and we face any new challenge presented to us with a confidence in the secure knowledge of past experience .
In 2005 , as the European Capital of Culture , Cork will show all that is great in our past but also will provide inspiration for the future .
I take this opportunity to extend to all a welcome to Cork , now and for 2005 .
I know you will be touched by its beauty , humour , vitality and calm .
Once you have been to Cork you will never wish to leave .
Graefe zu Baringdorf report ( A5-0421 / 2001 )
Mr President , this report is on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs and therefore on what animals eat , and animals include fish .
As you know , Mr President , I am famous among fish , particularly pensioner fish , and I therefore could not fail to ask them , especially the pensioner fish of Morocco , what they think of this directive on the contents of feedingstuffs .
I am not joking , Mr President , I am only telling you in my customary manner why I voted for the motion .
Breaking their usual silence , these fish told me that they support this document but that they would like me to tell Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , when he comes to amend this directive again , to ensure that there is a choice of feedingstuffs on the menu as well , so that animals do not always have to eat the same dishes .
They get tired of having soup for lunch every day as well !
Whitehead report ( A5-0416 / 2001 )
Mr President , I would like to explain why I voted for the document on the European Food Authority .
This second subject is a subject which takes us to the kitchen as well , Mr President - nothing to do with me .
Maybe it is because it is lunch time that the next topic is also food-related .
I voted for the motion because , clearly , we have to have good food on our tables .
However , I feel that it would be a good idea for inspections to be carried out on these directives on the monitoring of foodstuffs too .
I regret to say that our Member States do not want inspections , and so I call for the food authority to be given the power , in the future , to genuinely carry out unannounced inspections on public canteens , school canteens , company canteens and canteens in the institutions where elderly people live when they are no longer able to live with their families .
Food is extremely important !
Mr President , I should like to say very briefly that it was a great pleasure for me to vote for the amendments to the common position on food safety , for which Mr Whitehead was rapporteur .
I wanted to express gratitude for his major efforts , for thanks to his work , we have managed to reach clear and sound agreements across the political divide , and that is why we are now where we are .
Today , we only adopted those amendments which met with complete approval by the Commission .
In addition , agreements have already been concluded with the Council .
This means that the Food Authority can become operational in 2002 , which suggests that we are completely on schedule .
In my view , we can safely say that this is thanks to effective cooperation , across all groups of this House .
We have created a framework which should work .
If the right people are now also deployed in the right places , and the Authority is accorded a location which will give it the opportunity of establishing external contacts easily , then I believe that all conditions are in place to turn this Food Authority into a success .
It is now down to the Authority itself , and I wish it every success .
It could be useful to the consumer to set up a European Food Authority to see to food safety at Union level .
We agree with the principle .
Yet we would point out that unlike similar authorities in other countries , especially the United States , the European Food Authority will only have an advisory role and no power .
What value can its recommendations have under these circumstances ?
I ask this , in particular , because a series of recent food scandals , from mad cow disease to dioxin in chickens , has shown that food safety and the quest for profit are a contradiction in terms .
This means that the European Food Authority is liable to be a purely decorative body .
. ( PT ) Whilst some advances in establishing the European Food Authority are positive , I still maintain that it cannot act as a panacea for solving food safety problems or as a smoke screen for public opinion .
It is important to ensure that there is an Authority which guarantees risk evaluation for the purposes of food safety , enshrined in solid scientific opinion , but it cannot free from responsibility or replace the Commission in terms of risk management of the Community food policy or the competent authorities of each Member State .
The underlying principle of any legislation on food is the protection of human health , and for this very reason , it is vital to introduce the precautionary principle in risk management when scientific data is insufficient or inconclusive .
However , it is questionable whether such a structure that is so cumbersome from the administrative and budgetary standpoint is necessary , but the need to ensure that one representative from each Member State takes part in the Administration should be highlighted .
In any case , it is worth emphasising once again that the food issue can only be resolved by means of a thorough change in the CAP and a genuine food policy that is not based on the interests of the agro-industrial multinationals or the liberalisation of agricultural trade .
I voted in favour of this report .
We have been trying for years to restore consumer confidence and the European Food Authority is one way of doing so .
There is no such thing as zero risk and we know what consequences a bacteriological problem ( not linked only to terrorism ) can have for a large number of our citizens .
Safety must therefore lie at the heart of the proposed system .
Yet we must not give way to panic , for let us not forget that the European food chain is one of the safest in the world .
If it is to be effective and credible , however , the Authority will have to be supported by top scientific experts , while also drawing on the network of existing national agencies .
Another important aspect that needs emphasising is that we must separate the evaluation of the risk , which falls within the scientific domain , and its management ( the measures that are decided ) , which falls solely within the political domain .
Let me remind you that whatever measures are decided must be proportionate to the level of the risk incurred .
In the event of a perceived risk , but which has no foundation , for instance a rumour , we should respond by informing the consumers .
In the event of a potential risk , we must take precautionary measures . Lastly , in the event of a real risk , we have to take preventive measures .
If we want the European Food Authority to be as effective as possible , it will have to be completely independent , its composition will be a determining factor , and its decisions will have to be highly transparent .
Lastly , the penalties imposed for serious errors or fraud must not only be considerable but , above all , applied .
. ( NL ) For years , quality and public health in the production of food were secondary to the pursuit of ever lower production costs .
A cheap food package had to keep the costs down for the public at large .
Governments and private business shared the same view about this reduction in costs , which was achieved , inter alia , by economies of scale , the use of artificial raw materials , intensification of the use of space , the import of animal feed from the Third World and an enormous number of redundancies .
For that purpose , slaughter waste and dioxin-poisoned grass were fed to animals , or animals were gathered in pens and lorries where disease was able to spread readily .
After all , if one wanted better food , there was a separate distribution circuit for those in a higher income bracket .
Only when it transpired that people can contract fatal illnesses from contaminated food , did an increasing number of people want to know what they were eating .
Once again , it is demonstrated that accidents need to happen first before the incentive is there to look for a solution to the problem .
The solution does not lie in enhancing the European bureaucracy , or squabbles about the location and management of a new institution .
Food safety can only be achieved if cost reduction and company profits are no longer paramount and if maximum openness is created in the field of complaints , minority verdicts , composition and safety measures .
I look forward to the revolutionary effect which Mr Staes envisages , but it remains to be seen whether it will materialise .
I voted for this recommendation because I believe that the common position as amended is a great improvement on the Commission ' s original proposal .
I fully subscribe to the strong wish expressed by the European institutions : the future European Food Safety Authority must be set up very soon and be operative as from the beginning of 2002 .
With that in mind , I agree with the rapporteur in wanting to see a text adopted to which the Council is likely to agree , so as to avoid a conciliation procedure , which always takes too long .
The European Food Safety Authority will be strong and will , I hope , help us counter any food-related risks throughout the European Union .
The Member States will continue to be responsible for monitoring and checks , while risk management and the rapid alert system will remain in the remit of the European Commission .
Finally , I am in favour of adopting criteria for selecting the best location , in the general interest , for the European Food Safety Authority : I believe that the town of Lille fully satisfies the conditions laid down in the recommendation .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by my Socialist colleague which calls for the establishment of general principles and requirements of food law and for a European Food Authority .
Food Safety is of great concern to the majority of the European Union 's citizens and it is therefore vital that this Authority will be efficient , democratic and transparent once it is fixed .
In such a way , the role proposed for Parliament will ensure that this body will remain under close scrutiny and that it will prove to be as legitimate as possible .
Moreover , it is highly desirable that the future location of this Authority should be physically independent from other EU institutions .
This will ensure that it remains independent and thus more credible in citizens ' eyes .
Finally , the call for close cooperation with the relevant bodies is pertinent : when there is a suspected food risk it makes sense that the Authority should capitalise on the knowledge available in other related associations .
.
( NL ) The group encompassing the Dutch D66 Party has endorsed the Whitehead report on the European Food Authority . D66 is pleased with the timing of this report , immediately preceding the European Summit in Laeken .
After all , the question of EFA ' s location cannot be seen in isolation from the as yet unresolved issue of the EP ' s location and the ludicrous shuttle between Brussels and Strasbourg .
We assume that the Heads of Government will look into these issues at length in Laeken .
Bushill-Matthews report ( A5-0422 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Bushill-Matthews ' report is on financial assistance for small and medium-sized enterprises .
A Genoese 70-year old pensioner , Mr Guido Facchinetti , who is an expert cook and has worked in restaurants all his life , asked me to vote for this document for the reasons I have already given , namely that it is appropriate for small and medium-sized enterprises to be financed by Europe .
He said to me : " If I had the financial where-with-all , despite the fact I am 70 years old , I would open new restaurants throughout Europe serving trenette with pesto , Genoa-style chick pea flour , Recco focaccia and Camogli pan-fried fish " - apologies to any of my fish-loving friends who are listening - " for these are excellent dishes and I would like to take them to the whole of Europe .
All I need is the money ! "
I hope that this document will make it possible for him to continue to exercise his outstanding abilities as an Italian and a Genoese cook .
. ( PT ) The launch of the Growth and Employment Initiative is a very positive step in terms of increasing and improving employment prospects in the EU .
In the last few years , SMEs and micro-companies have been responsible for creating the largest number of new jobs .
The report submitted by the Commission provides an objective analysis of the development of the three financial instruments for SMEs : the Start-up Facility ( ETF ) , the Joint European Venture ( JEV ) Programme and the SME Guarantee Facility .
However , the critical observations set out in Mr Bushill-Mathews ' report , which I share and voted for , are highly relevant .
I would like to stress , firstly , the need for the Commission to indicate clearly in future the degree to which forecasts of job creation actually materialise .
Secondly , the Commission should carry out an in-depth analysis of the reasons which lead some countries to make extensive use of the different programmes and others to record a low or nil rate of use .
I would like to point out in this respect that Portugal is one of the Member States not included in the ETF-Start-up Facility , aimed at initial-phase investment in high technology projects .
Indeed , as far as the SME Guarantee Facility in the 31.12.2000 reference period is concerned , the rate of use is quite low .
According to preliminary data supplied by the financial intermediaries , only eight Portuguese SMEs benefited from a guarantee under this mechanism , whereas in Spain there were 2 812 beneficiaries .
That analysis will be a very important indicator for the definition and adoption of regulatory measures , particularly in terms of transparent access to information , simplification of the procedures for submitting applications and speedy allocation of funds .
. ( EL ) The policy being applied by the European Union and the Member States is forcing hundreds of thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) into bankruptcy every year , because they are unable to withstand the onslaught of the monopolies .
With the signs of a slump in the economy becoming more and more marked , SMEs and jobs are the first to go and the generally limited and short-term jobs linked to the occasional subsidy do nothing to counteract this .
The Commission proposal merely serves the objective of reinforcing the European venture capital market by setting up financial intermediaries , who are neither controlled nor operate on the basis of job-creating criteria .
In most cases , SMEs do not receive direct funding , in that applications must be addressed to intermediaries , generally conventional ' risk and investment capital funds ' which are guaranteed by the EIB and which receive credits and guarantees from it .
Thus , in the final analysis , no one apart from the European Investment Bank , knows which SME is being supported and what funding plans and jobs will result .
These intermediary financial organisations , which have signed contracts with the European Investment Fund , tend to favour early stage investments in high technology sectors such as information technology , communications and the biosciences .
So exactly what aid and which SMEs are we talking about , given that traditional small and medium-sized enterprises , small handicraft enterprises and tourist and commercial enterprises fall outside the funding framework , despite the fact that they are able to promote innovative products ?
The highly important specific weight of SMEs in the economy of each country is being ignored , despite its having been proven that they represent the backbone of the business sector in Europe and are the only enterprises to have created any jobs over recent years .
The unequal geographical distribution of this aid is also typical of growing regional inequalities between the Member States , in that over half this funding ( be it in the form of start-up aid or the guarantee mechanism ) will go to France and Germany , while in Greece , for example , this aid is non-existent because there is no venture capital market to speak of .
We harbour no illusions as to the nature of the EU 's employment policy or its policy on SMEs , which is basically non-existent , or the interests which that policy represents , which is why we feel that any reference to employment , to fighting unemployment and to supporting small and medium-sized enterprises within the guidelines for this policy is pure hypocrisy .
Faced with these choices , the workers and small and medium-sized businessmen are joining forces in their fight and struggle to overturn this policy and promote a different policy which takes account of man and his present-day needs .
. ( NL ) Small enterprises used to be a very common phenomenon .
In the last 150 years , they have been systematically bought up and forced out of business by large newcomers .
Only in the last few years has there been a surprising , renewed interest in small enterprises .
Unlike before , the big ones now stand to gain from their existence , since they can pass on tasks which they are unable to carry out at a cheaper price .
They involve outsiders in low-wage countries or sell vulnerable parts of their enterprise to the staff or management .
The business risks , including absorbing the peaks and troughs in transport and repair activities , are then borne by a third party .
In most cases , costly collective wage agreements and schemes for better conditions at work fall by the wayside .
In order to survive , people in such small enterprises must work harder and longer hours than they used to in the large enterprises .
The small ones may think that they are independent , but they rely completely on the bank and on the larger enterprises with which they have outstanding contracts .
Consequently , their existence can come to an unexpected end very quickly .
Chances are that ultimately , government aid for small enterprises invariably benefits the large enterprises .
However , I do not dismiss this aid just like that , for there are also situations where small enterprises can offer sound , fresh opportunities to groups of workers , notably to migrants and pioneers in the field of technical innovation .
. I wholeheartedly support this report which endorses the Commission report on financial assistance to SMEs through the Growth and Employment Initiative .
Since it is presently the case that most SMEs have some difficulty in breaking into the technology market , this financial assistance can often symbolise the make or break of a potentially very successful SME .
It is all too often bemoaned that the EU has failed to foster a culture of innovation and enterprise : the European Investment Fund ( EIF ) is a vital way in which this imbalance can and should be redressed .
The call for the close evaluation of projects is also welcome : in such a way there will be a vital element of accountability in the scheme .
To bolster this , the call for the involvement for the European Parliament is also vital .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Draft general budget for 2002 ( as amended by the Council ) and Letter of Amendment 2 / 2002
The next item is the joint debate on the following four reports , tabled on behalf of the Committee on Budgets :
( A5-0400 / 2001 ) by Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) , and Letter of Amendment No 2 / 2001 to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 ;
( A5-0427 / 2001 ) by Mr Colom i Naval , on financial programming 2002-2006 ;
( A5-0447 / 2001 ) by Mr Wynn , on the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument ;
( A5-0439 / 2001 ) by Mr Turchi , on Trans-European-Networks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure for me to be meeting you here again in order to shed light on the salient points of the second reading of the EU ' s draft general budget , as drawn up on 22 November .
It is one of the last , but also one of the most important stages in the sometimes complicated process in which the Community budget is brought about .
I greatly value the fact that I am able to make this statement before the MEPs who , as representatives of the European democracy , are meeting here in plenary session .
According to the rules of the interinstitutional agreement , this second reading of the Council was preceded by a consultative meeting of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , which took place on 21 November .
I believe I can speak on behalf of all participants in this lengthy meeting , which did not finish until the small hours , when I say that it was not only a success from a budgetary point of view , because the general budget for 2002 will now soon be established , but also politically speaking , for we managed to agree on a number of new elements which presented themselves to us since our first reading and which need to be discussed , as well as a number of priorities .
On behalf of the Council , I should like to express a word of thanks to the Parliament ' s delegations and Mrs Schreyer , who went out of her way to achieve this result .
I should first of all like to focus on the new elements . Needless to say , there were the events of 11 September .
Entirely in line with what was decided at the consultation meeting , the Council wanted to set up a scheme to finance the effects in Afghanistan and in the neighbouring countries after these tragic events .
In our jargon , this means that the geographically oriented budget items are increased , and by these we mean the items for Asia and TACIS of the external policy .
For example , at second reading , the Council decided to pledge a total amount of nearly EUR 488 million in commitment appropriations for Asia .
The Council also wanted to leave open a wide margin under the maximum of Heading 4 ' External action ' with a view to meeting possible future needs in those regions .
This margin is also in line with the agreement that was reached with the European Parliament to maintain a minimum margin of EUR 70 million for any needs in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries .
Moreover , I should like to remind you that it was also agreed to earmark a minimum amount of EUR 35 million in reserve for emergency aid of Heading 6 for possible needs of this kind .
These elements formed an important part of the discussions we held .
Another new element that came up in the discussions , is the conversion programme of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleet following the failure to set up a fisheries agreement with Morocco .
In this respect , the Council has included EUR 170 million of commitment appropriations under Heading 2 of the draft budget and has decided to use the flexibility instrument for the corresponding amount .
In this connection , may I remind you that the Council , by way of accommodating the EP ' s wishes , has approved a specific allocation of EUR 30 million in commitment appropriations under Heading 2 for the regions which border the candidate countries , and has also approved the use of the flexibility instrument for the corresponding amount ?
In the framework of the agreement with the European Parliament on an amount of EUR 20 million in commitment appropriations under Heading 3 for those border regions , the Council has approved the trial project : ' Effects of enlargement in the border regions ' .
This agreement was unquestionably one of the key points of the 2002 budgetary procedure .
In order to give this more lasting form , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have decided in favour of inclusion in the 2003 budget , taking into consideration the maximum amounts established in Berlin , together with EUR 27 million that were not placed on the 2002 budget which form part of the EUR 197 million which the Commission had proposed in the financial statement pertaining to the fleet conversion programme , as well as EUR 15 million for the border regions .
As far as the priorities are concerned , I would remind you that the Council officially adopted conclusions concerning the budgetary guidelines for the forthcoming budgetary procedure in March of this year for the first time .
In doing so , the Council wanted to indicate its budgetary procedures for the year 2002 , as is the European Parliament ' s and the Commission ' s wont .
During the negotiations , the Council continually pointed at these principles and priorities , and adhered to the same .
In my view , this is a sound method , for it indicates more clearly what it is about and what the goal is , and it enhances transparency .
I therefore believe that we all stand to benefit from the Council ' s continued efforts in this direction .
Let us start with the priorities which are close to the European Parliament ' s heart .
I am delighted that an agreement has been reached in the framework of the joint declaration on the management of the commitments outstanding ( the RALs ) and of the elimination in the medium term of what people started to refer to as ' abnormal RALs ' .
I would point out that abnormal RALs , which we defined as sleeping obligations for which no payments have been made over the past two years , as well as old obligations which have been on the budget for at least five years , cannot only be reduced by increasing the appropriations for payment , but also by causing obligations to lapse to a large extent .
I believe that the measures announced by the Commission will ensure that this matter be resolved satisfactorily in due course .
Moreover , we managed to agree on a statement regarding the implementation profile for the 2002 budget .
This statement means that the implementation of the budget will be spread over the course of the year as equally as possible .
The so-called December fever must be avoided in this respect .
In order to achieve this , the Commission has envisaged the following measures . It aims to implement the 2002 budget , taking into account the implementation of the 2001 budget , and make the necessary changes .
The budgetary authority will be notified when the implementation profile deviates considerably from the proposed profile .
Furthermore , an implementation plan for the 2002 per heading of the financial perspectives will be sent upon submittal of the preliminary draft budget for 2003 .
I am convinced that these measures correspond to the horizontal amendments which the European Parliament approved at first reading , so that we can look forward to the budget approval with confidence .
The Council has also devoted special attention to the priorities which the European Parliament had listed at first reading , inter alia by agreeing to the additional appropriations for e-learning and immigration .
Needless to say , I am pleased with the post-ECSC regulations and the pledge by the Spanish Presidency to redraft the Financial Regulation .
I should like to conclude this last list of priorities to be taken into account with one of the Council ' s essential priorities , namely the controlled increase of payment appropriations .
I shall come back to this in due course .
At second reading of the budget , we took account of the agreements concluded during consultation .
We have tried to adopt a budget which can accommodate all the EU ' s priorities , on the one hand , and which can take into consideration the points which were brought up after first reading without losing sight of the real needs and scope for spending the appropriations , on the other .
I should like to outline the other results to you for each heading .
As far as agricultural expenditure is concerned , letter of amendment 2 has been adopted in its entirety .
Moreover , the Council has restored the proposed amounts in the preliminary draft budget for the budget lines which were cut at first reading and to which the letter of amendment refers .
An additional EUR 4.5 million has been included , as agreed during the consultation of 21 November , whereby Parliament ' s observations were taken into account .
In a joint declaration with the European Parliament , special attention has been paid to the protection of animals during transport .
I am also delighted that our institutions can reach agreement on the points of this letter of amendment which pertain to expenditure for rural development , fisheries agreements and the inclusion in the budget of the surplus available from the previous budget year in the sum of EUR 1.2 billion .
I believe I have already outlined the key results in connection with the structural measures , namely the inclusion of EUR 170 million by way of commitment appropriations and EUR 39 million in payment appropriations for the conversion of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleet , and the amount of EUR 30 million for the regions which border the candidate countries , whereby use is made of the flexibility instrument in both cases .
With regard to internal policy , the Council has kept most points of its first reading and has also partially adopted a number of major amendments of the European Parliament , including e-learning , which entails EUR 5 million , and the European refugee fund , which entails an increase of EUR 5 million .
The rapporteurs have tried to convince us and they have succeeded , but the Council ' s willingness to cooperate should also be highlighted here , in my view .
It is under this heading that quite a considerable proportion of the measures will be funded for the benefit of the regions which border the candidate countries .
As far as the external policy is concerned , the Council has not only increased the budget items covering Asia and TACIS by EUR 66 million compared to the draft budget , it has also adopted letter of amendment 2 concerning international fisheries agreements .
Concerning the common security policy , an amount of EUR 30 million in commitment appropriations has been included , in accordance with the results of the consultation of 21 November .
As for administrative expenses , the three institutions agreed to hold extensive discussions about the report of the Secretaries General regarding the multi-annual development .
In my view , quite a few options are still left open .
As far as the EP ' s budget is concerned , the Council has adopted draft Supplementary and Amending Budget 5 for 2001 , by means of which expenditure for buildings can be forecast in the framework of the 2003 budget , with the obligation to reduce the expenditure in 2003 by an equal amount .
For a number of years now , the Council has adopted a comprehensive approach during its reading , which means that the main issues in the draft budget are the set priorities and the extent of the expenditure category .
Thanks to this approach , the Council has managed to remain under the existing annual maximum amounts of expenditure , established in the interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999 .
Additionally , in accordance with the interinstitutional agreement , it has managed to ensure that within the maximum amounts of financial perspectives , margins remain available , as a result of which different Community measures and policy lines can be prioritised .
When the second reading was drafted , the Council aimed for a budgetary discipline , so much so that the budget increases are in line with those of the national budgets .
The total increase of payment appropriations is therefore restricted to 2 % .
As you know , agreement was reached during the consultation of 21 November in the framework of this general agreement with the help of the Commission .
The Council relies on the fact that the European Parliament will carry on in this vein during its second reading , so that the percentage increase does not exceed the agreed maximum amounts .
Before you have a final discussion on the budget , I should like to emphasise that the Council has endeavoured to take account of certain budgetary rules and basic provisions concerning the inclusion in the reserve of appropriations , the make-up of expenditure , legal bases , preparatory actions and trial projects .
That is why the Council would state once again that it is opposed to Parliament ' s use of conditional reserves , which is in contravention of the Financial Regulation .
Furthermore , the Council has once again opted for the outcome of the first reading of the draft budget for heading B7-1 concerning the European Development Fund , since the increase of a funding or even of a margin in the budget lacks the necessary legal basis and is therefore not possible .
Moreover , allow me to remind you that this is intrinsically about compulsory expenditure .
I should like to conclude this brief outline of the second reading by the Council by highlighting that the budgetary procedure been conducted in a good atmosphere .
As in the past , emotions sometimes ran high during the discussions .
Everyone has put forward their view in clear , concise , sometimes lengthy , yet forceful terms .
However , the aim of the consultation procedure has not been overlooked : namely to bring about agreement between the two arms of the budgetary authority with the help of the Commission . In that way , we can adopt a budget which enables the European Union to face its challenges , and also to accommodate the circumstances and the developments which can be anticipated during the 2002 budgetary year and programme in the best possible way .
On my own behalf and that of the Council , I should like to thank in particular Mr Terence Wynn , the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , and the two rapporteurs , Mr Carlos Costa Neves and Mrs Kathalijne Buitenweg , as well as all the members of the Committee on Budgets , with whom I have had the pleasure of working over these six months of the presidency of the Council , in which I have not only become familiar with the European budgetary procedure , but have also learnt to appreciate it .
I thank you for your attention .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with the constructive attitude of both branches of the budgetary authority , the European Parliament and the European Council , and with the support of the Commission , it has been possible , throughout the different phases of the complex budgetary process , to find an answer to a series of new challenges , ensure that previous commitments are fulfilled and deal with most of the priorities defined for 2002 .
In the light of a markedly balanced end result , it is only fair to single out the work of the members of the Budgetary Commission , the vital contribution of the draftsmen of the opinions of other committees , the responsible involvement of the political groups , the negotiating skills of the Belgian Presidency demonstrated by Minister Vande Lanotte , whom I congratulate , the competence of the Commission departments , which I hereby single out in the person of the Director-General for the Budget , Mr Mangasson , the work of the entire College of Commissioners and the particular endeavours of the Commissioner for the Budget , Mrs Schreyer , whom I would also like to congratulate .
I would also like to make a special personal reference to the invaluable support and contribution of the secretariat of the Budgetary Commission for the excellent results they achieved .
They went far beyond the call of duty .
In a rapid assessment of the results achieved , we should mention the establishment of better conditions for continuing to improve the performance of the budget and make it more effective .
The joint declarations issued by the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission are very important .
For the first time , the Council accepted amendments adopted at first reading by Parliament within the framework of the common agricultural policy , thereby opening up promising prospects for cooperation .
It was also possible to meet new needs deriving from the failure to sign the fisheries agreement with Morocco and the impact of enlargement through the financing of a restructuring programme for the Portuguese and Spanish fishing fleets , and specific support for certain border regions .
Fourthly , financing was agreed for three new agencies with competence in the area of maritime safety , air safety and food quality .
There is also an initial response to new challenges relating to the situation following the attacks of September 11 , in particular in the areas of policing , justice and external action ; here again special reference should be made to the financing of humanitarian and reconstruction actions in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries .
I would further stress the strengthening of the ability to act in terms of e-learning and the special importance given to the response to the tragic situation of the refugees .
Support for the Commission reforms and progress in preparing for enlargement are also envisaged .
Compliance with commitments entered into previously , whether in the context of Agenda 2000 with regard to the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds , or with regard to programmes arising from codecision or even concerning the policy on external action , are also matters which should be addressed .
Of course , it is only normal that new challenges are appearing for the future .
I would single out the following : the endowments needed for expenses of Headings III - Internal Policies , IV - External Policies and V - Administrative Expenses are subject to enormous pressure and the fact that the situation is under control for the time being should not delude us .
The problems will arise again in the next few years and it will become increasingly difficult to find solutions .
In this context , I would mention with regret the rigidity of the budgetary structure deriving from the Financial Perspective in force , which means that in some categories there are substantial balances and in others the situation is becoming increasingly complicated .
It is incomprehensible that with the current difficulties in various sectors , such as external action , there was a balance of EUR 11 billion outstanding in the year 2000 , which is around 14 % of the total expenditure .
We must have the courage to adopt in good time the solutions that in this case are so obvious .
At the same time , it must be stated again that the division of budgetary expenses into compulsory and non-compulsory is a completely outdated concept and , in the light of the most elementary principles of democracy , it is unacceptable for the effective competence of Parliament to be limited to non-compulsory expenses ( around half of the budget ) and it is incomprehensible that it has no competence as regards the revenue system .
The 2002 budget is ready and I believe it merits your approval .
As for the tasks for the future and the new role of the European Parliament in the budgetary process , we will be here to deal with them .
Once again , thank you all very much .
Mr President , words of thanks have already been addressed to Mrs Schreyer , the Belgian Presidency for its commitment , and to all fellow MEPs and co-workers .
I would particularly like to thank my fellow MEP , Mr Costa Neves , for all the work he has done over the past year . For the equanimity and meticulousness which he employed , his willingness to take the contribution of other , also smaller , groups seriously and the way in which he managed to persuade everyone to adopt the same line , which was no mean feat .
At the start of the budgetary procedure , it looked as if the pain for the 2002 budget was mainly concentrated in heading 5 . Needless to say , I was delighted with this as rapporteur .
However , now , having reached December , we could say that Mr Costa Neves has yet again assumed the leading role , for Heading 4 is now also showing cracks again .
For the third year running , we have had to supplement the budget by 200 million by calling on the flexibility instrument .
We therefore continue to scrounge in order to fund the political tasks of the European Union .
Despite this , it was once again possible to reach agreement with the Council .
However , as far as my group is concerned , our support is not really heart-felt , and this has everything to do with the tragic rituals and traditions which typify the budgetary procedure .
The President-in-Office of the Council has praised the Community budgetary method and although , admittedly , this method always ultimately culminates in agreement , more than anything , the annual budgetary ritual is a rather irrational process .
The Commission presents a proposal , the Council takes a huge slice off the proposed amount , Parliament adds a bit more , and we are then supposed to come up with something wonderful in the renowned consultation .
It did occur to me to break up the cycle and to simply leave a number of Council cutbacks in heading 5 where they are , including the cutback at the Court of Justice .
It did seem like a healthy exercise to let the Council come face to face with the effects of its actions and its unilateral obsession to remain well below the ceiling of the financial perspectives .
Unfortunately , I did not do this . I have had feedback that that is what I should have done .
I decided against it because otherwise the wrong people would yet again be penalised .
This view about assuming one ' s responsibility fits in well with the idea that we also mooted at first reading , namely that political promises made by Heads of Governments and Ministers should be accompanied by a financial picture .
We have drawn the necessary lessons in the reconstruction of the Balkans , and it seems fairer to me if it is indicated whether new tasks also require new funding , and - that is at the same time a promise - whether aid to a region in crisis will require cutbacks in peace projects in the Middle East or in projects against sexual violence in South Africa .
What is at any rate a bonus is that this time , aid to Afghanistan featured as a prominent part of the consultation and , unlike in the Balkans , external pledges were not made at donor conferences first , upon which we were expected to pick up the pieces , but these were discussed during the consultations .
I hope that this was not simply a question of good timing , but the start of a positive development .
Another bizarre aspect of the budgetary procedure is the implementation of the budget , and we as Parliament are also guilty of making empty promises .
We want tens of millions of euros more for South America , for instance , without knowing exactly why only 60 % of last year ' s funding was spent .
And each year , we intend to better monitor and adjust the Commission ' s budget , which is no reason not to do it this year .
My group will therefore grant priority to this aspect during the preparation of the 2003 budget .
However , my group is pleased with the minor changes in the Council ' s budget in the area of foreign policy expenditure .
Not a great deal of money is involved , but it is significant nevertheless .
It is now clear that Parliament will from now on give its verdict about the Council ' s budget in terms of operational expenditure , which is an improvement .
The budget is a means , not an end .
It funds our activities for citizens in Europe and elsewhere , and if there is one slogan of which the European policy-maker cannot get enough , then surely it must be that Europe should be closer to the citizen .
And you cannot get much closer than the people of Elsene , our neighbours in Brussels , and I am therefore delighted with the paragraph in the present resolution which urges us to draw up a sound inventory of what we need , and how we can provide for it , and also to take account of the interests of the citizens in the immediate vicinity , before we start making plans for new Parliament buildings .
I would thank the Bureau for all its efforts and I hope that the planned hearing will lead to positive results , also with regard to the conservation of the quaint little station .
It is important to put forward great visions , but it is just as important to face up to the practical implications of these .
Mr President , I would firstly like to apologise to the House because I must leave , since I have obligations in my capacity as Vice-President in a few minutes time and I will not therefore be able to attend the whole of the debate .
The report which I have just had the honour of presenting deals with an important contribution to the Community ' s budgeting and programming system .
We had an agreement , based on the joint declaration of 20 July 2000 , in which we established a system for programming and verifying the activities of the Commission in relation to the Financial Perspectives .
Its objective was to serve as a guide for the decisions of the Budgetary Authority , offer a vision of the margins available in each heading , taking account of the contributions already approved during the codecision procedure , and facilitating the application of the new assessment procedure originating from the aforementioned joint declaration .
We are now in an important financial year and , for the first time - we will thank the Commission for this - it offers us this opportunity to see the programming of Headings 3 and 4 , in relation to our activities .
There is an issue which interests us , a very methodological issue , on how to plan , in the future , the programmes which are already under way , and there is just one point which interests us : for certain programmes , for certain budget lines , future inflation is included , by means of what the Commission calls a budgetary deflater , and , in our opinion , it ought to be a budgetary inflater .
There is a technical contradiction here .
The Financial Perspectives are expressed in standard euros , while the programming works in current euros for each year .
The result is that we do not really know , when we reach an agreement , what value we may have for the previous year because it will depend on real inflation .
Anybody who has been a trade unionist knows that one can lie through statistics in many ways and this is one of them - by mixing current prices with standard prices ; and I will not therefore insist on this .
I am going to give you an example - by hiding future inflation in the framework programme , the Commission reaches the conclusion that , according to its figures , between 2002 and 2006 , we will have an increase in annual contributions of 14.3 % .
Inflation is hiding the fact that , basically , we really only have an increase of 4.9 % .
This is the real increase .
The rest , which brings it up to 14 % , is inflation .
That is what we do not like .
The other day , the Commission told the Committee on Budgets that , with the euro , inflation is dead .
Praise the Lord !
I accept that , but I am from the school of Saint Thomas and prefer , when it comes to these things , to see before believing .
When I have seen that inflation has disappeared , I will accept the removal of this type of differentiation between standard prices and current prices and , therefore , this is the main issue from our point of view .
All the rest of the Commission ' s work we believe to be excellent .
Our concern is really to prevent a situation where , through this technique , the higher real inflation is , the greater the margin available will be .
It makes no sense and therefore our request , included in the motion for a resolution , is very simple : if it suits the Commission to continue working , for whatever reason , in terms of current euros , it should do so , but the information it offers Parliament must also be expressed in standard euros .
This is the key point of our report .
As for everything else , I would like to thank the Commission for the effort it has made to offer us this information for the first time .
Mr President , I am a somewhat unexpected rapporteur for this report .
The report is in my name because the person who has done all the work on this , the standing rapporteur for the financial perspective , Mr Colom i Naval , decided after a lot of consideration that he could not present it to Parliament .
I know his reasons why .
I have spoken to him about them .
I can respect those reasons but I am somewhat saddened that he is not giving this report instead of me .
For the last three years the flexibility instrument has been the main aspect of the budget and it has overshadowed everything else .
On this occasion we are using it for two programmes , as has been said by speakers before me .
I do not have to outline what that is , but I have to outline one small problem which we have not yet resolved , that is , how the remaining money - the EUR 27 million for the reconversion of the Spanish fisheries fleet - will be found for the budget after next year .
That remains an issue on which I am sure the Commission will be creative and inventive when it comes to next year 's budget - to make sure that money can be found , because it is certainly expected .
When the interinstitutional agreement was agreed , the flexibility instrument was one of the items which was reluctantly agreed by both sides - reluctantly from our side because there was a lot of resistance to the IIA anyway .
Do not forget that it was passed in this Parliament by a simple majority , not by a qualified majority .
That was an issue in itself .
The Council did not really like this idea anyway .
If I remember correctly it was the Commission that proposed it as a way out of the impasse .
It is a good job that it was proposed because it has ' saved our bacon ' for the last three years .
In the first instance it was the great debate on how to fund Kosovo .
The Council did not want to use it and we went to the wire , if you can remember that famous occasion in this Chamber when we each had two voting lists .
Then last year it was on how to fund Serbia .
That in itself was a problem and now on this occasion we have how to fund the reconversion of the fisheries fleet and also the cross-border initiatives .
These last three years have shown the creaking structure of the financial perspective .
I am sure that this is a point that Mr Colom i Naval would have made .
We have a situation where the financial perspective has great problems with heading 3 , heading 4 and certainly heading 5 .
Unless Parliament and Council begin to get some sort of agreement on how to fund these categories in the future , the consequences will be there for all to see .
It is the consequences of pre-enlargement .
It is not necessarily enlargement itself .
The preparations for pre-enlargement will be as big a headache as the enlargement issue itself .
We also have the needs of Afghanistan , or perhaps I should say the unknown needs of Afghanistan .
What are we going to do about that ?
What are we going to do if we get a hoped-for peace agreement in the Middle East ?
Where is that money going to come from ?
There is no room at present in heading 4 .
I have heard rumours that the Commission may be proposing an extra flexibility instrument for heading 4 .
If it does , it will be a welcome addition , but whether it would be agreed by the Council is a different matter .
This head-in-the-sand attitude cannot prevail if we are trying to be serious about how we manage the Union 's budget and the taxpayers ' expenses in the future .
The negotiations with the Belgian presidency at the second conciliation were 100 % better than the first conciliation , which was a waste of time , as I made known last time .
At least this time it was good to do business with the Belgians , as it was last time when I was general rapporteur for the 1994 budget .
There are areas where we have our differences , such as in heading 3 where we have always had difficulties .
In heading 5 , one of the main areas where we differ is in our support for the Commission on the reform programme , especially on the establishment plan and the posts that are needed .
However , whilst we have agreed on the establishment plan , the Committee on Budgets voted for one third of those posts in reserve , albeit by a one-vote majority .
The coordinators and the rapporteur are working very hard to try to ensure that we can get a position which will deliver a qualified majority on Thursday because if we do not , we may end up with the Council 's position which would not aid the Commission 's reform process as we would want it to do .
I have seen the letter that Commissioners Schreyer , Kinnock and de Palacio have written , where they state that the conditions for release of the reserve have been met .
If I was not the chairman of the Committee on Budgets I would say that I agree with those sentiments , but since I am the chairman of the Committee on Budgets I could not possibly say any such thing .
I would like you to know that hopefully , between the vote on Thursday and the not-too-distant future , we can all be in a position where we can see the Commission 's proposals coming to fruition and we can get on with the job of making Europe the place that the citizens expect it to be and not associated with the great mystique that it represents for too many of them right now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission ' s annual report on Trans-European Networks provides a general outlook on Community assistance in the three main areas of TENs ( transport , energy and telecommunications ) , which are financed either through the general Union budget or through other Community sources such as the EIB and the Cohesion Fund .
I believe that , overall , it is a good report , if one also takes into account the fact that 1999 was a pivotal year for this sector , in fact , 1999 saw the modification of the financial regulation , the approval of the financial framework for 2000-2006 and the creation of ISPA ; this year , 50 % of the funding was devoted to transport infrastructure works and the emergence of Galileo as a new and priority TEN project .
This does not mean , however , that there are no criticisms to be levelled at the Commission ; these derive above all from the type of report it has given us and not from the implementation of the Trans-European Networks .
The first criticism I intend to make about the report concerns the lack of references to the qualitative development of TEN projects .
Very often , the initiation and completion of projects have taken much longer than expected because of procedural differences and a lack of coordination .
In several cases , Member States have had different priorities , while the notion of public or private partnership is not yet well developed .
In future , therefore , the Commission should attach additional information on the projects to its reports , such as , for instance , the original plans , timetables and the results achieved .
This would , first and foremost , increase transparency and thus also permit more effective and productive monitoring of the situation .
Secondly , the financial evaluation of TENs should include information on funding through local , regional and national budgets and also through private resources , since roughly 80 % of the total funds comes from these sources .
It would thus be possible to obtain an overall view of the state of funding and to check that the commitments undertaken by Member States are maintained .
Thirdly , I believe that the financial resources available for TENs are too limited in view of the continual challenges faced by the transport sector .
The percentage of TEN activities funded by the general budget is constantly falling , while EIB loans cover more than three-quarters of the funding in this sector , and this is highlighted .
My view is that the funding package for transport TENs should be reviewed and adapted to actual needs , especially in light of the reductions in other sectors , such as the environment .
Lastly , I believe we must properly address the problem of road traffic , the constant increase in which runs contrary to the objectives that were proposed when TENs were created .
I think this is due to a lack of cross-border cooperation , which necessarily undermines the interoperability and promotion of rail networks .
To get round this problem it will , I think , be necessary to gradually shift the emphasis away from the Essen priority projects and national infrastructure projects towards transit and cross-border projects , so as to strengthen the policy of sustainable transport and promote integration between different modes of transport .
In conclusion , I should also like to mention the budget that we are about to vote on .
I believe we have come to the end of two not inconsiderable political problems which reflect the additional needs which have emerged in view of the changed international situation .
In second reading , we have left an ample margin for assistance to Afghanistan and neighbouring regions , and with the Council we have agreed on the figure of EUR 488 million for cooperation with developing countries in Asia .
Once again , then , we have given evidence of our political sensitivity and lent our support to the common foreign and security policy .
It was unthinkable that the Union might absent itself at a time like this , and it was also unthinkable that Parliament might default after the explicit request by the Council .
This does not , however , mean that everything is fine and that no criticisms should be made .
Nevertheless , I must especially congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg , as well as all the Secretariat staff who have helped and supported us through both good and difficult moments .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the result of the budget negotiations that we have before us is self-evident .
During the period of the budget negotiations , that is to say from the time the preliminary draft budget was submitted to the present day , many new demands on the EU budget have arisen .
World events , the terrorist attacks of 11 September , the war in Afghanistan , and the crisis in the Middle East have all given rise to new budgetary requirements .
The crises in the agricultural sector that we have witnessed this year have meant new budget requirements in the coming year , and the public 's changing expectations also need to be reflected .
Together , we have succeeded in adapting the 2002 budget to these new challenges and given how often the European Union is criticised , we should make sure that this positive outcome is heard loud and clear .

We have succeeded , and this is thanks to the well-balanced and reconciliatory way in which you , Mr Costa Neves , have approached the negotiations , and we wish to thank you very sincerely for that .
We have also succeeded because of the exacting approach of the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , who also demonstrates a willingness to compromise , and we have succeeded because of the skilful way in which the negotiations were conducted at the crucial point by the President-in-Office - by you , Mr Vande Lanotte - and I would like to sincerely thank all of you , together with the rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , Mr Colom i Naval , the entire committee , and also you , Mr Turchi , on behalf of the entire Commission , for this very fruitful cooperation .


I would also like to mention Mr Seppänen .
He had the historic task of presenting the report on the last budget of the European Coal and Steel Community .
And we can also describe the level of the EU budget as well-nigh historical , that is to say the EU budget share .
The budget as a proportion of Europe 's GNP is lower for next year than at any time during the 1990s .
It will amount to only 1.03 % of Europe 's GNP .
The EU budget is accordingly EUR 4.6 billion lower than the amount provided for next year in the financial perspective .
EUR 4.6 billion is almost 5 % of the entire budget , or to put it another way , it was envisaged in the financial perspective that the budget for 2002 might be 5 % higher than is now actually being agreed .
I am stressing this point firstly because it reflects the budgetary discipline that prevails at European level , and , Mr President-in-Office , because the EU budget is therefore below the average growth rate for budgets in the Member States .
That is also worth emphasising .
Secondly , this result also demonstrates that scope for action has been created to allow the EU to take on new financial tasks , and I am referring here , in particular , to the debate on the costs of enlargement .
That therefore means that Europe , the European budget , is prepared to assume new tasks .
Aid to Afghanistan for peaceful future development of that country is a new task for which the European Union should , and will , assume responsibility .
An initial provision has been made for this in the 2002 budget , with EUR 130 million in addition to the funds already earmarked for humanitarian aid .
This is a positive result , particularly in view of the fact that it would be disastrous if we were to reduce our commitment to the Balkans .
That cannot be allowed to happen , and for that reason the same amount is being made available for the Balkans as this year , with a part being brought forward to the end of the current budget year .
Further aid is also needed for Palestine .
Together with other donors , we are making good some of the loss of income that the Palestinian Autonomy Authority has suffered because Israel is holding back tax and customs receipts because of the escalation of the conflict .
The use of this money in Palestine is subject to strict controls .
It is supervised by the International Monetary Fund , and there are no indications that this money is being misused to purchase arms .
That would of course be totally unacceptable .
The European Union is supporting public health and it is supporting education .
We want to use our contributions to give the peace process a chance .
That is our aim , I am very glad that at yesterday 's Council press conference the Minister , Mr Perez stressed that Israel , too , regards financial support for Palestine as being important .
The European Union is in the process of shouldering more responsibility on the world political scene , and that is a good thing .
This involves a greater commitment to civil crisis management , which in turn requires financial means and , as you know , and as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets has stressed once again , the budgetary rules are such that funds released elsewhere cannot simply be used for additional expenditure on external policy .
Of the EUR 4.6 billion that the 2002 budget will be below the amount provided for next year in the financial perspective , we cannot just use EUR 400 or 500 million for coping with external policy crises .
Nor can we simply use money from the budget surplus to finance new requirements .
That is why the Commission has proposed that by means of an agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission , an extra reserve should be created for additional external policy actions , and I believe that this is in fact the ideal way to avoid unravelling the financial perspective whilst still addressing the new challenges facing the Community in a Community-oriented way . It would be a good thing if the Laeken Council could also express its support for this approach .
A new feature of the 2002 budget is the commitment of funds for measures in the area of judicial cooperation , including the development of the new information system for Schengen and for Eurojust .
The Commission 's estimate of funds for this area is something quite new .
Another new item is the programme to restructure the Spanish and to some extent the Portuguese fishing fleets which up to now have been able to fish in Morocco 's waters .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the budgetary authority accepts the Commission 's proposal both with regard to the level of this special programme - EUR 197 million - and also concerning the specific shape of the programme and the proposal to finance it by mobilising the flexibility instrument .
The compromise solution of making additional funds available in the 2002 budget for the regions bordering the candidate countries was really not easy to achieve .
However , the compromise of entering part of the additional amount in the 2003 budget for these two requirements is acceptable , and I can assure you that the Commission will make the necessary financial proposals for 2003 , so that the funds for the programme to restructure the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets will be available .
It is now up to Spain and the border regions to implement the programmes being allocated additional funds as rapidly as possible , and the Commission will support this .
I say this because it is evident that the public and the fishing industry in Spain expect this now , as do small and medium-sized enterprises in the border regions .
Parliament has this year once again very strongly supported the Commission 's reform process during the discussions on the budget .
I would like to express the Commission 's heartfelt thanks for this .
However , I nevertheless wish to touch on one point , and a very important one at that , regarding the reserve for the 105 new posts envisaged up to now .
In the Committee on Budgets you agreed two conditions for lifting this reserve .
The first is that the Commission should bring forward a proposal for a permanent early retirement scheme .
The Commission has already included this in its guidelines for personnel policy , and will consult on a proposal for amending the statute .
The second condition was better matching of budgetary decisions and the Commission 's work programme .
This was also the subject of this morning 's debate , and the Commission undertakes that , as from next year , it will present the most important initiatives with an impact on the budget at an earlier stage .
I can also assure you personally that I will support this request for the budgetary implications for the coming year of new legislative proposals to be made clear at the appropriate stage of the budget process .
I hope that we will also reach a satisfactory outcome on this point .
Two thousand and two is an important year for agricultural policy .
The interim review of the agricultural policy has to be presented .
Next year the agricultural budget will rise by only 0.5 % , which is less than the average , and that is despite the fact that , for example , there is EUR 400 million in the budget for the reimbursement of expenditure to Member States because of foot and mouth disease and that a total of EUR 8 billion is available for the beef sector .
The reform process , the mid-term review , not only has a financial dimension , it is also about setting objectives in agricultural policy , and the second pillar , the promotion of rural development , has an important role to play here .
However , with regard to the Sapard programme of pre-accession aid for agriculture , the Commission still considers that the proposal for a new programme is not the right way to go .
Two thousand and two will also be a very important year for the enlargement of the European Union .
Negotiations should be concluded for the countries that have made the greatest progress , and in concrete terms this means that budget-related negotiations on agricultural policy , structural policy and on the budget itself will be completed .
The Council intends to have determined its common negotiating position for the budget chapter by the end of next June .
The budget chapter is , of course , the crowning achievement of the accession negotiations .
The Commission has already agreed to present a proposal that will not go beyond the amounts set in Agenda 2000 for new Member States for the years 2004 , 2005 and 2006 .
That was also laid down in the interinstitutional agreement .
The Commission accordingly expects to receive the support of the budgetary authority for no more and no less than these annual amounts being made available .
Two thousand and two is also the year in which the convention on the reform of the European treaties will start its work .
We are now virtually on the eve of the Laeken Summit and of having to agree the programme of work for the convention .
An important subject for the future to be dealt with by the convention will be the Parliament 's budget rights .
The outcome of the 2002 budget negotiations is evident and this outcome will once again enable the challenges to be met .
Nevertheless , it should be clear for the future that the European Parliament finally deserves full budget rights .
This is a touchstone for the democratic development of the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to inform the House that an agreement was reached on the European arrest warrant at the end of the meeting between Prime Minister Verhofstadt and Prime Minister Berlusconi .
Italy will sign the proposal , but the measures needed to change the Italian Constitution have been referred to the Italian Parliament , because , as certain emeritus judges of the constitutional court have observed , the European arrest warrant conflicts with the Constitution .
The Italian Prime Minister has therefore asked Parliament itself to amend the Constitution .
The press conference at which the news will be given is just starting .
Thank you , Mr Tajani .
This is good news for everyone .
Mr President , I would like to thank the general rapporteur for the budget , Mr Costa Neves , for the efforts he has made to achieve a balanced and reasonable budget which respects the competences and prerogatives of this Parliament .
We now have to ensure maximum efficiency in its management and I therefore call on the European Commission to spend the money in a balanced fashion between all geographical areas , since I do not believe it is correct to undermine the priorities set by the European Parliament by redistributing appropriations at the end of the financial year .
To this end , the Commission clearly needs to be provided with the necessary human resources , and the Committee on Foreign Affairs has asked , particularly with regard to the management of external aid , for the Commission to have those human resources which will allow it to carry out the efficient management we are referring to .
Finally , Mr President , I share the concern expressed by other Members , because , in order to fund new priorities in subsequent financial years , new resources will be required , so as not to jeopardise the European Union ' s external action commitments .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who is nearly at the end of the second reading .
I need to remind him , from a control point of view that we anticipate and look forward to him taking a keen interest in how the budget is implemented by the Commission next year and how he drives it forward from there .
The Committee on Budgetary Control tabled a number of amendments to the budget to gain extra information and evaluations from the Commission .
We are actually getting somewhere this year .
It is a tactic we have decided to use in future years as well .
We would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets for allowing us to have a say on transfers , in which we are particularly interested .
Finally , I thank the rapporteur again for taking a keen interest in the amendment concerning the European Court of Auditors .
We on the committee will be looking at this carefully because we understand that the Court of Auditors will be coming to us for more money , staff and resources in the future .
We are very interested to see how this year 's situation develops over the course of 2002 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , I would also like to congratulate the general rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves .
I also want to offer congratulations and thanks to all my colleagues on the Committee on Budgets .
It is a rare privilege - and I can measure its worth as a committee rapporteur - to be able to say that the Committee on Budgets accepted all the demands we had made , they were , of course , legitimate and carefully considered , and which were put forward in Parliament at second reading .
So I want to thank the general rapporteur and all the members of the Committee on Budgets .
That said , I would like to address the Council more directly , address the intelligence of the Council , if I dare put it that way , knowing that Mr Vande Lanotte is bound to understand what I mean .
Four years ago , the European Parliament proposed setting up a European fund for refugees , an idea that the Council angrily struck off the list at second reading .
No European refugee fund .
Four years have passed and now the Council has just proposed more money than we ourselves had even asked for the European refugee fund it had refused to create .
It took the Council all of four years to understand , to become responsible and , with respect , to show some intelligence .
Another example : for several years now we have included a Schengen list at the budget ' s first reading , because for several years we have wanted some of its aspects to be communitised and financed from the Community budget .
Each year the Council would angrily strike off the Schengen heading at second reading .
This time , the Council needs the Schengen heading we had introduced because it has to finance SIS II and has decided to finance it on a Community basis .
That brings me to the third problem .
We decided - Parliament did so at first reading and will do so at second reading - to vote to enter EUR 5 million under the Europol heading to combat terrorism .
The Council did not accept this at second reading .
I would ask the President-in-Office of the Council to do the impossible and to create the necessary legal basis and agreements .
I would ask it to use this money without waiting four years , because the terrorists for their part will not wait that long .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to make a number of basic points with regard to the agencies .
The decision to deal with the agencies on an individual basis was an important one .
I have very carefully read through the amendments proposed by the specialised committees , and to those of you who sit on them I would therefore like to send out a signal .
I ask you , firstly , to take a close look at the agencies with a view to seeing whether or not they work well , and then read the report of the Court of Auditors .
Something else , too , about the new agencies .
I think policy is tending in the direction of creating even more agencies , something , which also appears to be the Commission 's strategy .
In general terms , this is not to be rejected out of hand , but it becomes objectionable when it comes to finance , as the Commission does not include their funds in the calculations .
So if , in future , the Commission or the agencies , as the case may be , come wanting more resources , then heading 3 will not be able to take the strain .
I too would like to congratulate both the rapporteurs on their budget reports and thank them for the collaborative approach that they have adopted .
We have had a tough budgetary procedure especially in relation to the priorities of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
This will present my committee with problems in meeting obligations on a number of programmes .
These programmes are not just crucial to achieving a dynamic knowledge - based Europe but , in the light of the tough current economic climate that the European businesses and organisations are facing , our key to achieving our aims of creating new jobs and supporting businesses .
However , I appreciate the constraints that we are working under and , as someone who in the past has emphasised the need for prudence , efficiency and economy , I know that my committee will do its utmost to deliver growth and prosperity for the EU .
The issues that I really want to raise concern the implementation of the budget .
First , there is the Commission habit of ignoring some of the priorities of this budget authority and I want to give you an example from my committee in relation to the synergy programme .
It is a small programme , but nevertheless an important one .
However , it did not actually suit the particular director-general to implement this programme last year and so it was just ignored because they believed it did not have a big enough impact .
Secondly , there is the use of transfers , which I believe are open to misuse because often these happen very late in the budgetary process and the Commission will transfer money from areas which are priorities for Parliament to those that are priorities for them .
We must have mechanisms in place to stop this recurring year on year .
Thirdly , there is the lack of synchronisation between the budgetary process and the launch of legislative programmes .
It makes a mockery of the budgetary process and the authorities when you have the launch of the budgetary process in February and the launch of the legislative programme in November .
Very quickly , I wish to move on to the other institutions budgets .
This concentrates largely on preparations for enlargement .
I understand that Parliament has made plans for new buildings to incorporate the new Member States .
However , if we are increasing buildings in Brussels , it is important that we learn from the lessons from Strasbourg and that we do not make the same mistakes as we did with this building which generated a lot of negative publicity and reflected very badly on Parliament .
Therefore , for the future , it is important that we have a clear explanation of what these buildings are going to be used for and that these buildings are environmentally friendly , user-friendly and cater for people with disabilities .
I must express surprise that we are already negotiating on new buildings in the absence of major decisions in a variety of areas including the language regime .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate both rapporteurs on the result achieved and also on the speeches they gave here this afternoon .
However , I have to admit that I still feel slightly resentful about the Council ' s result .
I am pleased with the final , positive result , but on the other hand , why did the Council present such an unacceptable initial proposal ?
It truly seemed as if the members of the Council were , once again , behaving like little boys running riot with cap pistols , as I expressed it a number of years ago .
Fortunately , everything got straightened out , for we would have had major problems with the whole of the budget on account of heading 3 .
I really fail to understand how the Council dares present proposals of this kind .
In my opinion , we have made a rather considerable concession with regard to payments . I believe that we should monitor this more closely in future .
The Council seems to have taken an interest in this , and it may be wise to be a little less generous next time than we were this year .
But that is a matter for next year .
I should like to highlight that , in future , we will be extremely short of cash in Headings 3 , 4 and 5 .
We subscribe to what the Commissioner referred to , namely how relatively little the Union is currently spending .
We must , of course , also bear in mind that as soon as new Member States join , the outlook will change immediately .
We are therefore putting some savings away for the future .
Another point which causes great concern , in my view , is the Council ' s attitude towards projects which could improve employment .
The issue surrounding Galileo springs to mind , which has caused great difficulty .
All other points which cost money from the EU budget and which can contribute to better economic performances in the coming year - and there are quite a few of those - have been systematically discouraged , and if we do not sufficiently appreciate this , we will really end up in a recession .
If we see what the Americans are currently doing , how much money they are prepared to pour into their recession , we do not have to copy all of this , but we can move slightly in that direction and manage our funds wisely .
Mr President , I again would like to congratulate the rapporteur , the Commission and even , to some extent , the Council for the work they have done this year .
This has been a budget procedure which has so far run with remarkable smoothness .
We recognise the pressures on the budget - whether it is the Balkans , Palestine , enlargement , Afghanistan or the demand for action in new fields of activity .
Balancing these pressures has been quite a performance , particularly on behalf of the Commission , and for that we say thank you .
In those sectors that are the concern of the Environment Committee I particularly welcome the establishment of frameworks and long-term funding regimes which have certainly stabilised our work in the area of consumers .
I welcome the developing framework in the area of health where it is certainly going to encourage the development of steady progress in that field .
It is equally important to say that those kind of stable funding regimes assist our work enormously .
I am pleased that they have been , in the most part , respected .
I also welcome the decision that was going to be taken , but has not , not to withdraw money from the Life Programme for the environmental projects that are so important .
We can only develop our work in guaranteeing the future rights of the consumer , the health of the public and the safe , clean environment if we put our money where our mouth is and spend the cash that is needed .
Mr President , my warm thanks to Mr Costa Neves , Mr Wynn and all the members of Parliament 's team in the conciliation negotiations .
There was nothing else to be done .
The Commission 's amending letter being as modest as it was , one could hardly build up anything great on it .
As we know how little room there is for change when it comes to compulsory expenditure in the agricultural sector , I think we have to give you credit for having fought and won a few points .
I would like to single out one point , one , which makes very clear the dilemma as regards the agricultural budget .
We all know that our hands are more or less tied when it comes to compulsory expenditure , that they are tied , too , when it comes to outlining compulsory expenditure and thus outlining the common agricultural policy .
Where we could make headway - the second pillar , which is a no more substantial beanstalk than it was before , where we have more obligations than we can meet - we are unable to transfer funds from the compulsory expenditure .
Our self-imposed captivity must at some point come to an end .
Not for the first time , I claim for Parliament not only the unhindered right to set a Budget , but also I claim for it the full right of co-decision in the area of the common agricultural policy .
If these rights are not granted to us , then this dilemma will remain unresolved .
Mr President the reform of the common fisheries policy on 1 January 2003 will change this important economic sector for the better .
Of that I am convinced .
It was for that reason that the committee did not want to bring in any new Budget lines at the present time , with the exception of the flexibility reserve because of the Morocco disaster , which has been a heavy blow for the fisheries sector and raised many issues .
We did , though , seek a few small changes .
A : on food safety , especially with regard to genetic engineering , where there is an urgent need for scientific underpinning .
B : on the monitoring of fishing activity .
We need rigid controls and , perhaps , financial sanctions to deal with the black sheep .
C : genuinely to include the sector in discussions and in the legislative measures in accordance with the bottom-up principle .
Dialogue must be put on a formal basis .
To sum up : We thank the Commissioners and in particular Mr Costa Neves for their constructive and wise collaboration .
The Committee on Fisheries felt itself to be in good hands .
We wish to maintain fisheries for our benefit and for the benefit of the generations that will come after us .
I seem to have another minute to go , so I would like to touch on another subject .
I refer to Mr Turchi and Mr Prodi 's statements about Galileo this morning .
I appeal to all of you not to block the road to further development .
Mr Dover , the amendments proposed to Mr Turchi 's report on TEN 1999 , above all by our British colleagues , should be rejected .
The justification for them is false , as the enterprises had , in a ' Memorandum of understanding ' , taken a positive line on their financial participation as early as the beginning of 2001 , without the political will having been present at that time .
Mr Dover , please think of the many jobs involved , as Mr Prodi has done .
Mr President , I am now focussing just on sport , or more accurately , its absence from the draft budget that has been adopted by the Council .
A statement has been made in many consecutive summits , most recently at Nice , on the social importance of sport .
Despite that , sport is hardly taken into consideration in the work of the Union .
The situation has become more critical as , unfortunately , the EU had to withdraw from WADA funding .
The Committee on Budgets has repeated the proposal by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which was agreed in Parliament ' s first reading , for an appropriation of five million euros for preparatory actions for a Community policy in the field of sport .
The appropriation would be used , for example , to help the work of sports associations to prevent exclusion amongst youth .
I hope that the motion will receive Parliament ' s support in the vote on Thursday .
It would also be very much in harmony with preparations for the physical education theme year .
Mr President , my speaking time is limited , but I nonetheless want to address a couple of important issues .
There has definitely been a breakthrough this year in the area of aid , on which I have been working .
We have reached an agreement with the Commission both on how the reporting is to take place and on the direction our assistance is to take in the future .
I would thank the Commission for the constructive spirit in which our discussions have been conducted .
Parliament ' s scrutiny and control of aid money will substantially increase .
The conditions are now much better than they previously were for bringing order and method into an activity which is unfortunately often characterised by anything but those qualities .
The fact that the Commission has accepted as a benchmark that a third of the aid must be used as social assistance also definitely represents progress .
The agreement guarantees greater focus upon programmes and activities of special importance in combating poverty .
I also wish , of course , to thank Mr Costa Neves for the way in which he has taken care of the work .
His approach to a very difficult job has been characterised by openness , friendliness and efficiency .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report presented by the Committee on Women ' s Rights was approved by Parliament at first reading , practically in its entirety .
A new line , A-3037 N , was added to the amendments in this report , for women ' s organisations which do not belong to the European lobby , but which do effective work for the equality and promotion of women .
Both this and certain other proposals by the Committee on Women ' s Rights have been removed by the Council , and therefore Parliament , making use of the rights afforded it by the Treaties , since they are not obligatory expenses , is presenting them once again for approval .
We are thereby acting coherently , presenting the amendments which Parliament approved on first reading .
Amongst these amendments I must also highlight line B5-331 , Information Society , which is so important for the future , especially for women and their full incorporation into the labour market .
I would lastly like to warmly thank Mr Costa Neves for the very important work he has done and his sensitivity in responding to the needs we had raised .
I hope that the House will approve it by a large majority , because , as you all know , since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force , all Community programmes must include the objective of promoting women and achieving greater equality , not only in the European Union , but also in the countries with which we have cooperation agreements , particularly in the Euro-Mediterranean area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft budget for 2002 , both in its Commission section and in the sections relating to the other institutions , deals directly with the financial challenges of enlargement .
The two rapporteurs have budgeted for the structural , administrative and logistical needs which the immense challenge of enlargement will very soon present us with .
For 2002 we are basically faced with two new structural needs originating from the Nice Summit and not foreseen in Berlin .
The first one is caused by the failure of a Community policy , the non-renewal of the fisheries agreement with Morocco , which obliges us to convert part of Portugal and Spain ' s fishing fleets , with the great social impact of that conversion on many regions of those countries .
The other structural need derives from the very fact that enlargement is imminent .
We must respond to the needs of the border regions of the Union , whose competitiveness is being weakened by the imminent application of the freedom of circulation of persons , goods and services .
I would like to highlight the fact that the great majority of this Parliament understood both structural needs and supported a joint solution from the outset .
However , it has not been simple to respond to both demands .
Until the conciliation meeting of 21 November it was not possible to agree on a satisfactory solution , and that means living with an excessive degree of risk .
It is therefore very important that we improve the degree of implementation of the appropriations agreed .
Issues such as the entry into force of automatic failed commitments and the achievement of a level of payments which allows for the absorption of the leftovers are priorities which this Parliament is happy to have obtained .
We do not know which new structural needs we will have to deal with between now and 2006 and a degree of flexibility is therefore necessary within the spending categories , while always respecting the principle of maintaining the current financial perspectives which are now entering the third year of their difficult and eventful life .
This acceptance of the financial framework must not , however , lead us to forget how tight it is .
This year Afghanistan and the Middle East are the issues which have once again created tension within heading 4 .
The problem is not the ends , but rather the means used by the Council to achieve them .
Nobody disputes the needs of Afghanistan and the Middle East , as well as other international crises which may arise .
But this Parliament does not agree with the Council ' s way of doing things .
The Council is once again making financial commitments in external policy without taking account of Parliament ' s political priorities , and furthermore it is doing so with non-obligatory expenses , which complicates even further the task of those Members who want to maintain the current financial framework .
We would ask the Council whether it is really so difficult to establish a prior consultation system for external priorities in heading 5 ?
We take very good note of the words of the Commissioner on the possibility of improving the suitability of the legislative and budgetary procedures during next year and we truly welcome what he has said .
I would like to congratulate Carlos Costa Neves and also Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg , as well as Francesco Turchi on his report on the Trans-European networks .
We would also like to congratulate Terence Wynn on his work as chairman .
We believe that Commissioner Schreyer has found a good ally in this Parliament and that we have received good help from the Commissioner .
We believe that it has been a good marriage of interests .
I would finally like to thank the Council for making the most difficult thing look easy , and that is being here when necessary .
Mr President , I also want to begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves , Mrs Buitenweg etc .
They have not only sought broad solutions within Parliament but have also persistently maintained our positions in relation to the Council , something which has been especially important .
I also want to thank the Council and the Commission .
We have sometimes been critical about the forms , especially in connection with the first conciliation , but we nonetheless came up with a constructive approach in the end .
It has been possible to solve a number of difficult issues .
It is , of course , incredibly important that we have been able to produce substantial additional aid for Afghanistan , given the enormous needs that exist .
Personally , I am delighted that we have been able to direct a portion of this aid to women ' s involvement in constructing the future Afghanistan .
In the same way , there is satisfaction to be found in the fact that we came up with solutions both for the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets and for aid to the border regions .
In spite of the fact that work on the budget has , then , proceeded well , we see a number of problems for the future .
One of the biggest problems is that the EU budget is not flexible enough .
Each year , we are witness to events in the world around us which require the EU to contribute resources without delay .
In 2000 , this was the case with Kosovo and in 2001 with Serbia , and now this year it is the case with Afghanistan .
We have released funds for these unexpected situations , for example through the flexibility mechanism , but the process has been extremely difficult .
Now , moreover , we are seeing its shortcomings for , this year , we had to use the flexibility mechanism for other , heading-2 , aid .
When , at the same time , a crisis like that in Afghanistan occurs , the problem becomes clear .
Obviously , we ought , therefore , seriously to discuss the approach laid down in the interinstitutional agreement , namely that of revising the ceiling in the budget .
The Council is steadfastly saying no to this , in spite of our having a budget , large amounts of which are never used .
The problem , then , is that all that Parliament can do is account for every single krona in the budget , right up to the ceiling , and not allow for any margins for unforeseen events , or else cut back on other of its high priorities and thus let recipients of aid in other parts of the world in practice pay for our new needs in the Balkans or Afghanistan .
We can naturally solve such a dilemma once , perhaps even twice , but when such initiatives tend to become permanent and when the situations in Kosovo , Serbia or Afghanistan give rise to multiannual programmes that pile up without the other needs disappearing , then the situation becomes untenable in the end .
I believe that one of the major issues for next year will be that of finding new ways to increased flexibility .
I therefore welcome the Commission ' s ideas as a starting point for this discussion and hope that the Council will show a corresponding open-mindedness .
Another fundamental error is , of course , the poor implementation of the EU ' s budget . We have now launched a number of new methods , which are not only about increasing payments .
Instead , we are trying to identify those areas we think of as lagging abnormally behind .
We are trying to specify what is required of the implementation profile . We have conducted extensive discussions as to which services are required if we are to be able to implement initiatives in different policy areas .
Finally , we have also , as Mr Wijkman pointed out , launched a new benchmarking method in the area of aid .
These are important areas of progress , but I believe that they need to be developed further in future if we are to be able to win back people ' s confidence in how we handle taxpayers ' money .
As next year 's rapporteur , I naturally see a number of important areas that have to be worked through .
Enlargement is drawing ever nearer .
During the preparations , we must , quite simply , consider not only the short-term perspective but also the long-term perspective when enlargement seriously makes itself felt in the budget too .
Finally , we must also take a genuine look at reforming the Commission .
If we do not succeed in this - and it is not only a question of reviewing the regulations but , above all , of looking at evaluation , follow-up and how we use taxpayers ' money - then I do not believe we shall succeed in changing people ' s view of the EU .
We must have effective administration and make sure that people regain their confidence in the European Union .
That is one of the most important tasks for future work on the budget .
Mr President , first I would like to heartily congratulate and thank the budget ' s main rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , with regard to his excellent draft budget and his constructive cooperation .
Likewise , I wish to thank the second budget rapporteur , Kathalijne Buitenweg , and also , in particular , the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Terrence Wynn , for his skilful and constructive leadership of the Committee .
The budget for 2002 now being debated is a moderate and disciplined one .
Appropriations have grown by just 2 % , which is clearly below the figure for the financial perspectives .
The European Parliament has shown an enormous sense of responsibility , which our group values highly .
This budget is a considerable improvement on the Council ' s first proposal .
The agricultural budget is realistic .
There are more funds available to cover outstanding commitments under categories 2 to 4 , and there is a common call to use them to clear arrears .
The reform of the Commission proceeds , and any expenditure that should not in fact arise , has been cut .
We particularly appreciate the fact that no negative reserve , that is to say , no uncovered appropriation , has been adopted .
In the first reading of the budget some cuts were made to external actions , such as the western Balkans CARDS programme .
Now we have been able to prevent most of these cuts .
A total of 206.4 million euros is being proposed for the Balkans .
Furthermore , the CARDS programme had already been given 63 million euros out of this year ' s budget transfers , so all in all the programme is returning to what was proposed in the Council ' s draft budget .
This was immensely important for my group .
For the Commission ' s reform 317 posts are being reserved , which guarantees that the reform will proceed .
Of these , 105 are in reserve , and our group hopes that at least the majority of them may still be released .
A flexible instrument had to be adopted once again this year .
A compromise decision was reached on its use , according to which Spain and Portugal will see the structure of their fisheries fleets revitalised with the aid of 170 million euros , plus another 27 million in 2003 .
Thirty million euros are to be spent on solving border problems associated with new Member States , with a further 15 million being spent on this next year .
Our group supports all these decisions .
Mr President , in the conciliation meeting between the Council and Parliament most of the time was spent discussing the use of a flexible instrument .
The Commission would have promised 197 million euros for the reconversion of the Spanish and Portuguese fisheries fleets , which is a lot of money .
In the same connection , the Nordic countries are demanding 50 million euros to resolve problems on their eastern borders .
It was decided to finance these new needs with a flexible instrument under section 2 , but over a period of two years .
This new interpretation of the use of a flexible instrument shows that if there is the political will to finance something , the rules can definitely be bent .
The EU does not have a money shortage .
That is evident from the financial statements for 2000 .
Furthermore , there will be a surplus of billions for this current year .
There is 40 billion in outstanding commitments - the so-called ' RAL ' s - in the accounts , and it is to be supposed that most of it will never be spent .
The Commission has saved money but it is questionable as to whether it has made any political decisions regarding savings .
As there are such huge budget surpluses , the Commission has not implemented those budget decisions Parliament has made .
To be perfectly frank , the Commission high-handedly invalidated the decisions of Parliament .
If the next EU year is evaluated from the point of view of the budget we might say that things are on an even keel , no rises and no falls .
There are no special areas of focus , only running costs are funded from the budget .
When the Council lacks the ambition to tackle the problem of unemployment , it also shows in the Commission ' s draft budget ; for that reason , our group takes a critical view of it .
Just a small detail , the Council has not wanted to end the transport of live animals over excessive distances .
The ill-treatment of transported animals continues , and the Council of Agricultural Ministers is to blame .
Mr President , there is an old Dutch saying which reads : ' wie wat bewaart die heeft wat ' [ waste not , want not ] .
This has proved invaluable time and again for those who have lived by it .
When we adopt the budget , it is crucial to set aside adequate reserves for unforeseen expenses .
This was illustrated yet again this year .
In this respect , the recent crisis in agriculture springs to mind in the first instance .
Unfortunately , the Commission has abandoned its plans for a reserve in the sum of EUR 1 billion in the compulsory agriculture expenditure .
In our view , the Commission ' s argument for this U-turn borders on naivety and bears witness to a short-term view .
Even if expenditure in terms of arable crops , dairy products , sugar , olive oil and mutton turns out higher than expected , expenses are far higher where vinicultural products and cotton are concerned .
Our greatest frustration is the fact that BSE and foot and mouth no longer seem to feature in the Commission ' s dictionary .
Mr Görlach from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is right to remark on the underlying uncertainty as to the final end of the foot and mouth crisis in the United Kingdom and other Member States , as well as animal transports and the inconsistent vaccination policy .
Additionally , I share his fear that the BSE crisis is likely to be around for the foreseeable future .
The recent confirmation of a case in Austria speaks for itself .
How does the Commission intend to pay for unforeseen expenditure ?
Will we once again have to fiddle with the ceilings agreed in Berlin ?
The second point concerns the flexibility instrument .
It is striking that these resources , an annual amount of no less than EUR 200 million , have been fully used up ever since this instrument was created three years ago .
I do not call into question the validity of the spending objectives to obtain funding .
What bothers me is the financing method .
Why do budget headings not receive a thorough overhaul for unspent amounts and unprofitable budget lines ?
This Parliament wants to be close to the citizen . It should therefore act as any sensible citizen - if it wants to pay for something new , there will have to be economies elsewhere .
Mr President , negotiations with the Council were , yet again , not straightforward , but it is important that we were able eventually to come to an agreement on the question of the modernisation of the fishing fleet and on additional funds for the Member States ' frontier regions .
The roles played by the Commission , and indeed also by some Members , were in our view not always transparent .
The acceding countries must not have large amounts of promotional funds made available to them whilst the frontier regions of our Member States get no additional funds at all .
These regions ' economic situation is often not much better than that in the acceding countries .
The poor economic situation in the frontier regions of the Member States may well get even worse after the new countries join the EU , because differing levels of funding - almost all get Objective 1 funding - will greatly favour the frontier regions of the acceding countries , some of which already possess better transport infrastructure than is to be found in the frontier regions of the Member States .
As an example of this , I would mention the airport at Laibach in Slovenia , which is more modern and much better developed than the airport at Klagenfurt in Southern Austria .
The accession of the new states will , for the reasons I have mentioned , make it difficult , or almost impossible , to support small and medium-sized enterprises in the frontier regions of the Member States .
We must , though , be clear in our own minds that the citizens in these regions can hardly be in favour of the accession of new countries under these circumstances .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today is a good day , because we as Parliament have together , and as citizens ' advocates , gained something for the frontier regions that the Commission at first denied them , and I wish to thank from the bottom of my heart those Members who helped to make political reality of this important concern that the Heads of State and of Government had articulated in Nice .
My thanks are especially addressed to the Belgian Presidency of the Council , who took the concern of the regions ' peoples on board and here provided the financial means it demands .
Commissioner , I now of course expect the Commission to table proposals with all speed .
You have demonstrated that you are in a position to do this where fisheries policy is concerned , and I hope that you will present programmes for the frontier regions within a comparable timescale , so that the money can be tied up as quickly as possible and be spent on the ground on worthwhile projects .
Secondly , I would like to point out that we must , of course , ensure that political priorities and the Budget process are synchronised in the future .
It was this morning that we first had the opportunity to acquaint ourselves with the Commission 's political priorities for 2002 .
I find that quite unacceptable .
The former Commission , which also had to step down because of problems with the Budget , was significantly quicker and more efficient than the present one when it came to setting priorities and discussing them with Parliament .
As the Commission always needs some supplementary tuition , we will happily provide it .
The best way of doing this is to keep in reserve those positions that the Commission urgently needs .
I hope that will help to make the setting of political priorities and the Budget process go more in step with one another .
I find it unacceptable that we should be told the political plans for the coming year only on the day we are debating the Budget at second reading .
I will also take the opportunity to thank Mr Turchi for his report on the Trans-European Networks .
Here , too , I would like to ask the Commission to see to it that , where funds for stages or parts of networks are made available from the EU 's Budget , care is also taken that the whole network is also constructed .
Let me give just one example from my own country , the important transport link from Berlin to Verona via the Brenner Tunnel .
The German federal government readily undertook to finance the construction of the stretch from Berlin to Erfurt , but struck the Erfurt-Nuremberg portion from its list of priorities .
Now , either the money must be repaid , as a stage is no use on its own , or pressure must be brought to bear to get the next stage built .
Let me end by saying something about Parliament and its budget .
I think it is a bit close to Christmas to be drawing up Christmas lists of possible new buildings that we will need if we are to have the space to cope with enlargement .
I think there must be serious examination of whether there is real need for additional space for offices and meeting rooms .
Christmas lists are nice , but the Christ child does not grant us all wishes , and nor should we .
Let me thank everyone , the rapporteurs and especially the Belgian Presidency of the Council , for their cooperation .
Many thanks .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Schreyer , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to add my thanks to Carlos , Kathalijne , Francesco , Esko , Joane and Terry .
It is they , of course , who have provided us with these documents for today ' s debate , and I believe they have done an outstanding job .
The result we shall obtain from all of this will be a very good one .
Allow me at this point , I spoke out of turn last time , to address Mr Vande Lanotte , the representative of the Council .
After Mrs Parly last year , you are the second President of the Council whom I shall remember with profound gratitude .
If this trend continues in the coming years , if this level is consistently maintained , we shall yet manage to establish really close cooperation and mutual trust one of these days between the Council and Parliament .
Keep an eye on us , Commissioner - you must treat us better , otherwise you will suddenly find that we are far more in tune with them than with you .
The point I wish to put to the President-in-Office , however , concerns Laeken .
As I have already remarked , one of the things you will be discussing in Laeken , naturally enough , is the future structure of the European Union , and this discussion will not be confined to the question of a constitution in the sense of defining the structure and purpose of each component of the Union .
No , we must also talk about the way in which we can achieve a budget that is transparent in every respect . It is impossible to explain to any of our citizens the fact that , having underspent various allocations by 4.6 billion euros , as the Commissioner said , we should be fighting for weeks and months here to obtain an extra 200 million or , when acute emergencies occur , that we actually have to push the entire budget back and forth to deal with them at the expense of our long-term strategies and basic political aims .
We have had to make a large amount available for Afghanistan this year , and indeed it is very important that the people there do not merely see Europe as an authority that comes to punish but that they also experience Europe as a helper coming to assist them in their development .
We have allocated aid to the fishing regions and aid to the border regions .
This , too , was very important , because it signalled to the world that we are taking the current changes seriously and that we are restructuring in response to them .
Allow me a brief remark in parenthesis .
Time and again , as we all know , the cry from Bavaria has been that we need money for the border regions .
These are the selfsame Bavarians who , on other occasions , denounce the system of revenue redistribution among the Länder and who , in CDU and CSU papers on structural issues , advocate the scrapping of all structural aid .
On such occasions they turn round and demand a great deal more money .
I have been a very fervent supporter of assistance for border regions and shall continue to support it , but those who beat the drum with high-powered press releases must ask themselves whether this is a consistent way to act .
We also have fundamental matters to deal with .
We must forge ahead with the reform of the Commission , because we want a modern administrative system .
We must forge ahead on e-learning , one of the areas with the highest growth potential in a developing economic area like the European Union , not only because we want to grasp our economic opportunities but also because we want to avoid a split within our populations between those who can afford to acquire computers at a very early stage and those who are excluded from the information society .
We must cooperate more effectively in Europol and Eurojust to combat terrorism .
We cannot have a situation in which the criminals are driving Ferraris and the police are trying to chase them in Fiat Unos !
I mention these two makes of car deliberately , because they come from a certain country , a country that would do well to consider what it is doing to Europe at the present time .
In the domain of foreign policy too , we must agree to tackle important issues .
The Balkans must continue to receive attention .
So must the Mediterranean region .
But we must also heed the silent agony of the voiceless in the world .
This is why we have been active this year in the struggle against AIDS .
Silent agony , however , is easily neglected .
We must keep closer watch .
We must not wait to be rocked by violent explosions in the world . On the contrary , the European Union must become more sensitive , in cooperation with the regions of the world where our help is needed , especially to the need for food aid to ward off starvation but also to the need to help the countries in those regions to improve their administrative systems and infrastructure , thereby guaranteeing that those countries can develop by their own efforts in a manner which reflects credit on the quality and diligence of European cooperation with the rest of the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I wish to concentrate on a single point , namely the issue of the Commission ' s reforms , which are of course an important priority , in this year ' s budget too .
There have been quite a few speakers here today who have stated that there are things in the budget process that could be done better and that the institutions should in future work better together , even though this budget has proceeded very peacefully under the expert direction of Parliament ' s Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg .
However , I also think that , in certain areas , we should give some thought to how we act in Parliament .
In next year ' s budget , money has thus been set aside for early retirement and new appointments in order to ensure that the Commission obtains the right manpower for carrying out its tasks .
In Parliament , we have demanded information as a condition of the appropriations , and the Commission has , on several occasions , reported in detail on the staffing situation .
There is a majority in the Committee on Budgets that has wanted to place a large amount of money in reserve until further information has been provided .
I think we must be careful , in making our demands , that we are not too pedantic and do not require too much detail . Otherwise , we shall end up obstructing the reforms rather than promoting them .
We must , of course , ensure that taxpayers ' money is managed efficiently and transparently , but I believe it is important for us to concentrate our attention more on results than on detailed management of the Commission ' s administration , for that would not promote responsibility .
I think that we in Parliament should honour the obligingness and openness shown by the Commission and either release those items that are in the reserve or at least be content to keep a smaller amount in the reserve so that the Commission obtains reasonable conditions .
Mr President , from Brussels ' point of view , the budget for 2002 is coherent and comprehensive , despite the criticisms made by the European Court of Auditors , which I have been examining with great interest .
The Berlin decisions still offer some scope , particularly since there is apparently no need to maintain the levy on the Member States at its present level .
In the implementation of the budget for 2002 , I expect the structural support funds for the development of rural areas to be spent in full and all surplus revenue to be reduced to zero before or during the year 2006 if possible , by ensuring that eligible projects are realised within the shortest possible time frame . In response to another complaint that I hear time and again , I also expect guarantees that enough flexibility will be shown for projects to be replaced if necessary .
At the same time , I expect the Commission to reconsider carefully whether the intended lowering of the support rates for major investments in the least affluent areas is necessary and warranted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me pay tribute to the presidency of the Council and to its cooperative approach to this year ' s budget .
Naturally I also pay tribute to our rapporteurs and to the Commission for a budget that , in my view , is going in the right direction .
Nonetheless , I have three comments to make .
The first concerns the reform .
In this context I must say that I am most disappointed , we as a Parliament are most disappointed with the various episodes of these past days .
As the President , Mrs Schreyer , will know , I am not addressing her at this moment but the Commission in general , including its Vice-President Mr Kinnock .
I think the kind of communication and exchanges of view we have seen over the past few days between the Commission and Parliament is not likely to help us take the decision we need to take this evening to unfreeze the budget items on reform , which is a pity .
I want to draw the attention of Members and in particular of the rapporteur to two points .
It seems to me that yesterday the General Affairs Council buried the ' European political parties ' heading .
That means EUR 7 million are likely to be unusable for lack of a legal basis .
I would ask the rapporteur whether we could vote differently on Thursday .
Furthermore , in regard to the budget heading for north-south cooperation in combating drugs , the Commission has not really followed up that question .
A report that should have been drawn up is not there .
Here again we have entered money under this heading , which has no raison d ' être .
So I would ask you whether we could change the vote on Thursday and delete this heading .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is right firstly to express my gratitude , as previous speakers have done , for the work of Mrs Buitenweg , of the chairman of our committee and , especially , Mr Costa Neves .
The Union is at a decisive stage of its history , which must be accompanied by budgets which are suited to the challenges we are facing .
We must begin by acknowledging the fact that , if we want to promote the work of the Union and make it truly efficient , we should enter soon into a debate on the Union ' s resources and the Community ' s budgetary weight .
First of all , I should point out that throughout the difficult negotiation , which has ended with a positive agreement , progress has been made in resolving problems which go beyond a particular budgetary year .
The commitments made in the statements during the conciliation process represent a code of conduct which works in favour of transparency and greater efficiency in spending .
It is therefore important during the next six-month period , under the Spanish Presidency , which has declared its intentions with regard to the financial Regulation , to reach a definitive agreement on this fundamental piece of legislation .
We have responded to the problem created by the lack of a fisheries agreement with Morocco by compensating the Community fleets in Spain and Portugal and guaranteeing the funding of the necessary conversion and modernisation programmes both in the 2002 budget and in the current period , as the Commissioner has pointed out , and I thank her warmly for her commitment .
But it is also necessary for this Parliament to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Commission on such important projects as the establishment of the European satellite navigation system , known as Galileo .
At a time when there are doubts on the part of some Member States , we must make it clear that the programme must not be called into question and that this phase needs to be basically sustained by means of public funding , as the Turchi report demonstrates .
It is true that , as we move towards the mid point of the period of the financial framework in force , the difficulties increase because the new demands , the new commitments , call on the budget without any financial coverage .
Despite the difficulties and contradictions , I sincerely believe that , with the signing of this budget , the way ahead has been partly cleared .
It is a political success because it is rigorous and is accompanied by guarantees of more efficient implementation , and these conditions are essential if we are to ensure healthy and sustainable economic growth .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we are at last at second reading and as far as the administrative reform is concerned I agree with Mrs Wynn and colleagues who raised the matter .
It is true that at first reading we were quite severe with the Commission about the reform .
However , as you know , after the Commission ' s replies we are quite prepared to give up these reservations , although there are still some points , two in particular , that bother us .
Let me remind you of them .
First there is the question of early retirement ; up to now , and for several months now , we have had no reaction and seen no document that meets our expectations .
The second point to which I would draw the attention of Parliament as a whole is the establishment of base management activity , with as its corollary the lack of any reliable response from the Commission on the application of coherent legislative and budgetary procedures with a view to drawing up our next budgets .
I must say that we would not be so concerned if the administrative reform had been accompanied by an even more revolutionary reform , that is , a much more satisfactory system of interinstitutional relations with a view to drawing up the budgets .
I must tell you that if the Council could reply in time , coherently and on a reasoned basis to the questions we or the Commission put to it , we could make progress on every front .
Above all , if the Commission implemented in a reliable manner the budgets we as the budgetary authority adopt , believe me , Parliament would not hesitate today and would find it easier to give a vote of confidence and to abandon many of its reservations , especially those relating to the reform .
You may be sure that Parliament continues to spearhead the reform with a view to modernising the administration ; but then the Commission must also give us proof of its serious resolve to reform the working procedures between our two institutions .
Thank you , Mr President .
I , too , should like to congratulate all those involved in this budgetary procedure , which , as far as I can see , was an excellent procedure .
We greatly appreciate the fact that amendments tabled by Parliament to compulsory agricultural expenditure have been adopted under the Belgian Presidency for the first time .
It is somewhat regrettable that the Commission has failed to seize the opportunity to include Parliament ' s proposal in the letter of amendment at this stage .
In the light of the foot and mouth crisis , it is crucial for the European Union to do something about the development of marker vaccines and of insurance systems against animal diseases .
I only hope now that the Commission will implement the amendments to this budget , for in the past I have had certain doubts in this respect .
Other amendments which have not been included unfortunately , but which are of major importance , in my view , are the amendments which relate to the quality policy for agricultural products .
This then refers to a quality heading other than the purely organic production .
I hope that the amendment will be adopted and that the Commission will implement it accordingly this time .
Of great concern is still the fact that a large number of amendments are left over , of which the Commission had said before that it was unable or not prepared to implement them .
There is every chance that these amendments will be adopted on Thursday nevertheless .
What will the Commission do in that case ?
Will it persist in its attitude or will it bow to the wishes of the budgetary authority ?
Mr President , I want to speak briefly about an amendment I have tabled to the Turchi report on trans-European networks .
I have no problem about telematics being included in such a programme and I generally support the Galileo project .
But the fact is that nearly EUR 1 billion is committed over the next five years , all from the public sector - from either the European Space Agency or from the Commission itself .
By contrast , only EUR 200 million is allocated to the project by the private sector .
My amendment therefore says that it is doubtful whether the private sector will come up with the goods early enough .
I ask for a reserve of half the money allocated by the Commission for the first year of the funding to be set aside and released only if the private sector signs up to its commitments to take part in this project .
I do not want to smash the project .
I know there are heated discussions in the Council , and many nations have withdrawn their support for now , or are a bit uncertain .
That is not my agenda .
I just want to make sure the private sector comes to the party early enough to make sure there is more confidence in the scheme as a whole .
Mr President , I too thank the rapporteur , the President of the Commission and all those who have contributed to the achievement of an agreement that I see as being positive and satisfactory on two key subjects that have concerned us : the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fleets and the impact of enlargement on cross-border regions .
These two problems do not just affect two nations but have Europe-wide repercussions .
I therefore ask the Commission once again to provide a better definition of the concept of cross-border area and region .
For us socialists , a cross-border region , which should be included in the pilot project and other measures , is one which forms a border by land or by sea .
I do , however , regret certain cuts , in the case of the Balkans for example , but I am also pleased with the success achieved in MEDA recovery .
In this regard , I hope the Commission will give priority to the regional dimension of the partnership provided for within this programme .
I must also express my satisfaction with e-learning , Socrates , Leonardo , Europol , Eurojust and the Global Help Fund .
Thanks also to Mr Turchi for his report .
The projects approved at Essen must be speeded up ; the individual States must be involved more , but the space for the great networks linking North and South must also be increased .
Only if North and South can be brought closer together will we have a more cohesive European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me just deal very briefly with some of the comments we have heard .
Mr Colom i Naval suggested that the agreed amounts which are laid down in the multiannual programme should be index-linked .
The Commission cannot endorse this view , because these appropriations must be adopted as absolute amounts .
If we then have a different inflation rate , that naturally creates more leeway in Category III , which such a situation will quite obviously require , and of which Parliament will rightly avail itself .
Many comments related to the implementation of the budget .
May I simply remind the House that a new instrument has been in place this year through which Parliament has been able to take part in the monitoring process , namely the weekly implementation figures issued by the Commission .
This is the only Parliament that is kept so well abreast of the day-to-day expenditure situation .
The Parliaments of the Member States do not have such an instrument .
This is a genuine innovation , and we should certainly maintain it .
For you , of course , it is a very important source of information , enabling you to observe how implementation is proceeding .
I believe that what we have set down in the resolution is another important step towards close cooperation as part of a sound implementation process .
The third point that was raised in many of your contributions concerns the flexibility of the budget as a whole .
How rigid is this system that the Financial Perspective gives us ?
It is undoubtedly noteworthy that this year , for the first time , the Council consented almost immediately to the use of flexibility instruments , of the flexibility reserve , in the budget .
This really shows how important it is to have a balancing instrument , a fine-tuning instrument .
But of course we must also ask the question whether that in itself is sufficient .
We are in the third year of the Financial Perspective .
Much of what we have to do here together , it must be said , raises budgeting almost to the level of an art form .
This is the third year that we have launched the budget together .
I do believe we can be content once again with the result , which certainly stands up to scrutiny .
On behalf of the Commission , I should like to repeat my sincere thanks to everyone who has been involved in this process .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 10 a.m. on Thursday .
Determination of Member States ' payments to VAT-based own resource
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0431 / 2001 ) by Mrs Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Common Position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2223 / 96 as concerns the use of ESA 95 in the determination of Member States ' payments to the VAT-based own resource ( 8793 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0385 / 2001 - 2000 / 0241 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in June 1996 a Council Regulation introduced a new revised European system of national and regional accounts , ESA 1995 .
This revised system superseded the old ESA 1979 .
Its use was made compulsory for all Member States .
It applies to all acts of the Community - all except one .
For budgetary purposes and for the determination of the Communities ' own resources , the old system is to stay in place for as long as the Council Decision of 1994 on the system of the Communities ' own resources remains in force .
Back in 1994 it was assumed that there would be a new decision on the Communities ' own resources in 1999 .
As we know , it actually took until the end of September 2000 before the Council plucked up the necessary courage .
At the same time , however , the Council tried to railroad us here in Parliament into a quick decision .
A grim picture was painted of the scenario that would ensue if Parliament did not adopt the Council Decision without amendment and , later , if we insisted on a second reading .
A delay , we were told , would be intolerable , the Communities ' own resources from VAT could not be collected properly , the Member States would incur high costs , because statistics would have to be collected for both accounting systems , and so on and so forth .
Sheer balderdash !
Since the year 2000 all the statistical offices have in any case been compiling their respective accounts on the basis of the 1995 system .
The ESA 1979 data are not even available any more - a fact , incidentally , which the Council has now formally acknowledged in item 2 of its common position .
So if we approve the common position at the present time , we shall merely be legalising a fait accompli .
In other words , we had all the time in the world , and we wanted to take this opportunity to issue another urgent reminder of the importance of the revenue side in the compilation of the budget , to re-emphasise that revenue is the key to our prospects of funding our European policies .
In its common position , the Council has only adopted the first of our amendments , the one in which we stated that the change from ESA 79 to the ESA 95 system for the determination of the Communities ' own VAT-based resources would have no impact on the level of these resources , neither in terms of the balance between Member States nor of the overall volume of the Communities ' own resources .
The Council has rejected our Amendments Nos 2 and 3 , in which we sought to guarantee better annual information for the budgetary authority on the state of play with regard to the Communities ' own resources in the form of a Commission working paper and to establish a trialogue with the Council and the Commission in this domain .
Yes , the Commission has subsequently written to us , indicating its willingness to provide us with such a working paper every year , for which we are grateful .
No , the Council does not wish to engage in talks with us .
There is no provision for such a trialogue in the interinstitutional agreement , it says .
Huh ! So much for the constant preaching about transparency !
Then there are those who say that the discussions about our own resources have no place in legislation on statistics .
Admittedly , we cannot invoke Treaty articles , the Financial Regulation or interinstitutional agreements .
Admittedly , statistical legislation is not the most attractive vehicle , it is not the ideal means of getting our demands through .
We do not have a formal legal base , but we have a right , the right of equality for both branches of the budgetary authority in all matters relating to the common budget .
If the participants in the Laeken Summit , the post-Laeken convention and the subsequent intergovernmental conference speak of democracy , they must also speak of the democratic right of Parliament to exercise full powers of co-decision on the European budget , and they must not only speak but also take action .
If , by the end of these meetings , Parliament has obtained its rightful budgetary powers - co-decision on all expenditure and revenue - that will be a satisfactory outcome .
Anything less , and the word ' democracy ' in the mouths of Council members will not be worth the cost of the electricity that feeds their microphones !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to achieve the objectives set in the Treaty on European Union and , more specifically , on Economic and Monetary Union , the Community requires high-quality statistical instruments , which provide all the institutions , governments and economic and social operators with a collection of harmonised and reliable statistics on which to base their decisions .
In this respect , it is necessary to modify the Regulation in order to make it possible to use ESA 95 .
We believe that the new ESA 95 significantly improves on the previous version , which dates from 1979 .
Progress has been made on the harmonisation of methodology and the accuracy and precision of the concepts , definitions , classifications and accounting rules which must be applied in order to achieve a quantitative description of the economies of the Member States .
It is clear that , by implementing the change to the new system , the Member States have made additional improvements to the quality of the national accounts as a result of a complete review of their sources and methods used in producing accounts .
Of all the various uses of the national accounting data of the ESA in the budgeting procedure , such as setting budgetary limits , calculating gross national product , setting the fourth resource etc . , the only thing that is affected by the modification is the determination of Member States ' payments to VAT-based own resource .
In this regard , we agree with the draftsperson of the opinion that to use this new system would make no difference in terms of the level of Member States ' payments , since they have already begun to adopt the ESA 95 in producing their national accounts .
To attempt to calculate them again would be expensive and risky and furthermore would not be useful , since all the experts agree that , for rebalancing the levels of taxation , the use of ESA 79 or ESA 95 would not have an effect on the result .
Finally , we congratulate the rapporteur on having obtained a commitment from the Commission to present an annual report to the European Parliament on the state of the collection of own resources , the forecasts in this field for the next budgetary year and certain frequent problems relating to the system .
This will contribute to greater transparency and will allow the European Parliament to be duly informed on the implementation of the modifications necessary for the harmonisation of the new system .
In relation to everything else , we fully agree with the rapporteur ' s views .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission firstly wishes to thank Parliament , and in particular Mrs Haug , for your understanding and the common approval of the Council .
As Mr Garriga has stressed , the Regulation is going to allow the Member States to use the best and most recent data from national accounts for the calculation of VAT-based own resources .
As Mr Garriga also pointed out , the Regulation in no way affects budgetary revenue or the balance between Member States in the field of own resources .
The debate at first reading allowed us to better understand and restate the need to improve information to Parliament relating to budgetary revenue .
As a result of this debate , I would like to confirm on behalf of the Commission that , at the beginning of every year , we will present Parliament with a working document on the state of the collection of own resources , the forecasts for those resources for the following budgetary year and any other specific problem relating to the own resource system .
I therefore confirm what has been said by the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , and also Mr Garriga , in this respect .
I believe that in this way we are going to establish fruitful cooperation between the Commission and Parliament , and I would like to congratulate Mrs Haug on this initiative and on the work she has done with a view to the adoption of this Regulation , which is highly technical , but no less important for that .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Green paper on the criminal protection of the Community 's financial interests : A European prosecutor
The next item is the Commission communication on the Green Paper on the criminal protection of the Community 's financial interests : A European prosecutor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission attaches high priority to the fight against fraudulent misuse of the financial resources of the European Union .
The Commission is well aware of the fact that the European Parliament is our staunchest ally in this cause .
Today the college of Commissioners has unanimously approved the Green Book I presented on the use of criminal law to protect the financial interests of the Community and on the creation of a European Public Prosecutor .
By adopting this Green Paper just before the European Council meeting in Laeken , the Commission has sent out a strong political signal .
We have already made some headway in the fight against fraud .
This applies especially to our cooperation with the Member States .
The Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) is doing sterling work in this domain .
The Commission has also been doing a great deal in the field of prevention ; for example , OLAF will examine all future legislative proposals to ascertain whether they are fully fraud-resistant .
On the other hand , there are still many serious shortcomings to be rectified in the body of criminal law with which the European Union seeks to combat fraud .
We need a consistent approach to criminal prosecution throughout Europe .
The prosecution of cross-border frauds involving funds from the Community budget all too frequently grinds to a halt at the borders between different legal systems , of which there are not only 15 but 17 in the European Union , a number that will increase still further with enlargement .
What is lacking is an effective instrument with which administrative scrutiny by OLAF and national investigations can be made to culminate in criminal prosecution rather than running into the brick walls that divide our legal systems .
For this reason , back in September 2000 , the Commission tabled a proposal for the Intergovernmental Conference in Nice that a European Public Prosecutor be established to protect the financial interests of the Communities through the system of criminal law .
The introduction of a European fiscal prosecutor would be unprecedented in qualitative terms , and a truly innovative step in the judicial fight against fraud .
The Heads of State and Government , sadly , did not pursue this proposal at the time .
The issue , however , is far too important to be left on the shelf to gather dust .
For this reason , I immediately decided to draw up a Green Paper which would spell out the details of the proposal for a European Public Prosecutor as well as indicating how this Public Prosecutor could operate in practice .
The best possible use should therefore be made of the time between now and the next reform of the Treaties to respond to the questions and scepticism from the Member States , which have been asking us repeatedly about the precise form that such a system would take .
The EC Treaty would merely deal with the appointment , the dismissal and the responsibilities of the European Public Prosecutor and the main elements of his or her job specification .
All other details , such as the status and working methods of the Public Prosecutor , would be laid down in secondary legislation .
These are precisely the questions that are now addressed in the Green Paper .
How and on whose initiative does the Public Prosecutor act ?
What are his or her powers ?
Who supervises the actions of the Public Prosecutor ?
How does he or she cooperate with the national prosecuting agencies ?
What is the Prosecutor ' s legal status , and how is the Office of the European Public Prosecutor to be organised ?
On these questions , the Green Paper advances various options for discussion .
The Commission , however , also clearly expresses its preferences , which , taken together , form a coherent system .
What is the general approach that the Commission is proposing ?
Which principles underlie the Green Paper ?
The general approach proposed by the Commission is that the European Union should legislate only where such legislation is absolutely necessary and should rely as far as possible on the national laws and legal systems to regulate other matters .
Our proposals are therefore fully consistent with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The European Public Prosecutor would considerably enhance the effectiveness of criminal law as an instrument in the fight against fraud without turning the national judicial systems upside down .
What does that mean in detail ?
The originality of the proposal lies in the fact that the European Public Prosecutor would be a central authority responsible for conducting and co-ordinating criminal investigations and prosecutions at the European level , whereas the Office of the European Public Prosecutor itself would not be centralised , and the principle of mutual recognition would be paramount when it came to taking specific measures .
A common investigation and prosecution area would thus be created in Europe for the protection of the Communities ' financial interests .
Once investigations were completed , the European Public Prosecutor would prefer charges before the proper national court in the relevant Member State .
The proceedings themselves , including the delivery of a judgment , would then be governed by national law .
The Commission proposes a decentralised structure for the Office of the European Public Prosecutor .
In the Member States , the European Public Prosecutor would be assisted by ' delegated national prosecutors ' whose responsibilities would have a European dimension .
As for proceedings , the European Public Prosecutor should be able to draw on the broad range of national investigation instruments .
European prosecutors should therefore be able to enlist the help of the national and regional prosecuting authorities , such as the criminal investigation departments of the national police forces .
The application of the principle of mutual recognition should also ensure that these investigative measures are automatically admissible throughout the territory of the Community .
The same applies to the recognition of evidence and to judicial scrutiny of the actions of the European Public Prosecutor .
For example , if an application made in a Member State for a search or telephone-surveillance warrant is granted by a national court under the applicable national law , the warrant would be valid throughout the territory of the Community .
This approach respects the national legal system .
At the same time , the principle of mutual recognition would ensure that the common investigation area became a reality .
As far as judicial scrutiny of the European Public Prosecutor ' s actions is concerned , the Commission also takes the view that national legal channels are adequate for this purpose and sees no compelling need for a European criminal court .
Moreover , the Commission does not believe that the definition of the crimes for which the European Public Prosecutor could prefer charges implies the need to create an autonomous European penal code .
What we do propose is the minimum essential degree of harmonisation , which should certainly go beyond the level that is set in the proposed directive for the protection of the Community ' s financial interests and should therefore cover a wider catalogue of crimes than is covered by the 1995 Convention .
We want to incorporate all offences that damage the financial interests of the Community , such as fraudulent practices in connection with tendering procedures or breaches of official secrecy to the detriment of Community interests .
We also consider uniform rules necessary for sentencing and prescription limits .
The Green Paper , then , is structured in strict accordance with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality while guaranteeing that a European Public Prosecutor will be able to operate efficiently and effectively .
It is my view that we have struck a good balance which might even win over some sceptics .
The concept of a European Public Prosecutor fits neatly into the vision of a common European legal area .
I compiled the Green Paper in close cooperation with Commissioner Vitorino .
The various departments of OLAF were also in constant touch with their counterparts in the Directorate-General headed by Mr Vitorino during the drafting process .
The new and long-awaited breakthroughs that have been made in judicial cooperation between Member States in criminal matters represent a sound basis for the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor .
One of these is the European arrest warrant , which we hope the European Council will approve in Laeken .
Another is Eurojust .
The Eurojust initiative is not in competition with the European Public Prosecutor either . The two , in fact , would complement each other very well .
I expect the Green Paper to herald the start of a broad and objective discussion about the creation of a European Public Prosecutor with all interested parties , including , of course , practitioners , judges and prosecutors in the Member States .
I would ask the European Parliament , as the driving force behind this idea , to play an active part in this discussion and to foster the debate in the Member States .
We need the widest possible feedback on our proposal .
Once we have analysed the results of the consultation process , our aim is to be able to contribute something at the end of 2002 or the beginning of 2003 to the convention responsible for preparing the next intergovernmental conference .
The ultimate goal is to ensure that the European Public Prosecutor is enshrined in the Treaties when they are next revised .
We must be prepared for a long haul .
I am , however , optimistic , because this goal can be achieved together , with the support of the European Parliament .
Mr President , what I have to say is addressed particularly to Mrs Schreyer , the Commissioner .
A fortnight ago , you described me as a champion of the European State Financial Prosecutor .
I take that as a title of honour and might perhaps apply the term to you yourself , as we have now of course achieved what we wanted at the beginning of the nineties - a Green Paper and consequent Treaty amendment .
I believe , though , that the timetable has to be tightened up a bit , as what you have said indicates that such a State Prosecutor will be in place only in 2006 or 2007 .
So , we are on your side , but , as we want to speed the process up , I would like to ask you to find the time to enable us to achieve the objective , and , with all the subsidiarity , please see to it that the process is not ponderous , slow or inefficient .
That is important ; it will enable us to really move ahead with setting up the State Prosecutor .
The citizens out there demand it , and we are doing something for Europe if we make it clear that it is Europe 's money that we are protecting .
Mr President , I would like to pick out a few points .
Firstly , it is a fact that you , Mrs Theato , were the originator of this idea and have been pursuing it for a long time .
I believe that we are now at a stage when , as the Nice Summit showed , it really is important to be precise .
The question at issue was what exactly this meant , which is often taken as an excuse to say that the whole idea will have to wait .
The timetable looks more or less like this : the consultation will run until June 2002 .
While a new treaty amendment is launched for the next Intergovernmental Conference , proposals for secondary legislation - that is , on functioning and on such issues as the admissibility of evidence - will be drafted at the same time . The time available will be used for both purposes , so that we can as soon as possible not only give form to the idea , but also make the institution a practical reality .
Firstly I would like to say that the previous speaker , my illustrious committee chairman , was being slightly disingenuous because there is no real demand for a European public prosecutor .
Only two weeks ago in Parliament we saw huge tranches of her own report being deleted because they contained references to such a body .
There will be some dissension among the various political parties in this House but many people are concerned about what this is actually leading to .
I do not think you were being completely fair with us , Commissioner , when you said it will only go so far and no further .
Will it lead to corpus juris ?
If you say no to this question , how can you reconcile that with the answer that Mrs Delmas-Marty gave our committee a month ago ?
Mrs Delmas-Marty is the former head of the supervisory body of OLAF and she has written many books on this particular subject .
She said yes - a European public prosecutor will almost certainly lead to corpus juris , a common body of law throughout the Community .
What would be the core competences of the European public prosecutor ?
What powers would he or she have ?
What are the Community 's financial interests ?
Surely you are not ignoring political signals sent by both the Council - many countries are against this - and Parliament , which , as I said at the beginning , two weeks ago rejected many things to do with the European public prosecutor ?
Mr Heaton-Harris , the debate a fortnight ago was about the directive on the protection of Community financial interests , a directive in which the offences of fraud , corruption and money-laundering were defined , and , moreover , in terms already agreed on in 1995 by all Member States , the United Kingdom included .
That agreement , though , is not yet in force , and the Commission therefore proposed to include it in a directive .
Like the Commission , Parliament was of the opinion that the directive was not the right place for a definition of a Public Prosecutor , both of them being convinced that the creation of a European Public Prosecutor could not be accomplished by a directive , but would need an amendment to the Treaties .
It was for that reason that Parliament struck out a Member 's proposal that it should be dealt with in the directive , but doing so was not a vote against the European Public Prosecutor .
This , I think , is something we must stick to .
You are right to ask now what the duties of the European Public Prosecutor might be .
One is that he will take over the direction and coordination of law enforcement and also direct investigations , which would themselves be conducted according to national law .
The European Public Prosecutor would then be entitled , having assembled incriminatory and exculpatory evidence , to bring charges on the basis of that evidence , and this would also be done in accordance with national law and in a national court , so there is no question of creating some huge new apparatus or a new European penal code - we all know how much scepticism there still is about that .
Many of these cases are listed in our Green Paper .
There was , for example , the regulation that , where evidence was gathered in one Member State and then , crime knowing no frontiers , was used in a cross-frontier case before another court , it could be objected to on the grounds that it had been gathered in accordance with administrative law . That is something we do not recognise .
It often happens that there is a mass of evidence of fraud being committed against the European budget , but the evidence is , as it were - legally rather than bureaucratically - defined out of existence , because of the sort of differences that there are .
I do not believe that is in the public interest , and it is certainly not in the interests of Parliament .
I would ask you , Mr Heaton-Harris , to examine this proposal with an unprejudiced mind . We have said that we are committed to applying the subsidiarity principle , but we do of course want there to be real protection in criminal law for Community interests .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to dissociate myself from the remarks made by Mr Chris Heaton-Harris and I believe that the Commissioner has very effectively outlined the framework within which the amendments to the Theato report were rejected in this Parliament .
This is indeed a correct account .
I should like to echo the words of Mrs Theato and call for speed .
Commissioner , you have now announced a timeframe for setting up the post of European Public Prosecutor that is indeed a very slow process .
You will be submitting a proposal after the Green Paper consultation in the course of 2002 or at the end of 2002 or beginning of 2003 , this will be followed by a Treaty amendment in 2004 , and entry into force is likely in 2006-2007 .
You will have to admit that this is all a long way off . I should like to note that at the time , the Committee of Independent Experts made a few suggestions in reaction to the dismissal of the Santer Commission in order to work faster and to move away from multi-stage plans .
I should like to ask you whether you have adopted elements of these proposals by the experts in the Green Paper and whether you are willing to consider them , thus enabling us to make a start on the establishment of the function of European Public Prosecutor at this stage .
Mr President , the Commission had indeed submitted a proposal to amend the Treaty to the Nice Intergovernmental Conference , and if that proposal had been successful , it could be said that the legal basis would have been created as soon as the Treaty of Nice was ratified .
The Council decided otherwise , and this proposal was not even put on the table for the negotiations .
Now we must in fact wait for the next IGC to carry out an amendment of the Treaty that will make the creation of the European Public Prosecutor possible , but , as I was saying , we will be making good use of this time and not just waiting ; we will be using the time for consultation to find out the best possible model , and will then be discussing functioning , organisation , status , evidence gained from questioning , periods of limitation , in short , all the things that of course have to be cleared up .
I work on the assumption that we will be having very intensive and practical debates in the Committee on Budgetary Control on the issues that have been raised .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to address the timetable issue , and do so from the same angle as did the previous speaker .
I do not think , Commissioner , that you can in fact afford to wait until 2006 . You cannot do so in view of the revelation of two billion euros ' worth of fraud and irregularities , and in view of the challenges , some of them financial , with which eastward enlargement is going to face both you and us .
I do think that speed really is of the essence here , and , indeed , you must not wait .
You know that as well as we do , you know our report and you know about the proposals that have been made , which have stated that you are well able to tackle an initial , introductory stage without amending the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Both the Council of Experts , which made proposals in 1999 towards reform of the Commission , and also the latest annual report of the committee overseeing OLAF have mapped out these two stages for you .
In view of this pressure , which really is needed , I ask you : why do you still hesitate ?
Why are you again putting it off , until 2006 ?
Why are you so hesitant , why do you not take the plunge , as we urged , most recently in the Bösch report ?
Mr President , Mrs Stauner , it is not within the Commission 's competence to appoint a Public Prosecutor , who can then carry out law enforcement in the Member States and bring charges in them .
That is not the case ; rather , the European Union is founded on the Member States ' agreement to cede competences to the European level .
The Member States have not as yet ceded the competence to establish a European Public Prosecutor .
The foundation for such a law enforcement competence must first be laid at the European level , in other words , a Treaty amendment is needed to do it , and an effective instrument needs to be created , one that can actually deal with cross-frontier crime in all the Member States efficiently , not only carrying out investigations , but also bringing charges that result in prosecution and , finally , punishment .
It is that procedure that we must apply .
You may well now say that you wish the European Union were different , but I must tell you that the Commission is the guardian of the treaties , and what we propose must therefore take due account of the competences .
This proposal really does , in my view , promise much for the future , and I hope that we can use it to convince even the sceptics .
Mr President , I just wanted to ask a few questions .
I am sorry I was not here at the beginning .
First of all , do you not think that Mr Heaton-Harris is giving a green light to fraudsters ?
In the past five years only two people have been prosecuted for fraud against the EU .
If he does not come up with any alternatives , it is effectively giving the green light .
I wonder if you could comment on that .
Secondly , how do you convince those Member States which are resistant to the concept of European Public Prosecutor , for example my own country which , in my opinion , is misguided on this point ?
Thirdly , how will the European Public Prosecutor be appointed ?
And , fourthly , do you not agree that it is important not to proceed too quickly and do you accept also that this proposal is not enough ?
In other words , Eurojust will simply not work .
Mrs Schreyer , I am going to ask you also to be very brief .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , we are dealing here with a relationship of complementarity similar to that with Eurojust , which I have described .
The European Public Prosecutor proposed here has to do with the protection of Community interests in the financial sphere , whereas Eurojust deals with other types of serious crime .
Of course there has to be a link here , for data exchange among other things , but always from the data protection angle . We must look at it in a complementary way .
Secondly , the Public Prosecutor 's appointment would involve various procedures .
On the one hand , a procedure must be devised for the appointment of the European Public Prosecutor , who would , as it were , represent all public prosecutors .
The national European Public Prosecutors or the Delegates want a decentralised structure and would then be appointed under the relevant law of the Member State .
I do not believe that Mr Heaton-Harris wants to protect fraudsters ; rather , this is about what steps have to be taken for protection to be efficient .
I will say again that we have a Community Budget , we have Community finances and we have a common internal market , and to that degree we no longer have borders in the legal sphere , but we do still have seventeen different legal systems , as the United Kingdom has three different legal systems .
These , then , are real obstacles , which leads to the possibility of real defects in law enforcement , defects that we should overcome .
Thank you , Mr President .
What the Commissioner is saying all sounds encouraging .
I should like to pose a very brief question : how does she view cooperation between the proposed Prosecutor and OLAF ?
Mr Mulder , there are of course various possibilities for that as well .
One is that OLAF would continue in its present function of carrying out investigations under administrative law , in which case provision would of course have to be made for OLAF to present its results to the same Public Prosecutor , who would make use of the intelligence thus gathered .
Another possibility would be for OLAF to itself take over enquiries rather than being limited to an examining role .
We consciously refrained from giving that a prominent position in the current debate , but then it would have been said afterwards that we wanted to give OLAF a specific role .
This is , as it were , an issue that has to be worked out once we have the ' big picture ' .
I can only reiterate that we are not now dealing with competing conceptions , but with a White Paper in the drafting of which OLAF played a part .
OLAF is always facing the difficulty of its having gathered evidence or intelligence and then having to wait to see whether a national state prosecutor 's office will accept this material and work with it .
If we had a European Financial Public Prosecutor , it would be a really positive step forward for OLAF 's work .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
You must not enter into a dialogue .
You must be aware of the Rules of Procedure and apply them .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0536 / 2001 ) .
Part I
Question No 39 by ( H-0878 / 01 ) :
Subject : Securing the external borders of an Enlarged Union Slovenia has some 370 border crossings with its neighbour Croatia .
However its government currently only has enough money to man around 90 of them .
Thus , some 270 border crossings are currently wide open .
In view of terrorism , organised crime and illegal migration , what plans has the Commission got to ensure a secure border for the Union in the Enlarged Union ?
Mr President , one of the future external borders of the European Union is expected to run along the border between Slovenia and Croatia .
There are 36 crossing points along this border where it is legally possible to cross .
The figures quoted by the honourable Member refer to places where crossing the border between Croatia and Slovenia is physically possible but legally prohibited - for instance , footpaths , roads and bridges .
I agree with the honourable Member that it is the reality on the ground - literally speaking - that deserves attention .
The Commission recalls that Slovenia must achieve a high level of external border control upon accession .
The Commission is paying close attention to Slovenia 's progress in the framework of the negotiations under the Justice and Home Affairs chapter , as well as in the pre-accession process .
Slovenia is required to demonstrate its capability systematically to check all persons crossing external borders and to ensure effective border surveillance between authorised border crossing points .
In this regard , Slovenia has prepared a detailed action plan for the implementation of the Schengen acquis , as requested by the European Union .
In its action plan , Slovenia has shown that it is taking the necessary steps to ensure that the appropriate infrastructure and equipment are allocated to the border with Croatia .
In addition , Slovenia is taking measures to ensure greater coordination between its authorities involved in border controls .
The Commission wishes also to underline that Slovenia is already engaged in intensive bilateral cooperation for control of the common border with Croatia .
This should be further expanded by the conclusion of the agreement on simplified border checks on road and rail traffic and an agreement on cross-border police cooperation .
The latter agreement will also encompass joint border patrols for the surveillance of the green border , that is between the authorised border crossing points .
In addition to the very substantial financial assistance granted to Slovenia for upgrading its border controls - this is financial assistance within the framework of the pre-accession process - the Commission is encouraging and directly supporting the bilateral cooperation between Slovenia and Croatia .
This is funded under our assistance programme to Croatia for integrated border management , which will also cover border crossings with Slovenia .
Slovenia and Croatia have recently reached agreement on the demarcation of the common border .
While , in the past , the lack of demarcation did not affect in practice the quality of the border controls and of the surveillance of the green and blue border , this agreement , once ratified , is additional proof of the good cooperation between the two countries .
Thank you Commissioner for a very full answer .
Everybody is aware that this is very difficult .
My point is one that was raised with me by a minister in Ljubljana .
All the crossings , whether they are legal or illegal , will be used by terrorists , smugglers , immigrants , criminals and so on .
Therefore it is a very serious problem .
The minister also said to me : we cannot pay ; we do not have the money to man all these crossings !
So Slovenia has got a real problem .
There are nine other applicant countries - if I leave aside Cyprus and Malta where it is presumably easier to control the borders - so we have ten applicant countries , all with problems like this , without enough money to meet the cost .
Is there any possibility that the Commission might propose that the Union takes on a responsibility for guarding our eastern borders ?
I would not necessarily agree that the ocean is easier to control .
I mean it is as easy getting to Malta and Cyprus in the dark from the sea as crossing a hill in the mountains .
We know that there is a real problem .
We have organised and funded capacity-building support to provide very strong assistance in this effort and this is what we have to do right now .
It is quite important , as part of the whole negotiation process and accepting the acquis and responsibilities , that we clarify that this is a responsibility for the applicant country .
There are numerous problems .
The issue of controlling the periphery of the European Union will remain with us as a real challenge for quite some time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU-Slovakia Joint Parliamentary Committee recently toured our border with Slovakia .
Near Kosicec there is a forty-kilometre long border strip consisting of green fields . We were told that this is very difficult to monitor and that , at present , a very substantial influx of Afghan refugees can be observed there , perhaps not all of whom are entering Europe motivated by peaceful intentions .
I would therefore like to ask if it is possible for the Commission to introduce satellite surveillance here , for example , or automated systems , making it possible on the one hand to gather statistical material and , on the other , to pick up more of these refugees and so be better protected in future ?
What programmes are in fact available to these states ?
Mr President , it is difficult to add anything substantially new to what I already expressed .
But the mention of satellite monitoring prompts me to say that it is quite well understood in Parliament that the Commission is serious about Galileo and considers it to be an important programme .
This is just one other application .
Not having it would be a problem for the future of Europe and for our ambitions .
I could not agree more with your remarks , but please talk to your national governments about that issue .
Question No 40 by , which has been taken over by Carlos Carnero González ( H-0881 / 01 ) :
Subject : Revitalisation of the Euro-Mediterranean policy On 24 October 2001 President Prodi , addressing the EP plenary in Strasbourg in the debate on the Ghent European Council of 19 October 2001 , said : ' The time has come to make new moves in the Mediterranean area . ( ... ) We must now take full advantage of all the opportunities open to us to ensure real progress .
The Euro-Mediterranean region must aim at genuine economic integration and at setting up institutional mechanisms for taking common decisions ' .
Which of the existing mechanisms does the Commission intend to reinforce in order to improve the effectiveness of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership ?
What new instruments or mechanisms will the Commission propose to generate real prospects of economic and social integration with the Mediterranean countries in the short and medium term ?
What institutional mechanisms need to be put in place for the purposes of ' taking common decisions ' ?
In re-invigorating the Barcelona process we are strengthening the existing institutions of the Euro-Med partnership and moving ahead in a number of key areas .
Concerning the association agreements , 2001 started with the good news of Egypt ' s decision to initial the association agreement and negotiations are ongoing with Algeria , Lebanon and Syria .
My second point concerns the association agreement signatories developing free trade between each other .
We are encouraging each association agreement signatory to agree on free trade arrangements with the others so as to facilitate economic cooperation and inward investment .
The Commission is working with the countries which have already started this process to see where technical advice can best be provided to help partners reach agreement .
In parallel we are working on the rules of origin to see how the partners can be brought into the pan-European system .
In order to lay the basis for a Euro-Med internal market so as to fully exploit the future free trade area , we are assisting our partners to bring their regulatory frameworks closer to ours .
During 2001 the Commission has further developed a concept of the Euro-Med internal market , provided information about its implications and opportunities , and we have paid particular attention to internal market issues in MEDA programming .
Cooperation is being strengthened across a range of sectors .
The regional economic dialogue is being reinforced with future discussions focusing on growth and employment .
MEDA is being used to examine certain infrastructure needs from a regional or subregional perspective and , where appropriate , to draw up strategies for interconnection and for linkage with the trans-European networks to ensure that priority projects are funded and implemented .
Together with our partners we are developing a new regional MEDA programme on justice and home affairs and are engaged in discussions on these issues bilaterally in relation to the provisions of the association agreements and in MEDA programming .
Concerning new instruments and mechanisms , in recognition that cooperation between Europe and Mediterranean countries cannot be solely political or economic , the Commission is looking at ways to initiate a new broad-based cultural dialogue in the Mediterranean region .
In this regard , in addition to the programmes which are currently being implemented to support cooperation in cultural heritage , audiovisual activities and youth exchanges , the Commission is examining the feasibility of extending the TEMPUS programme for higher education to the Mediterranean region .
With regard to new structures for dialogue , the Commission will bring forward proposals to adapt the working methods of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , in particular to provide for more frequent political dialogue on regional and international issues .
The Commission will launch a policy dialogue with the Mediterranean partners on employment policy , sharing EU experience on ways of combating unemployment and of creating new jobs .
It will work to improve the available information and statistics as part of ongoing efforts to channel legal migration and to combat illegal migration .
Finally , the Commission will consider ways to stimulate investment and joint development projects in the Mediterranean , for example by studying the need for , and feasibility of , a new bank or other financing mechanism , building on the European Investment Bank .
Let me add some information concerning the performance this year of the activities in the MEDA programme .
For this year , there are commitments under MEDA of about EUR 740 million in the budget which are expected to be fully implemented .
The same is true of other budget lines benefiting the Mediterranean partners .
As far as payments are concerned , they are expected to represent over 56 % of commitments this year to reach nearly half a billion euro , in fact the best ever result achieved in the region .
This year is also the first year of the implementation of the revised MEDA regulation which puts in place mechanisms for more coherent programming of the aid , better coordination both with partners and with the other major donors , and more streamlined approval procedures inside the EU .
Consultations have already taken place with the partners and with the other donors on the country and regional strategy papers covering 2002 to 2006 and on the more detailed national and regional indicative programmes for 2002 to 2004 .
All these documents should be approved by the end of the year .
I am reporting these details because I do not want to miss this opportunity to inform Parliament about the MEDA Programme which has been quite problematic in the past .
We are now seeing some light at the end of the tunnel .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the Commissioner for his friendly and extensive reply and also apologise on behalf of Mr Obiols who , contrary to what he would have liked , has not been able to get to the House on time today .
I believe that the Commissioner has given us a variety of reasons to think that the European Commission is taking the same approach as Parliament .
We must prevent one of the greatest successes of European Union external policy , the implementation of the Euro-Mediterranean process , from entering a period of stagnation .
This process must not be limited to Euro-Mediterranean summits or ministerial meetings , such as the one which is going to take place next April under the Spanish Presidency in Valencia .
It is therefore necessary to implement mechanisms which lower the level in a vertical sense and also broaden it in a horizontal sense .
I suggest that , with regard to what the Commissioner has already said , we add , the possibility of relations between civil society , trade unions , women ' s organisations , young people , as he has also already mentioned , and , of course , the cultural field .
I would like to hear the Commission ' s views in this regard .
I do not have anything further to say on the matter .
Question No 41 by ( H-0917 / 01 ) :
Subject : African children sold into slavery in Europe The BBC recently raised the issue of the increasing trade in child trafficking from Africa to Europe .
There are thought to be around 10 000 West African children living with strangers in the UK alone , and the trade appears to extend across the European Union .
Parents are persuaded that a new and better life awaits their offspring in Europe and send them off to live with distant family and friends in order to receive an education .
In reality , children are put to work as domestic slaves , some are beaten and abused - they rarely set foot in a classroom .
The BBC highlighted the apparent ease of bribing West African officials to buy genuine papers to enable children to be taken to Europe .
Can the Commission indicate whether it is aware of the level of this trade and whether it has statistics from the Member States to quantify the problem ?
Has it considered whether coordinating action can be taken at Community level to bring an end to this appalling practice and confirm that the OECD Convention on Bribery and Corruption , aimed at discouraging the bribing of public officials in third world countries , has been ratified by the Commission and by all the Member States .
The Commission confirms that it is aware of the phenomenon of child trafficking .
As regards the situation in the European Union , a study has been finalised with support from the Stop programme .
The title of the report is ' Trafficking in unaccompanied minors for sexual exploitation in the European Union ' .
It was carried out by the International Organisation for Migration and is available on the IOM 's website .
The report includes figures from Belgium , Germany , Italy and the Netherlands .
The Commission is also shortly expecting a report from Defence for Children International in the Netherlands .
They have carried out a study on the extent to which children are trafficked for sexual purposes into the European Union , how they get here , what happens to them next and what can be done to help them .
Furthermore , for 2002 the Stop II programme will support a follow-up and extension of the IOM report through a seminar on trafficking in unaccompanied minors in EU Member States .
Additional research on the situation in France , Greece and Spain will form part of the preparations of this seminar .
As regards action against trafficking in human beings , the Commission has been developing a comprehensive policy to fight and prevent such trafficking in human beings over the past few years .
The most recent example is the agreement reached on 28 September 2001 on the Commission 's proposal for a framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings .
The framework decision essentially concerns approximation of criminal laws and penalties to improve and facilitate law enforcement and judicial cooperation .
The Commission confirms that the political dialogue under the Cotonou Agreement and EU support for good governance in ACP countries have given real opportunities to address the human and social aspects of this practice , as well as the corruption elements that may be linked to it .
Moreover , as poverty and lack of local opportunities are amongst the main reasons for children being trafficked , the poverty-reduction approach of our development cooperation is a meaningful basis for attacking the problem .
It gives a priority to equitable growth and better access to education .
The Commission is also implementing actions and coordination with UNICEF and a large number of NGOs in several African countries where this problem is most acute .
In June 2000 , in Cotonou , in Benin I had the strange experience of visiting two projects we were funding from the Commission .
One project was helping abandoned children , the other helping abducted children .
In the same city we had two groups of beneficiaries : one project was for street children or orphans or simply abandoned children , and the other was for children who had been freed by the project from being enslaved .
It was very strange to experience .
We went from one project to another and were told about two different ways in which children find themselves in very serious situations .
We are pleased with our cooperation with NGOs in many countries in trying to do something meaningful here .
Finally , it is not envisaged that the Community as such will ratify the OECD Convention on Bribery and Corruption which is mentioned in the question , as its Member States are ratifying this convention .
At present all Member States , except Ireland , have ratified the convention and it is expected that Ireland will ratify it very shortly .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner very much indeed for that extremely comprehensive answer and also for mentioning his own personal experience of the problem .
I am pleased at the range of measures that he has outlined .
If I could perhaps ask a couple of supplementary points : in his list of countries involved in the various studies on the Stop Programme , he did not actually mention the United Kingdom .
Perhaps he could confirm whether my own Member State is involved or whether it will be brought in in the future .
If not , maybe this is something that I , along with others , can do something about .
Secondly , in terms of the work outlined and personal experience , particularly in relation to the issue of providing information to the parents of children - to some extent setting aside the issues I raised in my question , as it is clear from the BBC report that parents of children are being completely misled by people wishing to exploit their offspring - are there perhaps grounds for involving the EU in some sort of campaign to overcome this problem of misinforming parents , to try and tackle the issue at source .
Mr President , I do not have any information on the involvement of the UK in these investigations and studies .
It is clear that the real value of these studies is their ability to throw light on the whole issue and to raise awareness .
Knowledge , as such , is a strong weapon .
As regards the specific issue of child soldiers , where we have set in place a personal initiative on my behalf , there is a scheme under way with Unicef to try to establish a real information system that could produce reports , using a comprehensive standard base in order to establish meaningful and credible statistics .
At present , we only have the figures that have been flying around for the past five or six years .
So this scheme aims also to exert pressure and keep everybody better informed .
However , the core of this problem is not only poverty , it is also greed .
It is a moral issue .
Highlighting the problem of greed could be part of stronger work in this field .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I must inform you that Mr Lamy has not yet arrived , so Mrs Diamantopoulou will answer questions first .
Second part Questions to Commissioner Diamantopoulou
Question No 44 by , which has been taken over by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0866 / 01 ) :
Subject : Fatal accident at Perama - implementation of health and safety directives On 20 October 2001 , five people died as a result of a fire which broke out while they were working on board a tanker . It is thought likely that the tank in which they were working had not been properly cleaned .
Similar fatal industrial accidents occur frequently in ship-repair yards in Greece while tankers are undergoing maintenance .
The Greek judicial authorities responded to the last accident by initiating criminal proceedings , inter alia for infringement of Presidential Decree 70 / 90 concerning the health and safety of workers engaged in shipbuilding and ship repair work .
Ten years have passed since the Presidential Decree passed into law and , in the meantime , a number of Community directives on the protection of workers in such conditions have also been issued .
Will the Commission say whether there are any directives and accompanying measures concerning the health and safety of workers applicable to working conditions on board tankers , whether they have been incorporated into Greek national law , and whether Presidential Decree 70 / 90 now covers the obligations deriving from Community legislation ?
Mr President , Mr Alavanos 's question refers to the fatal accident in Perama , which was a most tragic incident and I should like to express the Commission 's condolences to the families of the workers who were killed .
The reply to Mr Alavanos 's question as to whether there are any directives and accompanying measures concerning the safety of workers on board tankers , which should have been incorporated into Greek law , is that there are no new measures and no new legislative framework which should have been transposed and that framework directive 89 / 391 , which covers both shipbuilding and the ship repair industry , was transposed into Greek law so as to cover working conditions in such cases .
This specific accident is being investigated by the Greek authorities and the European Union is waiting for the final results of the investigation into the causes so that measures can be taken , in collaboration with the Greek government , in order to prevent this sort of accident from happening again .
Finally , the health and safety strategy is on the European Commission 's list of priorities .
There is a huge number of deaths every year at European level .
The new health and safety strategy is due to be announced in 2002 , and the report on the application of European health and safety legislation at national level is being drafted as we speak , by which I mean that we are drafting a European report to evaluate the extent to which each country applied the health and safety specifications applicable to each sector last year .
Commissioner , following on from your last sentence , may I ask if the report which you mentioned will contain details of how Directive 89 / 391 has been applied ?
I ask because this is not the first time accidents have happened .
In Perama in particular they have become par for the course .
I should also like to ask the following supplementary question : having studied the texts , not that I have any highly specialised legal knowledge in these matters , I found other directives which , to judge from their titles , appear to relate to the matter under discussion here .
Directives 89 / 656 and 99 / 92 concern explosive atmospheres and work in such atmospheres , which is what caused the accident in Perama .
Surely these directives have a bearing on the matter ?
And , in any case , and I only ask because you said that you are waiting for news from Greece , and rightly so , does the Commission not periodically examine the prevailing situation on its own initiative , at least in highly sensitive areas which already have a history , such as Perama ?
As the European Parliament knows , the Commission has received specific charges relating to the application of the national provisions transposing the directives which you referred to into Greek law .
I have to say that it is extremely difficult for the Commission to intervene on its own and control and monitor the application of directives in all the Member States .
However , where specific charges and reports are filed , it is obviously obliged both to investigate them and to act accordingly , from nagging at governments through to bringing charges before the courts against the Member State in question if it finds that legislation is not being applied .
There have been charges relating to the application of national legislation , there has been an exchange of correspondence which started in the summer , in August to be precise , between the Greek government and the European Commission , staff from my directorate have visited Greece and examined the institutional framework and its application and we have requested additional information further to a letter sent by the Greek government on 9 November . We believe that the information sent is being processed at the moment and other information has also been requested , so that we can make a full evaluation of the level of application of legislation in the case of the specific directives to which you referred .
Mr President , I actually have a further question .
It is very important that regulations governing health and safety at work are applied in the field of shipping , especially where oil tankers are concerned .
It is also of crucial importance to comply with environmental legislation .
Since the Erika disaster , we have had several projects in Europe that have aimed to improve environmental legislation with regard to oil tankers .
Yesterday an oil spillage was discovered close to a nature conservation area in the archipelago off Turku , in Finland , probably due to some breach of environmental legislation - or at least the reason for it has not yet become apparent .
I would therefore like the Commissioner to comment on what measures can also be taken with regard to environmental legislation so that culprits may be identified , and on whether it is possible that the Commission might also take action regarding the kinds of oil-related accidents that occurred last year in Gotland , on the French coast ( with regard to the Erika disaster ) , and now in Turku in Finland .
Thank you for your question , which of course refers to other policies .
Environmental policy , especially after EUREKA , has been a driving force at the European Commission which , as you know , has submitted a framework of measures and proposals to the Council as regards both the actual ships and their various structural specifications and the measures which coastal countries need to take .
However , as far as the specific issue of the health and safety of workers on tankers is concerned , I have to say , first , that European legislation which applies to building sites also applies here and , secondly , that there is a specific directive on fishing vessels , which are a separate class of ship , and a directive on the provision of medical care on board ships .
That is all the legislation which relates specifically to the health and safety of workers on ships .
Question No 45 by ( H-0873 / 01 ) :
Subject : Collection of statistical data on Greece According to the Commission 's answer to my question H-0704 / 01 on the gathering of statistics on unemployment in Greece , the bulk of the reforms of the employment agencies are expected to be complete by the end of 2003 , while the implementation of supplementary measures will continue through to the end of 2005 .
Since the Commissioner responsible stated in her answer to my question H-0675 / 00 in September 2000 that the responsible Greek authorities had given a commitment to speed up the restructuring of public services , the employment agencies and the statistical services , and given that the restructuring is due to be completed by the end of 2001 , can the Commission say what the reasons are for the delay and who is responsible for it ?
Mr President , the Greek authorities have undertaken to reform the national employment agencies , the so-called OAED , and to set up a modern , integrated statistics system which can cope with the problem of people entering and leaving employment .
This undertaking is contained in the agreement on the community support framework for 2000-2006 or , more precisely , in the operational programme on employment and vocational training , and has been reiterated by the Commission in its recommendations for the last three years .
The Greek Ministry of Labour has tabled a business plan for reforming the employment agencies .
It is basically a plan which meets the need for preventive , individualised employment policies .
It has also tabled a reforming law , which was published on 19 October 2001 .
The Greek authorities have informed us that the bulk of the reforms will be complete by the end of 2003 , while the implementation of supplementary measures will continue until the end of 2005 .
One very important aspect of the reform of these agencies is the improvements which will be made to how statistics are collected and to the modus operandi of the employment agencies , which are the counterpart of the statistical office .
Commissioner , we appear to be condemned , you and I , to discussing the same question every three or six months .
It is like chestnut trees in Paris , to borrow an expression from journalism .
My question is this : you originally told me - I have all the information here and I do not suppose that you will question it - that it would be all done and dusted in 2001 .
That is what you told me in September 2000 , a year ago .
Obviously , you do not lie . Obviously , you were given that information and this assurance .
Now you tell me that you have been informed , but not assured I hope , that it will be all done and dusted in 2003 , with a few extras ' tacked on ' in 2005 .
What I should like to ask is who is to blame , Commissioner ?
Are you in a position to point a finger at who is to blame for this situation ?
Because this is no way to conduct a policy to combat employment and the periodic employment statistics published by Eurostat are making a laughing stock of my country because the column headed Greece is always blank .
This is no longer acceptable .
Sir , I do not think it is up to me to say who is to blame but I shall repeat the Commission 's recommendations to the Greek authorities that the policies on employment , which are subject to the agreed framework of the employment strategy , that is , prevention and an individualised approach , be applied as quickly as possible .
The reform of the national employment agencies in Greece is a difficult and complex matter .
There were procedures which the Greek government had to follow in terms both of social dialogue and parliamentary deadlines .
I only hope that a start will be made on putting these reforms into practice as quickly as possible .
As always , Commissioner Diamantopoulou is highly alert ; indeed , she is one of the most alert , able and sharp-minded of the Commission ' s representatives .
Employment statistics are certainly extremely important in combating unemployment .
Does the Commissioner know , for example , that in Italy , in order to get a pension , many women are forced to sign on at the job centre as if they were looking for a job , thus altering the unemployment figures ?
The jobless in Italy therefore always seem far more numerous precisely because there is a law that forces women to join the list of those seeking work even if this work is not what they want or desire .
Since this is an inflated and unfair statistic , does the Commissioner not think that there should be an attempt to seek clear and transparent statistics ?
Without doubt , statistical offices need to function objectively and correctly , correct statistical methods need to be used and the results of these statistical surveys need to be reliable if the strategy on employment is to be implemented properly .
The European Commission has repeatedly made recommendations to numerous countries , wherever statistical offices have failed to harmonise with common European standards and there are problems with the statistics which they supply , and a new method is due to be introduced in 2003 , in collaboration with the EU Statistical Office so as to ensure maximum harmonisation between statistical methodologies relating specifically to the question of employment and unemployment .
I hope that preparations by the Member States , which have already started so that we can commission this new system in 2003 , will be of help both to the European Union as a whole and to each individual country .
Question No 46 by ( H-0912 / 01 ) :
Subject : Health and safety at the workplace As part of the Social Policy Agenda , the Commission has undertaken to publish a statement on a Community strategy for health and safety at the workplace in the course of 2002 .
Since comparable statistics are needed in order to carry out such an undertaking , how does the Commission intend to address the lack of data and problems of comparability between national data ?
According to EUROSTAT research , the average percentage of accidents which are reported in the EU is 89 % , while the corresponding figures for Ireland and Greece are 38 % and 39 % , respectively , which is very alarming .
What measures does the Commission intend to propose to ensure that accidents at the workplace are reported ?
May I say that I fully share Mrs Kratsa 's concerns about the availability of comparable statistics at European level on both accidents at work and occupational diseases .
As I said earlier , the European Commission has put the strategy on health and safety on its list of priorities and harmonised statistics from the EU Statistical Office will be the basis for the proper development of this strategy .
The Commission has published two harmonised statistical methodologies since 1990 .
The first is the ESAW , the European Statistics on Accidents at Work , with 1993 as the reference year .
The second is the EODS , the European Statistics on Occupational Diseases , with 2001 as the reference year .
Provision was made for a special unit for work-related health problems in the 1999 survey on employees .
As far as accidents at work since 1993 are concerned , the Commission has annual statistics available for nine economic sectors .
These statistics come from various national sources and include statistics from Greece and , once they have been received from the Member States , they are adjusted by the Statistical Office in order to estimate the total number of accidents and ensure that they are comparable at European level .
As regards your comment on statistics supplied by Greece in comparison with other countries , the statistics provided by Greece are supplied by IKA , the Social Security Fund , and only refer to a proportion of accidents because only accidents which result in more than three days off work are reported .
According to IKA estimates , 39 % of accidents are reported , which compares with Denmark , Ireland and the United Kingdom , although we must bear in mind that 45 % of Greeks who are self-employed are insured with IKA .
However , we know that , in 1999 in Greece , 43.4 % were employers , self-employed or employees of family businesses , while the corresponding European average , according to Eurostat , was 16.2 % .
As part of the new Community strategy on safety , the Commission intends to recommend measures to improve the reporting of accidents at work and occupational diseases which , we believe , will help promote this strategy in all the Member States .
However , I must stress that the efficient implementation of national provisions transposing Community directives , especially those relating to the employer 's duty to report accidents sustained by employees at work is a matter for national governments .
It is very hard for the European Commission to monitor the situation at national and regional level , let alone at enterprise level .
So it is important for each country to set up national mechanisms to monitor health and safety issues .
Thank you , Commissioner , for all the information which you have given me .
I understand perfectly that , in order to achieve the objectives which you set in the Social Agenda , you need the national governments and the social partners as your allies .
But how do you intend to change the climate ?
Will the Community strategy which you propose force the Member States to supply detailed records , will you monitor progress , will you use tools other than the standard tools ?
There are countries , such as Greece which you mentioned , which need to adapt to a number of new circumstances and a new policy , new obligations , in order to highlight and inform the social partners of the quality and economic benefits of monitoring and applying Community policy in the field of health and safety in the workplace .
Mr President , the new strategy on health and safety will be announced at the beginning of 2002 and there will also be a consultation procedure with Parliament and with the Economic and Social Committee and the social partners .
The Commission is already preparing a report under framework directive 89 / 391 , evaluating the application of heath and safety in the Member States . This report is based on the reports submitted by national governments but also takes account of the independent expert 's report .
We are in the initial stages of drafting this report as I speak .
However , I must tell you that there are new ideas as regards the application of the new strategy on health and safety and , to reply to your concern as to whether further steps will be taken , thought is being given to applying the open cooperation method to the field of health and safety , which means common objectives , common national action plans , recommendations and cooperation between Member States .
This is one of the proposals which the Commission intends to submit for the new approach .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Questions to Commissioner Lamy
Question No 42 by ( H-0895 / 01 ) :
Subject : Commission contact with the TABD The Transatlantic Business Dialogue ( TABD ) was set up in 1995 on the joint initiative of the Commission ( led by Commissioners Brittan and Bangemann ) and the US Department of Commerce .
Is it true that the Commission and the TABD maintain permanent contact and exchange information and proposals with each other ?
Has the Commission contributed to the financing of any of the TABD 's annual conferences ?
This question concerns the Transatlantic Business Dialogue that forms part of a series of dialogues established in 1995 at the Madrid Summit .
The objectives of this dialogue , as of others too , and I will come back to this , are in a sense to build bridges across the Atlantic by bringing together a number of private , non-governmental players on the one hand and political decision-makers in the Union and the US Administration on the other .
This system of dialogues that was established at the time certainly includes the Transatlantic Business Dialogue , but also includes a Transatlantic Consumer Dialogue , a Transatlantic Labour Dialogue and a Transatlantic Environment Dialogue ; the business aspect being one of the pillars of this dialogue , which includes three others .
The purpose of this range of dialogues is to draw up public recommendations addressed to the Commission and to the US government , which , on a rotational basis , present their recommendations to the political leaders at the EU-US summits .
The Commission for its part attaches the same importance to all these dialogues , and we emphasise this because it has produced valuable results in terms of a number of developments , and certainly in terms of creating more balanced and solid transatlantic relations .
Participation in these various dialogues is open .
It is open to the parties concerned , in the various areas , and the results are obviously largely a question of how much the various participants invest in them .
The Commission is involved at different levels in the events that are organised in the context of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue , including an annual conference between the CEOs of the various companies , which could be said to form the annual highpoint of this dialogue .
The recommendations are published and available to the public , both on the website of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue and on the Commission sites , since our reactions to these recommendations are also in the public domain .
In fact , some Members of this Parliament closely monitor the bilateral US-EU bilateral business relations and are invited to take part in the annual conference of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue on a regular basis .
When the first dialogue was arranged in Seville , the two sides shared the costs of this event .
In 1998 , at another EU-US summit , both sides undertook to support all the dialogues and in fact that same year the European Parliament created a specific budget heading to support them .
In response to your specific question about financing , since 1998 the Commission has contributed to the financing of the business dialogue , as , incidentally , it has contributed to financing the other dialogues in the form of annual contributions .
In the case of the business dialogue , part of the Commission ' s contribution was designed to cover the costs of organising the annual conferences , although most of the costs of these events are now covered by the business sponsorship system .
That in fact explains why the Commission gives markedly less financial support to the business dialogue than it does to supporting the consumer dialogue , the labour dialogue and the environment dialogue .
I want to thank the Commissioner for a very comprehensive answer .
I have two follow-up questions .
My first is as follows . The major companies in TABD are making a number of practical demands , or expressing their wishes , in connection with legislation they want to see within the EU .
I wonder whether the Commission is reporting back on this to TABD , that is to say upon how these demands are being met and , if so , whether such reporting back is in the public domain .
Secondly , I wonder if TABD representatives participated when political summits were held between the EU and the United States , that is to say , meetings at the highest political level .
Have these major companies and their representatives access to such summits ?
As far as the first point is concerned , I would like to say that , like the dialogues on consumers , the environment or employment , the transatlantic dialogue on trade is intended to produce desires , recommendations and points of view that can help to provide a basis for our own work .
This contribution is , therefore , far from being exclusive .
Since we are engaging with a number of people from the business world , with trade unions , with non-governmental organisations , we have a whole range of bodies that are contributing to trade policy , part of which is the dialogue on trade .
This dialogue is important because the European and American business world is putting a considerable effort into this , which is commensurate with the importance of our trade relations with America .
This framework provides the opportunity for desires and wishes to be expressed , and recommendations and comments to be presented .
We discuss these , as we do with a number of representatives in the area of trade .
With regard to participation at the summit , as I said earlier , those taking part in these dialogues on business , consumers , the environment and employment are , in turn , urged to come and present their recommendations to the leaders of the two sides , in other words to the American president on the one hand , and to the Presidency of the Council and to the Commission on the other .
This is being done in conjunction with the summit ' s official meetings , which , as expected , bring us together with the responsible political authorities .
This is being done in conjunction with these events .
Question No 43 by ( H-0935 / 01 ) :
Subject : WTO conference in Doha NGOs had very little opportunity to put their case at this year 's WTO Ministerial in Doha .
Does the Commission consider that the opportunities NGOs were offered to represent their interests at Doha were nevertheless adequate ?
If not , how can it be ensured that NGOs and civil society are able to put their case in an appropriate manner at WTO conferences in the future ?
Does the Commission conclude from this that no more WTO conferences should be held in cities such as Doha ?
Mr Martin ' s question broadly relates to the problems that non-governmental organisations experienced in gaining access to the Doha Conference in Qatar .
First of all , I shall give you some background information .
Any member country of the World Trade Organisation can stand as candidate to organise the ministerial conference .
It turned out that Qatar offered to host the Fourth Ministerial Conference , and that it was the only candidate .
If we cast our minds back , so that we have a clear understanding , this decision was due to be taken several months after the Seattle conference , which may explain why there were not as many candidates as some might have wished .
Doha was , therefore , the only candidate city and it is relatively small in size .
Nevertheless , I think that the authorities made a considerable effort - this was something that all those taking part in the ministerial conference mentioned - to be in a position to offer the delegates appropriate accommodation and provide the necessary logistical support .
It is true that several delegations had to restrict the number of their participants due to the limited number of hotel rooms .
That is true .
However , I do not think that it is a catastrophe to slightly restrict the number of participants at such conferences .
In any case , I am sure that this saved the taxpayer some money and as for the delegation from the European Union , we were pleased with the way the conference was organised .
Furthermore , 20 Members of the European Parliament were in the EU delegation and I believe that they said they were satisfied with the way everything was organised .
It is also true that logistical matters were not helped by the events of 11 September and that many security measures were added to the checks that are normally applied at such conferences .
That is true , and it did not make anyone ' s life any easier .
I would like to reiterate that , as I also said to Parliament some time ago , we asked the Qatar authorities for access for the non-governmental organisations and were granted it .
This is what happened , even if the security restrictions caused some difficulties for everyone .
The last point that I would like to stress is that , again for security reasons , a large number of potential participants , whether governmental delegations , parliamentary delegations or non-governmental organisations , decided on their own initiative not to come to Doha .
In my view , NGOs were offered genuine opportunities to put their case at Doha .
The organisations that were present were able to contact their national delegations , were able to influence the outcome of the conference and we at Commission level widely encouraged transparency towards the non-governmental organisations .
For instance , documents were discussed quickly , meetings were held openly , and everything that favours transparency has been , in my view , significantly improved over the last two years by the WTO secretariats , has been supported , encouraged , and even initiated by the European Union .
Furthermore , the Director-General of the WTO arranged a number of meetings , in accordance with the commitment that he had made at the conference held in Geneva in July .
I willingly take on board the idea of a code of conduct , which could regulate relations between the WTO and the non-governmental organisations .
To come back to our own delegation , I said that it was made up of a number of MEPs , a number of colleagues of Franz Fischler and myself , more than fifteen representatives of civil society , who valiantly made the journey to Doha and who all achieved the goals they had set themselves .
We worked together with them at Doha .
If any one of them wishes to give their opinion , I have no objection to them doing so .
I myself had many intensive discussions with these representatives during the conference , and also with the representatives of other organisations from European civil society , who were not , strictly speaking , part of our delegation .
To sum up , if I compare Doha to Seattle , I think that we had better participation , greater transparency , a more lively reflection , and that the organisations present had a genuine opportunity to put their case .
This certainly had an effect on the outcome of the Doha Conference . I spoke to you this morning on that subject .
Overall I think that progress has been made in the way that civil society is managing to make its voice heard as regards multilateral trade policy .
This happened between the Seattle and Doha Conferences , this happened at Doha and I am certain that this will happen more often after Doha .
Mr President , I do not want to rephrase my question , but to put a supplementary one .
Commissioner , if everything was the way you describe it and Doha really was better than Seattle , how , then , do you explain the numerous complaints by NGOs that they were disadvantaged in the run-up to the event , that they could not get visas issued to them and that they were deterred from active involvement by bureaucratic obstacles being put in their way or by being told that there were too few hotel beds ?
Secondly , you have just described the narrow field of vision experienced by the European delegation , and how our delegation was composed .
That was not , however , what my question was about ; I was asking , rather , about the extent to which civil society could consider itself represented there , my point being that the situation was quite different from that in a country in which there is the freedom to demonstrate and the corresponding possibility of self-expression .
If though , you do not see things that way , I would very much like you to confirm that a second time .
Mr Martin , as far as the accommodation facilities are concerned , these were inevitably determined by the number of hotel rooms available in Qatar .
If my memory serves me well , there were approximately 4 500 rooms and , again if I remember correctly , about 700 of these had been reserved for the non-governmental organisations , meaning of course those NGOs that were present in that capacity , apart from those NGOs who were part of the delegations .
However , in the context of the European Union , and I suppose that it is essentially the EU that is of interest to you - it is , in any case , of primary interest to me - we are very lucky to participate in such conferences with 15 Member States , which themselves bring a number of NGOs along with their own delegations .
Therefore , from the European standpoint , many NGOs were present and I heard no complaints about this issue , either before or during any of the many meetings that I had with these organisations .
As far as what happens next , I will be taking part in a status meeting next week which will enable me to come to an opinion .
Once again , if you wish to hear first-hand information , those who were there will be able to give you the details .
I think that the NGOs were able to take the initiative in Doha .
Either I myself or my colleagues on my behalf spent time each day explaining to them ( as I did for Parliament ' s delegations and , of course , for the Council of Ministers ) where we were coming from , what stage we had reached and where we were heading , so that they could follow the work and influence it .
As you know , when you meet a delegation of this type which is able explain a few crucial points , this is what counts in such circumstances .
I therefore feel that , from this perspective , things were much better at Doha than at Seattle .
I would reiterate what I said earlier , with Doha being the only candidate city , competition and the law of the market concerning the appeal of the conference location did not really play a part .
This is an issue that we can only take note of ; since Doha was the only candidate city , I cannot see what other choice we had .
I reiterate that we ourselves specified the condition that access be offered on an equal basis for all the delegations .
Commissioner , would I be mistaken in suggesting that perhaps the admirable arrangements at Doha had something to do with the relative success of that meeting compared with previous WTO meetings ?
Perhaps we are finding a way of having a more civilised relationship with the NGOs than was evident in Seattle and Genoa ?
Are you happy that we now have a more rational and civilised arrangement to deal with the representations of NGOs for the future ?
Mr Purvis , I can see what you are driving at and I am not sure that I can go as far as you want to take me in this direction .
One of the reasons why Doha was better than Seattle - and , in my view , this is the main reason - was because everyone ( the governments , the WTO , the NGOs ) gave much thought as to why Seattle failed .
Everyone learnt a great deal from this failure after the event , if I may say so , and took lessons from it in preparation for Doha .
The reason why Doha was a success was , in the main , related to preparation . The reason why Seattle was a failure was , in the main , related to preparation .
The preparations for Seattle were poor , the preparations for Doha were good , and that is what counts for around 80 % of the success .
That basically leaves 20 % .
In Doha , things were well managed and the number of parties , in other words , the number of people who felt involved in the negotiations , who felt able to influence them , was considerable .
I always thought that what happened in the streets of Seattle only had a very small bearing on what was obviously a failure .
Similarly , I believe that what did not take place in the streets of Doha only had a very small bearing on the success of Doha .
Mr President , Commissioner , let me first congratulate you on your success in the Doha negotiations .
I believe that the European delegation , to which I belonged , did very well to bring the negotiations to their conclusion .
We stand a good chance of completing this round successfully .
Our hosts in Doha also looked after us extremely well , something which I think was a fundamental requirement .
What Mr Hans-Peter Martin is referring to , though , is the dialogue with the NGOs , a point I would like to probe further with reference to the Parliamentary Assembly .
I do not believe it is feasible for this discussion to be carried on every couple of years and at the same location .
Do you not think too that it would make more sense for parliamentarians from the various countries to be able to get together over a period of time and jointly to work through this subject , which is so crucial for the future , in a professional and detailed way ?
Mr Rübig , I am very much in favour of the suggestion to organise , structure and make more permanent the consultation between the governments and the WTO , to set up an organisation and parliamentary structure which could be derived from the Inter-Parliamentary Union .
You know , as I do , that we have worked on this area , and this House was a primary contributor .
We have not managed to set up anything with any shape or form for the time being , for reasons that mainly relate , on the one hand , to the great reluctance of a number of developing countries , and on the other hand , to the fact that the members of the American Congress have not , as yet , shown any particular enthusiasm for the idea .
These two barriers are still standing in our way , but I believe that we must not give up , and , in any case , if Parliament continues to move in the direction it has chosen , namely to attempt to set up this inter-parliamentary structure , you will have the support of the Commission in striving to overcome the obstacles that I have just mentioned , which are still standing in the way but which , in my view , must not deter us .
Thank you very much , Mr Lamy .
Questions to Commissioner Byrne
Question No 47 by ( H-0880 / 01 ) :
Subject : Animal transport The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has recently adopted a report ( A5-0347 / 2001 ) by Albert Jan Maat MEP , which calls on the Commission to present proposals incorporating a maximum limit of eight hours or 500 km on the transport of animals to slaughter or for further fattening and an end to the payment of export refunds in respect of the export of live EU cattle to third countries for slaughter .
Does the Commission intend to present proposals incorporating the above two resolutions of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ?
Mr President , as rightly pointed out by Parliament 's report , one of the key issues concerning animal transport relates to travelling time limits , and I thank Parliament for its contribution .
Travelling times , as with other parameters such as temperatures or densities , are essential elements to achieve a good level of protection for the animals during transport .
As a matter of policy , the Commission considers it to be of the utmost importance to draft legislative proposals on the basis of sound scientific advice .
The Commission has therefore requested an opinion from the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare on different welfare aspects of animal transport and , in particular , travelling time limits .
This opinion is expected early in 2002 .
The Commission will present further proposals on animal transport in the light of this opinion .
As regards the granting of export refunds for slaughtered cattle , the Commission shares the views of the Council , as expressed in its resolution of 19 June 2001 on welfare .
The first objective is to correct the deficiencies observed with the implementation of existing legislation .
There should be more controls and severe sanctions if the existing legislation on welfare during transport is not correctly implemented , be it on transport inside the Community or on exports to countries outside the EU .
Commissioner Fischler is also committed to strengthening the existing rules in this respect .
Community legislation in the field of export refunds unambiguously links the payment of aid to the respect of all the conditions related to animal welfare .
The Community must achieve a well-balanced solution to the different aspects of this question .
For example , it is wrong to assume that if we abolish the refund for live cattle , third countries will import carcases rather than live animals .
I conclude by assuring you that animal welfare is very high on the agenda of the Commission .
Animal transport in particular deserves much attention and action in the near future .
In 1993 , the Commission admitted that the laws on animal transport were being systematically flouted .
In 1999 , we had further evidence of particular problems in Spain , Italy and Greece .
There is no reason to believe that implementation enforcement has improved at all since 1993 or 1999 .
Animals frequently still find themselves crammed into overcrowded trucks , given neither food nor water , often for journeys flouting the current limits and travelling for up to 30 or 40 hours .
The combination of high temperatures , poor ventilation , overcrowding and lack of water can be lethal .
Many animals suffer extreme discomfort during transport and arrive dead or dying at their destination .
The European Parliament has repeatedly voted in favour of an eight-hour limit on transport .
It had the overwhelming support of a majority in plenary .
It had the support of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I am pleased to hear that a proposal will follow the opinion of the Scientific Committee , but what is the Commission going to do to ensure the proposal is enforced properly and to ensure the current laws are enforced properly ?
What specific actions is Commissioner Byrne going to take to improve enforcement both of current laws and the laws that we hope to see implementing an eight-hour limit and an end to export subsidies ?
Mr President , as I have already indicated , this report is due to be presented to the Commission early in the new year and when that report is available it will be closely examined by my services and myself to determine an appropriate response with regard to time limits and distances .
In the meantime , the control of this issue lies in the hands of Member States and it should remain there with the supervision of the Food and Veterinary Office .
That is one of the jobs that is undertaken by the FVO in its inspection reports .
The Commission also takes this issue seriously , not only in continuing its discussions with the Member States in circumstances where there is a recognised failure to comply with the legislation so as to ensure upgrading of standards , but also , where there has been a persistent failure to comply with the legislation , in instituting proceedings against individual Member States .
There are a number of such proceedings being considered at the moment .
You will also be aware of Regulation ( EC ) , No 615 / 98 which requires and empowers the Commission to withdraw export refunds in circumstances where the animal welfare legislation has not been complied with .
I refer you to the detailed answer given on 19 February 2001 to the question asked by Mrs Maes on the issue of the withdrawal of export refunds and , in particular , to the annex attached to that answer which clearly sets out the number of withdrawals of export refunds in respect of the Member States involved and the values involved .
I assure you that this issue is taken seriously by the Commission and all the measures I have identified have been taken .
We are keeping a close eye on this issue to ensure that animal welfare standards are kept up .
I wonder when the treatment and transport of animals will be seen as part of the public health and food safety chain .
We have already seen how animal nutrition has significance for people ' s health , but the ways in which we treat animals and the methods and systems we use to feed and transport them in fact affect public health as directly as does poor animal feed .
If these matters are not handled in the right way , there is a significant increase in the risk of diseases . These are mainly cured with antibiotics , but large quantities of tranquillisers are also used .
One consequence of antibiotics being misused as a result of poor animal husbandry is that what , during the last 60 years , have been simple infections are now - and , above all , will be in the future - significantly more serious when antibiotics are no longer available to us .
The connection between animal health and the treatment of animals and human health is well documented .
There is a close association between the two and definitely a connection in the sense that you make reference to - antibiotics .
The Commission has brought forward legislation in that regard and I refer you to the conference that took place only a couple of weeks ago under the auspices of the Belgian presidency on this particular issue .
I refer you to what I said on that occasion and also to what Minister Magda Aelvoet said in relation to that particularly important issue .
I also make reference to the zoonosis directive which has gone through the Commission and is now before Parliament .
Mrs Paulsen is your rapporteur for that particular piece of legislation and I identify that legislation as also being important in addressing the question of animal health as an influencing factor on human health .
Just one final point on this question , in relation to the transport of animals over long distances .
One of the issues that has to be weighed in the balance and borne in mind is the location and quality of abattoirs and meat plants : they need to be up to the high standards necessary to comply with the legislation passed here in this House and by the Council of Ministers .
The investment needed to achieve these standards means that there are now fewer abattoirs than there used to be and this is necessary in order to comply with the legislation for the protection of human health .
But ultimately it also affects the question of animal transport and the transport of live animals over a longer distance .
That , however , is another issue that has to be borne in mind in determining the protection of human health in respect of animals , animal health and animal welfare .
I am going to ask all Members to be very concise in their questions , and the Commissioner in his answers , naturally , because we are running late and we want to finish the programme of questions .
Mrs McKenna has the floor for a supplementary question .
I am worried that maybe this scientific report is a way of trying to avoid reducing the time and the distance to what Parliament wanted .
There was consensus between the Environment Committee and the Agriculture Committee on the reduction of the overall journey time and distance .
It is very important that the Commission takes this on board .
I am sorry to say I do not find your answer quite sufficient in relation to the export refunds .
You talk about respecting all conditions of animal welfare and say you need a well-balanced solution .
European taxpayers do not want their money going to fund something that causes distress and harm to animals .
We need to stop the export refunds granted in relation to third countries for slaughter , irrespective of whether conditions are being complied with or not .
It is wrong that our money is being used in this way .
This is the message that came out clearly from Parliament .
I would like a commitment from the Commission that it is going to abolish export refunds to third countries for slaughter .
The scientific report you refer to will be made available for your consideration and will be considered by the Commission before bringing forward any further policies .
On the question of stopping export refunds , I have already indicated that is not Commission policy .
It is also not the policy of the Council of Ministers and it does not reflect their views .
Therefore I cannot give the commitment you seek .
We are going to change the order because Mr Lund needs to leave the Chamber urgently .
Question No 49 by ( H-0908 / 01 ) :
Subject : Unacceptable limit values for heavy metals in fish The Danish newspaper Politiken reported on 15 November 2001 that the EU was to raise limit values to allow more heavy metal in fish despite a recommendation from an EU committee of experts that stricter standards should be introduced .
Mercury , lead and cadmium , which are found in shellfish for which there is high demand , can , for example , weaken the nervous system and cause other very serious diseases in humans .
There are absolutely no grounds for raising these limit values .
Will the Commission therefore say why these limit values are to be raised , on which studies any increase may be based , and which studies are opposed to any increase ?
I would also point out in this connection that the population of Denmark has long been encouraged to eat more fish as it promotes the general level of public health .
Unfortunately , these endeavours will now be to no avail if , at the same time , the EU intends to raise the limit values for noxious heavy metals in fish .
The Scientific Committee on Food made assessments on lead and cadmium in the diet and advised upon safe intake levels .
It concluded that dietary intake levels were well below the safety thresholds .
When EU legislation on contaminants is established , if the intake levels are below safety thresholds , the principle known as ALARA must be followed .
This involves setting maximum levels as low as reasonably achievable .
This is an internationally applied approach .
In this specific case , the Commission adopted limits for lead and cadmium to come into force in April 2002 .
Concerns were expressed at the time by the Member States in the Standing Committee for Foodstuffs that the new provisions were not achievable for certain fishery products .
It was agreed , therefore , urgently to review the relevant provisions .
From recent data , it became clear that these limits would impose requirements beyond the scope of what is reasonably achievable , without benefit to public health .
Therefore , the maximum levels in certain fishery products were reviewed and slight increases for certain limited species are now being proposed to take account of this reality .
To set unachievable limits is not defensible .
Given the overall intake levels , the revised maximum levels do not increase the risk to public health .
Thank you very much for your answer .
We are concerned here with ordinary , edible fish and shellfish , of which we normally recommend people in Europe to eat plenty .
I therefore find it worrying that there is now a desire to increase the limit values .
I must ask a couple of supplementary questions .
Is it correct that the Committee of Independent Experts has in actual fact recommended a reduction in the limit values ?
Is it correct that the United States has stricter limit values in these areas than we have in Europe ?
Finally , I want to ask who has asked for these limit values to be increased .
Is it the fishing industry and , if so , in which countries does the fishing industry want permission for higher limit values for the heavy metals at issue here : lead , cadmium and mercury ?
In respect of mercury the general maximum level is 0.5 mg / kg for fishery products .
That remains unchanged as previously set under veterinary legislation , in particular Commission Decision 93 / 351 .
The only proposed change is that two additional species have been added to the list of fish species for the maximum level of 1 mg / kg .
These are the grenadier fish and the emperor fish which are minor contributors to diet , but data showed the lower level was unachievable .
You then asked me about shellfish .
The proposals will not increase the safety level of eating shellfish for either children or adults .
The only proposed change for limits in shellfish as bivalve molluscs is for lead .
A slight increase from 1 mg / kg to 1.5 mg / kg is proposed , because data shows that the lower level for lead is not reasonably achievable .
Exposure to lead in the diet is well within safe limits .
Otherwise , there is no change for provisions on cadmium or mercury .
Question No 48 by ( H-0889 / 01 ) :
Subject : ' Smiling face ' food quality label On 1 October 2001 the Danish food inspectorate began to have its reports put up in the 40 000 or so establishments in that country producing or selling food and drink to the public .
The idea is that within a year all of them will be prominently displaying at least one report , clearly expressing the outcome of the official inspection in a label taking the form of one of four different facial expressions .
A broad smile for example will mean that no adverse comments were made after the most recent inspection , while a really cross face will show that the establishment was fined , reported to the police or had its permit withdrawn .
It would be hard to find a better way of conveying clear consumer information .
Is the Commission aware of this new Danish system ?
If so , is it prepared to recommend other Member States to follow suit ?
If not , does it not feel that the system deserves closer study as a possible basis for future rules on the matter ?
I agree with the honourable Member that it is important to raise consumer awareness .
The Commission is favourable to any initiative protecting the consumer .
However , the Commission considers that the task of developing food quality and information to consumers on the results of official controls , surveillance and other monitoring activities in the food sector should be left to Member States .
Member States are responsible for carrying out the official control of foodstuffs at all stages of production and distribution .
It is for them to decide how best to inform the consumer about these activities .
This is in line with the principle of subsidiarity .
While the Commission is not aware of this particular initiative by the Danish authorities , it can encourage such steps or the voluntary implementation of such initiatives by other Member States , but it is unlikely to make a similar proposal at Community level .
I stress that these points are made in relation to the outlets that you particularly refer to in your question .
Question No 50 by ( H-0942 / 01 ) :
Subject : State of slaughterhouses in Greece According to the data available , the Greek slaughterhouse infrastructure is extremely inadequate .
Specifically , of the 350 operational slaughterhouses , 50 to 60 fulfil the requirements of Directive 91 / 497 / EEC to a certain extent , and have formal approval , while the rest belong to municipal authorities and communes and are of ancient construction , with inadequate and obsolete equipment and no facilities for the hygienic disposal of liquid or solid waste or highly toxic substances .
Additionally , cleaning and disinfection programmes are not implemented in these slaughterhouses and the slaughterhouse workers do not observe the rules on personal hygiene .
Is the Commission satisfied with the current situation in Greek slaughterhouses , and what steps does it intend to take to ensure that Greece complies fully with Community law ?
Slaughterhouses in Greece are approved by the competent authorities under Council Directive 64 / 433 on health conditions for the production and marketing of fresh meat as amended by Directive 95 / 23 .
47 slaughterhouses are recorded as being approved for placing meat on the Community market .
The meat from the remaining operational slaughterhouses that is judged fit for human consumption can be marketed on the national territory .
The last inspection mission on fresh meat carried out in Greece by the Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office was in September 2000 in relation to porcine meat .
This mission identified serious wide-ranging deficiencies in the operation of official controls and production standards in this sector .
As the honourable Member is aware from the reply to his earlier question at the November session , there have been follow-up contacts with the Greek authorities during 2001 in an attempt to resolve the problems found .
To date the action taken has not been satisfactory and the Commission remains very concerned about the situation .
Further high level meetings with the Greek authorities are planned for early 2002 in an attempt to resolve the remaining shortcomings in food safety and veterinary control standards .
With regard to waste water treatment , Council Directive 91 / 271 concerning urban waste water treatment foresees rules for slaughterhouses .
Waste water above a particular volume must meet conditions established in prior regulations and or specific authorisations by the competent authority since 31 December 2000 .
Where slaughterhouses discharge directly into the public sewer , the general rules of the directive are valid .
Detailed information on the situation of industrial discharges in Greece is under assessment .
Commissioner , you said that 47 slaughterhouses meet certain Community requirements , while others can operate freely in Greece .
The point is that we have 350 slaughterhouses , leaving a large number of slaughterhouses which obviously do not meet Community requirements .
Is that correct ?
I should just like to clarify this .
The second question I wish to ask you is if you have any news on spongiform encephalopathy .
The Commission has conducted an investigation in Greece .
What is going on ?
By which I mean as regards BSE .
Then there is the serious question of the central meat market in Athens , where the Commission has ordered an investigation .
Given that you are in contact with the Greek authorities , I should be obliged if you could tell me if you have any news on this matter .
As I indicated in my earlier reply , the Commission remains very concerned about the situation in relation to slaughterhouses .
With regard to BSE and other controls , I refer you to the FVO reports on this issue .
On 22 May , I confirmed that I met the Greek minister in the margins of the Agriculture Council where there was a discussion in relation to the weaknesses identified in successive reports of the FVO .
Once again , on 8 June , I wrote to the Greek minister asking for a follow-up to his initial reply of 27 April .
This has led to further interaction between the minister , the relevant authorities in Greece and my own services .
The message to the Greek authorities is consistent : much greater effort and resources must be invested in correcting the deficiencies consistently found in the missions of the FVO .
The conclusions of the FVO reports are available for perusal on the website .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 51 to 83 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

WTO meeting in Qatar ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the meeting of the World Trade Organisation in Qatar .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I would like to say how grateful and obliged we are to the Commission and the Council for the excellent preparation of the WTO Ministerial Conference in Qatar .
Commissioner Lamy , you and your colleagues achieved something extraordinary in starting from an extremely difficult situation just before Doha and nonetheless , by the end of the meeting , getting all the subjects wanted by the European Union into the programme for the round beginning in 2002 , this despite the usual , and largely unjustified , attacks by India and the Cairns Group countries on the European Union .
Essential elements of our pre-conference resolution were included .
Two weeks later , in Accra , I saw for myself the pride of Ghana 's government representatives in pointing out that Africa had played an independent role this time , and this could , among other things , be attributed to good preparatory work by the European Union and in particular by Commissioner Lamy .
The developing countries , particularly Africa , are now and for the future fully involved in negotiations , and this was also one of our main demands .
The political declaration on TRIPS represents a respectable result for the African mediators , something that you have already mentioned this morning , Commissioner Lamy .
The demands of the developing countries and of the Africans - ranging from the need for comprehensive technical aid to the Cotonou Agreement 's exceptions up to 2008 - have very largely been met .
The core European demands will , though , also be included in the new round of negotiations .
I do not need to go into the details again .
What is important is that we in the European Union can input our conceptions of a socially and environmentally responsible market economy into the system of free and fair world trade and that they can also , slowly , prevail .
I also believe , though , that there is still more that we can do to make the WTO more democratic .
Mr Lamy , you too have referred to the need for us to achieve the creation of a parliamentary assembly .
We in this Parliament should retain our leadership role and also ask the Commission to continue its financial support for us , so that we can especially involve the representatives of the African parliaments .
Let me return to a point made in this morning 's debate .
One of our colleagues , Mrs Lucas , pointed out that the outcome was poor , indeed unacceptable .
I thought , here comes a European justification of European interests , but she only referred to India and certain NGOs , which ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , I want to speak on an issue which Parliament identified before Qatar as vital , indeed we called it ' make or break ' as did the Commissioner - that is the link between environment and trade .
In Qatar , we saw a breakthrough .
For the first time , and against fierce and widespread opposition , we will have negotiations on some key environmental issues .
Of course , much more remains to be done , but a process has been started and a taboo broken .
The key to further progress must be to demonstrate , above all , to developing countries that their fears of green protectionism on our side are groundless .
Qatar , frankly , did not produce the progress that we in the PSE Group wanted , and asked for beforehand on labour rights , on democracy and transparency in WTO decision-making .
But it did leave the way open to progress on both .
We know there was intense pressure from many countries , including developing countries , for a declaration that labour rights were a matter for the ILO alone .
That pressure was resisted quite rightly and the principle of WTO cooperation with the ILO restated .
The EU must now push hard to translate this principle into practice , seizing the opportunity given by the ILO 's launch of a commission on the social aspects of globalisation in which the WTO and other international organisations will be participating .
The ministerial meeting also agreed to negotiations on reform of the dispute settlement procedure with an open agenda covering whatever proposals WTO members choose to table .
The EU must take this opportunity for openness and transparency .
Commissioner , we would really like to know what your ideas are for reform and we shall not be slow in letting you know what our ideas are either .
We would like to put on record today our recognition of the key role played by you , Commissioner Lamy , in the success of the meeting .
You had a very difficult role and you displayed skill and tenacity .
I emphasise , in particular , your insistence that you need the political support of this House in order to pursue the round in the way it was launched .
We shall be marking our support in a resolution to be voted tomorrow .
Many people went to Qatar hoping for a fiasco , hoping for a re-run of Seattle , hoping for something to denounce , in a mood of populism .
They are disappointed in that hope and they need to be honest with themselves and to respect the views of developing countries not to indulge in paternalism as some of our colleagues have unfortunately done .
The Qatar Declaration contains almost everything that developing countries wanted on the agenda .
The agenda is not the outcome and we will need to be vigilant for a good result , but when developing ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the World Trade Organisation has a future .
It is true that in the coming years the 144 Member States will resume negotiations on the further liberalisation of world trade , but more than ever before , the rich man ' s club has learnt that survival of the fittest no longer applies .
Indeed , the developing countries have made huge progress and have made their mark during the negotiations . However , the European Union also has reason to be satisfied .
Thanks to the commitment and perseverance of the European negotiators , both our Commissioners who are present today , an agreement has ultimately been reached on a broad-based negotiation round .
For example , in the new round , there will be scope for negotiations about public spending , competition , investments , and the link between international environmental agreements and the WHO rules .
These trade discussions are held at a significant time , because after the acts of terrorism in the United States , they send out the message that the Member States are prepared to join forces at international level and that terrorists cannot undermine international trade .
Furthermore , it is important to continue the liberal trade policy because it can give the failing world economy a shot in the arm .
Finally , I should like to point out that the WTO ' s challenge is to continue to develop the multi-lateral trade system in such a way as to ensure that globalisation yields the best possible benefits for as many people and countries as possible .
We must continue to strive as we have for over fifty years .
Madam President , in a report to the 133 Committee on the WTO meeting in Qatar , the Commission asserts that ' active participation by European civil society strengthened the hand of the EU negotiator ' .
This creates the impression that popular movements should be just as deliriously happy as Mr Lamy about the result from Qatar .
That is an unusually impudent lie .
The truth is that the environmental and solidarity organisations are criticising the EU ' s action in Doha and characterising the final agreement as a defeat for the poor peoples of the world .
The International Forum on Globalisation observes , for example , that the results from Qatar signify ' the ultimate triumph for the world trade body whose very mission is to exclude civil society from shaping economic systems ' .
Prior to the Laeken Summit , ATTAC Belgium wrote that , partly because of its support for the WTO , the EU est essentiellement déterminée par les intérêts des institutions financières et des grandes entreprises .
The truth is that both the European popular movements and representatives of the developing countries are very embittered about the EU negotiators ' way of using the language of force to twist the arms of the poor countries ' representatives .
It is bad enough that the Commission should represent a Eurocentric , self-regarding and neo-liberal trade policy , but is it not rather crude , Mr Lamy , untruthfully to try to make Europe ' s popular movements jointly responsible for the shameful abuse of power of which the EU was guilty in Doha ?
Madam President , we view with concern the decisions of the meeting of the World Trade Organisation .
Its repercussions in the short and medium term may prove disastrous for the peoples of many countries , particularly the less developed countries , but also some in the European Union , namely Portugal .
For my country , the opening up in the agricultural and textile areas , including the bilateral agreements being negotiated by the European Union , such as that with Pakistan , without taking Portuguese requirements into account , is particularly worrying .
For the economic and multinational groups , the most important factor was achieved : the opening of negotiations for greater liberalisation of world trade , postponed in Seattle and openly called into question this year by world organisations , namely those which were present at the World Social Forum of Porto Alegre and at Genoa .
The triumphant declarations of UNICE ( European employers ' organisation ) show this clearly when they state that the principal issue was settled , even if not all its demands were fully satisfied .
The final resolution of the WTO itself , referring to liberalisation in particularly sensitive areas such as textiles , important aspects of agriculture , services and others , including the area of intellectual property , leaves little doubt , although its consolidation in practice could yet be influenced by any disputes that may develop .
Even a few small positive advances in the field of intellectual property , after the pressure which countries like Brazil and South Africa brought to bear in order to obtain generic drugs to combat AIDS and malaria , show that it is important to step up the fight against capitalist globalisation in its various aspects , whether political , economic , social or environmental .
The European Union trade associations have already condemned the opening of negotiations within the WTO framework without at least having secured real progress in upholding compliance with the ILO agreements and minimum standards of defence of workers ' rights , given that there can be no sustained development without social and environmental development .
The liberalisation of international trade favours the rich countries and multinationals , deepens the gulf between developed and less developed countries , as is clearly shown by studies conducted under the aegis of the UN , intensifies the exploitation of communities and workers by multinationals which dominate international trade and which are only interested in making maximum profit , even if it is at the expense of child labour , food safety , the environment , family farming and multifunctional farming .
Hence the importance of mobilising support for the fight for an alternative of sustained development which places priority on reducing poverty and social expansion , which promotes a review of the CAP , which is more coherent , which provides more mutual support and which is less isolated from the countries of the South .
Thank you , Madam President .
The Qatar trade round was to become a round for the benefit of the developing countries .
This objective has been partly achieved . Partly , because Europe , like other rich countries , refuses to cut down on market-distorting aid .
Europe ' s euphoria about Qatar can therefore be put down more to the expected trade liberalisation for its own benefit .
It has to be said that Qatar has given the umpteenth green light for the reform of our agricultural policy .
The challenge is to guarantee farmers a reasonable income without distorting the world market price .
Direct income support , and a widening of the agricultural packages of tasks and rewards are positive steps towards that goal . Even after Qatar , the impression remains that not all Member States are adopting that line .
Another matter of major importance for developing countries was the clarification of the agreement on intellectual property .
There may be the political explanation that patent law should not obstruct the production of life-saving medicines in emergency situations , this explanation is not entirely satisfactory .
Indeed , it must be possible for countries which do not boast an industry which produces these cheaper medicines to import them freely .
The legal problems which emerge in this connection deserve a resolute approach .
To avoid misuse , inspection to establish whether there is indeed an emergency situation is crucial .
Finally , I would underline that in the fight for the environment and social standards , not distortion of competition , but market access for poor countries and their well-being should be the EU ' s most important driving forces .
Madam President , Commissioner , at Doha , the fourth WTO ministerial conference had to set an agenda and a programme .
It did this , so from that point of view it was a success .
Yet for whom was it a success ?
It was , no doubt , Commissioner , a success for you , since you proved that you enjoy excellent health and the ability to work through the night .
Talking of health issues , Doha was a real success as far as medicines are concerned , but it is chiefly due to Osama bin Laden that the poor people of the world owe their entitlement to access to medicines .
In other words , if the USA had not been afraid of anthrax and had not , therefore , had to challenge Bayer ' s intellectual property rights , they would not have given in .
Apart from that , what did we get out of Doha ?
The answer is , two things , a few clichés and a reprieve .
The clichés are piling up .
First of all there are those clichés about world trade leading to growth , stability , and of course peace .
We had already signed a trade agreement in Marrakesh , and everyone knows that that agreement brought about peace in Gaza and in Palestine , and even peace in Afghanistan .
The second great cliché is that Europe would have held out , but was abandoned by Japan .
The least developed countries , despite having been given everything except arms , also abandoned it .
Korea has maybe stayed with it .
The European Union is showing cracks .
The French farmers are on their own again , apart from some support from Ireland .
However , Europe did obtain a victory on the environment and social affairs .
On the environment , the United States , which is not a party to the Kyoto agreement , did not associate itself with us , and on social affairs , all the European trade unions have expressed their highly negative opinions about Doha .
In addition , Europe obtained a reprieve .
First of all there was the agricultural reprieve .
Until the end of the negotiating round , and therefore until 2005 , our farmers will have internal aid and restitutions .
After that , we agreed that these will be abolished .
However , the French representatives Jacques Chirac and Lionel Jospin called for a stay of execution so that they can get through the presidential elections without any trouble .
They obtained that stay of execution for the CAP , which was facing the death penalty , so well , in fact , that when Poland accedes to Europe , Polish farmers will be deceived because they will be joining the Europe of the CAP when in fact , from 2005 onwards , there will no longer be one .
We also obtained a reprieve for foreign investments .
The IMA was thrown out of the OECD window only to return through the WTO door .
We also obtained a reprieve on pensions .
The insurance companies will not immediately be able to appropriate this large market for themselves .
After Doha , therefore , we are left with the following situation : the European agricultural model has been broken up , the European cultural exception has been forgotten , and the long-term European social model is at risk .
What will remain of Europe ?
It will be merely a vast free-trade area , and everyone knows that , according to Adam Smith , free trade equals national poverty .
Madam President , the self-appointed opponents of globalisation were in the headlines only for a short time .
They thought they had exiled the WTO to the desert .
Doha 's very remoteness brought about a compromise anyway , one that was signed by all 142 members .
What a contrast with Seattle in 1999 , when debates on content were overshadowed by clashes on the street .
I was there when militant demonstrators paralysed our conference and , in professional fashion , immediately supplied photos of the performance they put on .
Doha again saw highly polarised debates between the seven hundred accredited NGOs and the national delegations , but it achieved important results .
Three years are to be spent working on a new world trade round in order to facilitate further liberalisation of the global economy .
The EU had its way in agricultural issues .
One aspiration is that subsidies should come to an end , but this is not a precondition of the forthcoming negotiations .
It is unfortunate that investments and environmental issues could not yet be put on the negotiations ' agenda ; they will be on it in two years ' time at the earliest .
We all have to give way somewhere - the USA on hormonally treated meat , the labelling of genetically modified produce and the opening up of the textiles market .
The EU , too , must dismantle barriers , above all , Commissioner , as regards protection of farming .
We must strike a balance between the opening of markets and their regulation .
On the one hand , import restrictions are to be dismantled ; on the other , the import of low-quality cheap produce is to be prevented , for , firstly , they are a danger to the consumer , and , secondly , pirated copies and infringed patent rights cost businesses billions .
We are opposed to total liberalisation .
Social security and public services need to be tested , but state monopolies should not be dismantled while private ones are built up .
Changes to the agenda are just as important .
Let us then call for sustainable protection of the environment , social standards and the punishment of human rights violations .
Madam President , congratulations on being seated there today .
Thank you to the two Commissioners who are present and thank you also to the whole of the Commission 's team .
I would also like to thank the Council .
I believe it was only by working together that we managed to achieve real success here .
I include in this , by the way , our colleague Mr Westendorp , who headed our delegation and , unfortunately , is not here this evening , but I believe he deserves as much gratitude as everyone else .
There are just a few points that I want to address .
First , I believe that many Members have yet again forgotten a number of things , above all those whom I always describe as permanently engaging in mantra politics by repeating the same thing over and over again .
I believe that they are forgetting that Doha opened a way ahead for negotiations and laid down a strategy for them .
We should give more consideration to how we can work together with the Commission and the Council in future , for it is only now that the actual negotiations are happening .
The subjects for discussion must be defined , and it is by no means certain that apparent successes we have achieved on many points will prove to be lasting successes over the years , and so I would like to ask the Commissioners in particular how they actually envisage cooperation with Parliament .
I would like this cooperation to be substantially more precise and detailed , giving a much more accurate view of the state of negotiations you will be engaged in on the various subject areas , and also signalling where there are difficulties or problems , not only giving definite information on many points , but actually facilitating political monitoring as well .
Let me make another point .
I believe it will be much more important than in the past to join up policies on trade and foreign affairs .
I would particularly like to mention in this context two regions - the European Union and the United States .
I believe that the European Union and the United States bear to an incredible degree responsibility for the future definition of trade policy , which is much more than can be summed up in the traditional trade themes we were familiar with in the past , incorporating as it does so many new ones .
Development of traditional trade policy and its connection with new subject matter will be the difficult task to be faced in the future .
You - above all Commissioners Lamy and Fischer - managed to bring that off elegantly in Doha , but , as I said at the outset , the real work is only getting under way now .
I believe we must attach much more emphasis to putting foreign policy regarding countries such as , for example , India , Singapore or China , but also regarding many of the Latin American countries , on a much firmer footing , using a stronger foreign policy to achieve greater understanding for what we actually want to achieve in the sphere of trade policy .
There is still the prevalent feeling in certain countries and states that we are actually using our trade policy to engage in indirect protectionism .
We should take care that this sentiment does not arise in the first place , and that , if it does , it can be rooted out .
The Singaporean Ambassador has again drawn my attention to his country 's long-standing desire to conclude a free trade agreement with the EU .
I believe that bilateral free trade agreements bring with them the possibility of opening doors of that sort , and also have the potential to achieve greater multilateral rapprochement by means of bilateral negotiations .
Commissioners , perhaps you would be so kind as to tell us what you think about that .
Thank you , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . The Doha Conference has spawned a sense of enthusiasm that I can only ascribe to the fact that expectations were so low , for I have to say that we remain very critical .
Inequality of power is simply too pronounced in the world , which leaves its mark on conferences of this kind .
While the developing countries wanted to see the earlier agreements through to a conclusion , Europe wanted to continue to build at multilateral level . There was therefore a certain level of ambiguity which has facilitated some progress .
We are , of course , delighted with the fact that in connection with medicines , unmistakable progress has been made , because there is now at least an agreement about the intellectual property rights .
However , we are hugely vexed by the fact that Europe continues to insist on high import levies on agricultural and textile products , while an agreement on a gradual cutback had , in fact , been reached .
The first results should be evident as soon as 2005 , and upon further research , it now emerges that too little has happened in this field .
At the moment , agricultural support as a whole is hardly any lower than at the end of the eighties .
As at previous WTO conferences , the liberalisation of the economy was also mentioned at Doha .
Although the issue of intellectual property rights may have been a positive illustration of this , surely this was only a tiny ray of hope .
Ideally , we would like see that we side with the weak , for whoever observes this world at war is bound to see that this is all about inequality of power .
Madam President , all this triumphant talk masks the latest instalment in a policy to ensure that global trade serves the interests of the multinationals .
Further liberalisation is still the main objective , that is , opening up the markets in poor countries to the industrialised products of the developed countries which , at the same time , will import agricultural produce to compete with our own , together with raw materials at derisory prices .
In the agricultural sector , the main aim is to wipe out subsidies , which would strike a tremendous blow to production in countries such as Greece where , I should point out , farmers have taken to the roads yet again in order to demand a fair price for their labour .
When it comes to foreign investment , competition , public procurement and commercial arrangements , the ' because I say so ' approach has been used to impose imperialist choices , despite the almost universal opposition of non-governmental organisations and the less developed countries .
The meeting in Qatar confirmed the WTO as the main tool of capitalist globalisation .
Any interest evinced in the problems of less developed countries and the environment is lip service and , as such , mere hypocrisy .
It does , of course , show that the mass demonstrations have had an impact and that the WTO is trying to hijack the anti-globalisation movement by appearing to be sensitive to its concerns .
But it took good care to shield the meeting from troublesome protestors and we would not be surprised if the next meeting were held in Antarctica .
The only way open to the grass-roots movement is to resist and counterattack both the WTO and the European Union and the governments advocating and applying anti-grass roots policies .
Madam President , I also consider the results of the ministerial conference in Doha to be positive and I would therefore like to join other Members in congratulating Commissioner Lamy , Commissioner Fischler and the Council on their unquestionable contribution to this success .
It is true that the final declaration does not say everything it should say and , I would say , that sometimes it says more than it should say , but any negotiation means reaching compromises and compromise requires concessions .
The thing we must really value about Doha is the bringing together of the diverging , and sometimes contradictory , interests of the Member countries of the WTO and an agreement has been reached to launch a new round , set an agenda , a timetable and a working programme , and , secondly , that the development dimension has been fully integrated into all negotiations and that the least-developed countries and the developing countries have spoken out strongly and their voice has been heard and their concerns taken into account .
The WTO train , as you said quite rightly , Commissioner Lamy , is back on the rails and has already left the station .
I would add that furthermore the means have been provided so that its destination may be a sustainable growth which also benefits the poorest countries .
However , in order for that train to reach its destination , the necessary means must be adopted , the texts must be interpreted correctly , since they are full of structural ambiguities , and guarantee reciprocity in the opening up of the markets and full respect for the rules which govern multilateral trade .
In order to help to overcome the barrier of poverty once and for all , we must adopt the necessary measures to facilitate access , above all by the least-developed countries , because these countries may suffer as a result of the multilateral commercial system , due to the advantages we offer to the developing countries .
Mr President , before Doha , many of us were clearly aware that the issue of access to medicine was going to be the benchmark that developing countries would use to test our seriousness about whether we wanted to launch a development round .
What we have seen is a declaration on access to medicines and public health .
Even the title is important because it is not just about access to medicines , it is about support for public health .
It is groundbreaking and , as someone said this morning , it has within it a commitment to the whole question of flexibility of the agreement on TRIPS .
As the Commissioner is well aware , the United States and Switzerland , in particular , argued that the reference to public health was too broad .
They wanted it to be limited to certain infectious diseases .
But I have to say , Commissioner - and you will agree - that what happened represented a real victory for developing countries because they were skilled in negotiation , and that position by the US and Switzerland , in particular , was finally rejected .
It is important that we pay tribute to developing countries and to the negotiating skills that they displayed .
The belief traditionally fostered by the pharmaceutical companies has been that patents are sacrosanct .
After Doha that has changed .
If drug companies price medicines beyond the reach of people who need them , governments can override patents without the fear of retribution .
Despite the progress at Doha , as far as patent rules are concerned , the story is far from over .
I have two specific questions , Commissioner .
Does the Commission agree that the immediate challenge is to ensure that the WTO lifts the restrictions on the export of cheap equivalents of patented drugs to countries which have decided to override a patent but do not have the necessary manufacturing capacity ?
That issue was not resolved at Doha and has been referred to the TRIPS Council .
Secondly , how does the Commission intend to ensure that countries without production capacity or insufficient production capacity can make full use of the compulsory licensing provisions ?
This must , in my view , be accompanied by a reduction in the length of drug patents in poor countries .
TRIPS currently dictates a patent term of 20 years world-wide .
At the review of the rules scheduled for 2002 , the WTO should at least agree to extend the deadline for TRIPS compliance for all developing countries and base it on development progress rather than on arbitrary dates .
I wonder if the Commissioner agrees with me on this ?
Finally , on the question of developing countries , I would like to pay tribute , in particular , to ACP countries , in which we have a particular interest and partnership in the European Union .
The 77 ACP countries succeeded in obtaining a waiver .
They put out a brilliant declaration before Doha .
I have had several meetings with them since then .
They are well pleased with the results .
Doha should have been the development cycle .
Yet what have the developing countries gained from Doha ?
I do not share other Members ' optimism on this point .
For instance , the agreement on access to medicines , which appeared to be a victory , is really a decoy to lure the media and the developing countries .
Presented as a vital stake at this conference and as a major concession to the developing countries , the clarification of the TRIPS agreement and the interpretation of it - which has always been our interpretation - are admittedly a political victory , but that victory changes nothing from the legal point of view .
It is of no value before the body that settles disputes within the WTO , and , as Mrs Kinnock has pointed out , the question remains unresolved for those countries which have no production capacity .
For the time being , nothing allows them to use compulsory licensing in order to arrange for the medicines they need to be manufactured by third parties , and this point was emphasised at the recent conference in Ouagadougou .
In the same way , the derogation and the WTO ' s reciprocity rule , which were granted at the last minute to signatory states of the Cotonou agreement for a period of eight years , appeared to be a positive achievement .
In reality , however , that authorisation , which the ACP states had been waiting for for months , seems more like blackmail as far as they are concerned .
They were obliged to sign the final Doha declaration or risk having their request refused .
The gains were therefore minimal , and were used by the countries of the West , which are united in their desire to launch a new round , as a means of buying what they wanted .
In reality , what happened at Doha was more like a cynical play at the theatre .
We are becoming increasingly committed to unbridled liberalisation and , as we shall continue to insist , a fundamental reform of the WTO really is essential .
Madam President , Mr Lamy , Mr Fischler , I should like to say , first of all , that I am delighted by the success of the Doha ministerial conference , not only from the point of view of its results , but also from a material point of view .
It took place in excellent conditions , despite all the fears that we may have had .
Holding this event in Qatar was in itself a response to the war against terrorism that we entered into following the tragic events of 11 September .
Like other Members who took part in that conference , I appreciated the constant transparency that prevailed between the Council , the Commission and Parliament during the negotiations .
That transparency was also the order of the day among the NGOs present at Doha , who are to be congratulated on the efforts that they have made in this direction since the previous conference in Seattle .
We all hoped that this conference would lead to a substantial agreement that would pave the way for growth to be stimulated , thereby contributing towards economic development at a time when the international community is going through a very difficult situation .
This ministerial conference certainly enabled considerable progress to be made on various fronts , including the inclusion of China and Taiwan .
Another positive result , as has already been mentioned , was in connection with medicines .
As for the rest , the Commission took a tough stance in the negotiations , and the efforts that it made during the final night and on the morning of 14 November enabled the European Union to convince its partners that its positions were well-founded .
However , the work programme is still lagging behind the ambitions that we had set ourselves on certain major issues , such as the environment , the Singapore agenda and social standards .
For my part , I should like to make three comments .
During the conference , the developing countries often adopted a highly critical attitude towards the European Union .
When we were preparing for this ministerial conference , did we listen carefully enough to their concerns ?
Let us show humility , let us take up our pilgrim ' s staff again , let us listen to them and try to understand them , so that we can take their real concerns into consideration , and above all let us stop taking their place in defining the development policy that they need .
Secondly , the Doha ministerial declaration constitutes an undertaking to start negotiations on the priority issues of European enlargement and integration .
Finally , now that the real negotiations are about to start , I hope that the transparency that has prevailed so far will continue to do so , and that it will be strengthened still further between us .
I have just one question to ask the Commissioner . What will be the general structure of the negotiations which will be defined ?
Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the European Parliament delegation attending the Doha Conference , I too would like to congratulate our Commissioners on the excellent work that they accomplished and the results that they obtained , which were undeniably very positive and which bear witness to the highly effective way in which our Commissioners handled these negotiations .
I should also , above all , like to say how pleased I was with the excellent cohesion and solidarity between our three institutions which were represented in Qatar .
Basically , and restricting my comments solely to the agricultural issues , I was interested to discover that the European Union has given itself the room to manoeuvre that is needed to reform its common agricultural policy in response to the new expectations of our society , because non-trade considerations were explicitly mentioned in the final ministerial declaration .
It seems to me that this aspect is the vital element in the outcome of Doha .
The priority for European farming today should no longer be to remain competitive in exports at any cost .
It should be to satisfy social demand as regards food security and the sustainable rural development .
The Union can also take advantage of a success that it has achieved with regard to the United States , because all forms of aid to exports will be subject to negotiation in the new round .
Finally , it seems to me that the Union can congratulate itself on the fact that special and differential treatment for developing countries has been strengthened .
That should enable them to respond to their needs , including those needs relating to food security and rural development .
This prospect , in its turn , is more likely to encourage the development of farming for food production , and is therefore very important from the point of view of the world demand for food , which is expected to double in the next twenty-five years owing to the increase in the populations of the developing countries and the improvement in living conditions in the emerging countries .
In all , I believe this agreement represents a good balance between trade liberalisation and regulation , and also between trade and the development of all types of farming .
I just hope that the negotiations in the new round will fulfil the hopes that have now been raised .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it is too early to say who won or lost at Doha in terms of the agricultural COM , since the only issue there was agreement on an agenda and a timetable of negotiations .
The winners for now were the developing countries , whose principal demands , including the demands of the ACP countries , were accepted in the text .
The countries of the Cairns group and the United States saw enshrined in the text the principle of ongoing agricultural reform , improved market access and the gradual elimination of export subsidies .
The European Union succeeded in ensuring that this reduction in export subsidies would not be automatic and had some of its main demands in terms of reinforcing the non-commercial elements of the agreement included in the text .
Despite the relative optimism of the Community negotiators , the agreement did not include some of our fundamental demands .
Multi-functional agriculture was not expressly referred to in the text and the strengthening of measures for the protection of geographic indicators was only defined clearly for wines .
Furthermore , one thing was made crystal clear : the elimination , even the gradual elimination , of export incentives , will create strong pressure to reduce agricultural prices internally .
It will therefore not be difficult to conclude that the next reform of the CAP , before 2006 , will have to be more thorough than may have been hoped .
Not just because of the cut in the guaranteed prices it will involve , but also and especially because of the qualitative change in the instruments of support for farmers so that , even without market support , they continue to have an income safety net .
Doha was merely a starting point and much has still been left open .
But let there be no illusions .
Today , our commercial adversaries are fighting for an end to the supposedly more distorting support of international competition , but tomorrow they will want to impose an end to all types of agricultural subsidies , that is , the old story of the rings , the fingers and then the rest .
It would not be fair to end without paying special tribute to our Commissioners for the courage and firmness they showed in these negotiations .
Madam President , Commissioners , I will avoid polite flowery phrases , for you cannot talk up the outcome of Doha in such a way as to paper over the absence of any social component in world trade - at least from the point of view of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
It is not only that that is regrettable ; we must not overlook the minimal acceptance of environmental and food safety , and the failure to accept the demand for clarification of the precautionary principle .
Now , though , to my main criticism .
The EU often happily talks about the social dimension as a part of our European philosophy , but all it has achieved as regards the issue of core labour standards as human rights in the workplace has been to return them to the position discussions had reached at the 1996 Singapore Conference , that is , they have been put on ice .
What has become of our social responsibility ?
Perhaps this next observation will not be lacking in interest .
I basically welcome the fact that China has joined and that , hopefully , other countries will do so as well , but I doubt that it will become any easier to achieve basic human rights standards at work .
So the beginnings of an opportunity have certainly just passed us by .
I warn against taking conflict prevention too lightly .
If sensible steps are not taken to monitor it , globalisation will spark further demonstrations and more social conflict .
As Mr Mann has already pointed out , Seattle is not a thing of the past .
It can be resurrected , and we , in the safe haven of the European Parliament , should not banish that thought from our minds .
Commissioner Lamy , what are you thinking of doing in future to ensure that core labour standards are not only insisted on by the toothless ILO ? How can you help us , after what has happened at the WTO , to make a new start and move things forward ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the team of Fischler , Lamy and Neyts most warmly for getting a new round of talks together .
It is , though - in my opinion , Mr Ettl - significant that people are talking to each other rather than looking for points of conflict .
I believe that this spurt of growth in Europe , especially in employment in Europe , is of enormous significance - but not only for Europe , for , particularly in the developing countries , millions of people will be able to cross the poverty line , something that represents a breakthrough for the poor in the developing countries as well .
I believe this is of especial significance for Europe , which is the world 's greatest exporter of goods and services and the world 's biggest investor .
Discussions covered many areas affecting the developing countries , the environment , social affairs and animal protection too , and I believe that efforts are being made to find consensus here as well .
We should not forget , though , that the WTO should also be concerning itself with the creation of fair general conditions for investment , competition and market access .
We must remove the administrative obstacles to trade and take reciprocity into account when opening up markets ; we need maxima for customs duties and reliefs for SMEs and for products sent in small quantities .
Where trade works , so does democracy , and prosperity is the result .
I also take the view that the real , economic actors should be more deeply involved in the negotiations , and I believe it is right and proper that we should bring in EuroCommerce , Eurochambres , UEAPME and the SME-Union , so that they can join in discussions on this subject .
To tell the truth , conglomerates no longer see the WTO as the core issue - there is already a McDonald 's in every city in the world .
I would like to end by asking another group to explain to us how they are going to handle the confidentiality of discussions between the Commission and Parliament in future .
I believe we need a solution to this in order to guarantee good , honest cooperation in the future .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the President of the Commission expressed optimism this morning as to the future of Europe .
" A greater Europe is taking form " , said Mr Prodi .
We may ask : is a Europe taking form that is greater in spirit and in intent ?
A Europe with new aims , a Europe capable of performing its international role better ?
I hesitate .
It is permissible to doubt .
The Conference of the World Trade Organisation in Qatar in itself justifies tempered optimism .
The European Union ' s action through its representatives , namely Commissioners Lamy and Fischler , was difficult but frankly positive .
In fact , European diplomacy contributed decisively to the positive results of the Conference and hence to putting an end to the paralysis of the World Trade Organisation , to restoring its credibility after the resounding failure of the Seattle Conference .
The commitments undertaken by the European Union are far from fulfilling our main priorities , particularly in the environmental and social spheres .
The European representatives were , in fact , faced with a dilemma , where they saw protection of nature and social rights , the representatives of the developing countries saw only disguised protectionism of European interests .
Therefore , there are grounds for hope , but also grounds for disappointment .
It is worth emphasising the positive aspect of the negotiations with regard to agriculture , which are , at last , prompting and stimulating an in-depth reform of the CAP which the European Union proved incapable of carrying out internally .
Equally praiseworthy are the results obtained with regard to medicine prices and the undeniable victory achieved over the egoism of the pharmaceutical multinationals .
The Doha Conference represents just a small step along the steep path that aims to harmonise liberalism and regulation , a small step for globalisation to contribute to world progress and especially to the reduction of poverty , hunger , disease and violence .
Lastly , if the failure ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Thank you , Mr Lage , your speaking time is up .
Before I give the floor to Commissioner Fischler , in my capacity as President - and of course , I am not allowed to take part in the debate - I should like to warmly congratulate both Commissioners and also thank them for the pleasant working relationship which was very constructive , particularly in Doha .
I now give Commissioner Fischler the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , before Pascal Lamy sums up the discussion as a whole , please permit me a few remarks on the subject of agriculture .
I see the most important success at Doha as having been the formulation now contained in the Doha Declaration , which gives us the chance to decide for ourselves the direction we will take in agricultural policy .
That is both an opportunity and a responsibility .
It is an opportunity because , unlike in the Uruguay Round , we are not so much standing with our backs to the wall in a situation in which , while we continually just said ' no ' , the other parties to the WTO Treaty determined the direction of future policy .
It is , though , also a responsibility in so far as this outcome does not mean that we do not have to make further appropriate developments to our agricultural policy .
It is this task that now faces us , and it is one that we must take very seriously .
The criticism from some quarters has been that we , the rich part of the world , continue to exploit the developing countries with the help of our refunds on exports .
I take a somewhat different view of this .
I believe we should not ourselves make the mistake of hanging on to old images of a former agricultural policy .
Four per cent of the Community budget is hardly going to put the whole world 's agricultural trade out of true , and we use no more than 4 % of the total Budget for the promotion of exports .
I also , by the way , take the view that we really have nothing to be ashamed of when it comes to imports .
The European Union alone imports more agricultural produce from the developing countries than do the USA , Canada , Australia , New Zealand and Japan put together .
Various speakers have rightly pointed out that the work is only just beginning , something for which we will have to make proper preparations .
It goes without saying that we will make our further preparations in consultation with Parliament .
What still matters above all , though , is working at convincing others .
We cannot assume that our ideas about the future of agriculture will be accepted elsewhere in the world without needing to be explained .
I cordially invite you to join with us in carrying on this work of persuasion together .
Let me conclude with heartfelt thanks for the many compliments we have received today .
I see them , though , more as an appeal to us to carry out our responsibilities in the future .
Madam President , I must say that the fact that our work this evening is being chaired by an eminent specialist in trade matters is symbolic , and I should like to thank you , as well as all those present here this evening who believe that the Doha ministerial achieved positive results .
I should also like to thank , as Mr Fischler has done , those of you who have attributed part of that success to those negotiators who are this evening sitting on the Commission benches .
Having heard everyone who has spoken , I believe that the broad majority among you approve of what was achieved .
The fact that your approval is not completely unanimous is a matter of regret , at least for Mr Fischler and myself .
We shall try to do better next time .
The fact that the results obtained are of good quality is really due to the fact that this is the product of policy work in which Parliament and the Council played an important part .
I believe that Doha has reminded us of a basic rule of Community algebra , which is that the weight of the negotiators is an exponential function of the solidarity of the Union .
Once again that rule has proved to be true .
Yet that solidarity was neither the result of a sudden act of faith nor the expression of blind confidence in the two negotiators , whatever the qualities that you have emphasised .
In reality , the solidarity derived its substance from the Union ' s negotiating position and from the balance , which is in some ways intrinsic to our mandate , between liberalisation and regulation , between our general concerns here among the countries of the North and our openness towards the concerns of the countries of the South , between the specific values that we , as Europeans , wish to defend and our openness towards a number of the concerns felt by partners who do not necessarily share those values .
Of course , we did not achieve our objectives one hundred percent .
That is true but , as in any negotiations , we reached a compromise , a compromise in which everyone can be a winner , since we are not playing a game in which the stake is zero .
However , it is true that on the social side - and I think that neither Mr Fischler nor I have sought to conceal the fact - we have not made as much progress as we would have liked .
Many of you have , quite rightly , said as much , and we shall have to keep working on it in other forums .
I should just like to say a word to those people whom I have heard criticising the development aspect .
To be honest , I find it hard to understand their criticism , since the developing countries have been able to express themselves and make their voices count at this ministerial conference in conditions that they have never been able to obtain before , and I can say to this House that the Union played a part here , and if the developing countries were able to obtain a place at the conference table - both during the conference itself and during the preparations for it - which is much better than it has been before , it was to some extent the result of the efforts that the Union had been making in various places .
As a result , we shall be tested during the next round of negotiations , on our capacity to remain faithful to this viewpoint , particularly when it comes to adapting our programmes of technical assistance for development to fit the ambitious negotiation programme which has been decided on .
We shall have plenty of opportunity to verify it with our African friends during the phasing-in period after Cotonou and the WTO negotiations .
In reply to the question about the order in which things will happen , I can say that the real negotiations , particularly at technical level , will start at the beginning of next year .
I would suggest that we stick to our usual successful working methods , in other words , as things develop , continuing in what I believe to be more or less complete transparency , we should keep one another informed about developments in our mutual positions , and in particular about the Union ' s negotiating position .
The structure of the negotiations themselves is still being finalised .
On this point , we shall have to be scrupulous and careful to ensure that a certain number of the political balances that we obtained in the negotiating programme are not destroyed by some underhand means as a result of timetables with variable speeds , which would have the result of dealing with some subjects before others .
On the specific subject of intellectual property and medicines , as someone has already pointed out , the question of the use of compulsory licences by a developing country which does not have its own production capacity still has to be sorted out , and we shall be actively considering this issue and other issues too .
We shall be proposing solutions that will be in the same spirit as what we have already done in order to achieve this compromise , a spirit which those of you who are familiar with the Commission ' s position in February last year will easily have recognised .
It should be noted , in passing , that most of the countries in question are exempt from the disciplines of the agreement on intellectual property until 2006 .
Finally , to those of you who would like to see a reform of the WTO and who have pointed out , quite rightly , that this is not included in the working programme , I would reply that I share your view .
Some progress has , admittedly , been made since Seattle , at least in practice , without making any formal changes to the rules of procedure .
This is true in the case of transparency , and it is true as regards having a much larger number of the actors who sit around the WTO table being involved in the decision-making process , but I think that at Doha we probably went as far as we could in terms of what informal action can add to formal action , and I think that we shall have to think about this matter very soon .
As most of you have said , the serious negotiations are only just starting , and will continue during the years to come , in all probability with the maximum negotiating intensity somewhere between 2003 and 2004 .
We therefore have a little time to prepare for the peak in the negotiations which will no doubt occur at around that time .
I believe , therefore , that our method of working together has produced some good results , and I hope that during the negotiations we shall retain this spirit , which is at one and the same time positive , resolute and open , and which is the spirit in which we have been working for the last two years .
In any case , you can count on Franz Fischler and myself to ensure that that is the case as far as the Commission ' s contribution is concerned .
I have received four motions for resolutions , submitted in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Public health ( 2001 - 2006 )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council ' s common position with a view to the adoption of a programme of Community action in the field of public health ( 2001-2006 ) ( A5-0420 / 2001 )
I now give the floor to Mr Trakatellis , the rapporteur .
rapporteur . ( EL ) Madam President , the adoption of the Community action programme in the public health sector is the European Union 's first integrated attempt to protect public health .
Protecting public health is currently one of the primary concerns of the Union 's citizens .
Health must be a priority , over and above political or economic compromises , and cannot be treated as a commodity .
The programme designed to replace sectoral and fragmented Community action on health is a more integrated programme , based mainly on disease prevention , which will help us to introduce quality standards in the public health sector .
The Council has included a large number of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading in its common position , mainly as the result of excellent cross-institutional collaboration .
However , important aspects of our proposals have been rejected in the common position ; worse , part of the programme 's proposal has been deleted by the Council , forcing us to amend the common position in the Committee on the Environment , the members of which voted in favour of the present recommendation for second reading by a large majority .
I should like now to make a few comments on the programme itself .
The main objective of the programme is to strengthen collaboration between the Member States - and hence achieve added value from the synergy of Community action - by developing three lines of approach , which constitute the general aims of the programme .
The first line of approach is to improve the information and knowledge needed in order to develop public health .
The second line of approach is to strengthen the potential for a rapid and coordinated response to health threats .
I should point out here , given that it is three months to the day since the terrorist attack on 11 September , that we need to include a category to deal with health threats from natural , biological and chemical agents caused by unforeseen circumstances , such as accidents or defective infrastructure or machinery , human error or even acts of terrorism .
The third line of approach is to take account of health-determining factors in all policies and activities through health promotion and disease prevention schemes .
The programme , which complements national policies , aims to achieve a high level of physical and mental health and greater equality in health issues throughout the Community .
Given that the programme has limited resources , we need to prioritise health protection measures , so we can support action to prevent the most serious diseases , together with practical action and the need to develop an integrated , cross-sectoral health strategy within which all Community policy and action will help to protect and improve health .
I should like to highlight two points in our amendments to the common position .
Although we are in almost total agreement with the Council on the objectives of the programme and on individual issues , there is still a great deal of discussion as regards coordination and the budget for the programme .
The European Parliament feels that this sort of complex programme , which includes networks , data , various institutions and non-governmental organisations , needs efficient coordination and control .
Obviously , there is a need for a coordinating organisation , which is why , at first reading , Parliament recommended a mechanism called the Health Coordination and Monitoring Centre which would , of course , operate under the Commission and the programme .
We have now confirmed this approach in the Committee on the Environment , which voted for a second reading .
Of course , the Council , in its common position , and the Commission , in its amended proposal , espoused and adopted the main elements of Parliament 's position on developing what they refer to as an efficient system and mechanism for coordinating and monitoring the programme .
However , the configuration which they have opted for , in the form of structural arrangements including strengthened central resources , is not ideal and will , at the very least , give rise to confusion and ambiguity , which is why we shall clearly insist on a coordinating centre in a bid to achieve efficient , overall and continuous coordination of the programme .
Finally , the budget .
The programme must be adequately funded .
Parliament is asking for EUR three hundred and eighty million , given that the programme contains extremely ambitious projects and schemes .
Consequently , the budget needs to be increased if we are to fully satisfy the needs and objectives of the programme and meet the demands involved in applying the Council 's proposals for preparing , adopting and operating suitable structural arrangements including strengthened central resources , as set out by the Council in the second paragraph of Article 7.1 .
It is also vital for us to have the flexibility to redistribute resources .
Finally , strengthening the foundations of our European Structure depends on convergence , not just at the level of economic strategy and policies , such as the single market and EMU , but in individual sectors , such as the health sector .
These are new forms of integration , which I call new convergences , which broaden and deepen the unifying processes .
My view , therefore , is that the new programme marks the start of just such a convergence process in the vitally important health sector .
Madam President , Commissioner , this is the second reading of the public health programme and it is important that the European Parliament re-address a number of issues which it considers to be of fundamental importance .
To start with , we feel that the European Commission really must make suitable structural arrangements , within a year of the date on which the programme starts , for a mechanism which guarantees permanent monitoring and coordination , boosts efficiency and supplies the Member States with information on best practices and an overall evaluation of the programme .
This will provide an opportunity to readjust national policies along the right lines .
Following recent events and their impact on health , we need to extend action in order to deal with unforeseen threats and new circumstances .
As far as the budget is concerned , I shall not mince my words because , if we really want to respond to the needs and objectives of the programme in question , we need to provide the resources required in order to implement it .
Given that current programmes have been extended as a result of the delay in approving this programme , at the expense of the present budget , the sum of EUR 280 million proposed by the Council is already too little and is incompatible with the successful application of the programme .
I know the budget has limited room for manoeuvre , but I think that , on such serious issues , which directly affect our citizens , the Union needs to make its priorities clear and find suitable solutions .
So I ask the Council to reconsider its position , accept the relevant amendments approved by the parliamentary committee and allow for a budget of EUR 380 million .
Finally , I think it is important that the exact objective of the programme under discussion be made clear .
Amendment No 23 , which is referred to in Article 2 , reinstates questions such as a holistic approach to health , highlighting mental health and well-being , and the importance of preventing and combating morbidity or premature mortality and reducing inequalities in health matters .
I should like to finish by congratulating the rapporteur on his effort to reconcile opposing views and ensure that the procedure for approving the programme will be completed shortly .
Madam President , I should like , in my turn , and this time on behalf of the Liberal Group , to thank Professor Trakatellis for his excellent report and for his particularly productive and effective collaboration with the notional rapporteurs , and in this case , believe me , that is not just a formality .
He has succeeded in extracting from the 57 amendments our essential concerns , as expressed by our vote on the occasion of the first reading .
Above all , I should just like to say that I am glad that he has abandoned the idea of creating a European centre for the coordination and monitoring of public health .
On this point , I would just like to remind the House that the Liberal Group supports Amendment Nos 34 and 57 which , more prudently , are evidently intended to strengthen that coordination and also Community integration at the level of the various existing public health networks , under the auspices of the Commission .
At a more fundamental level , of course , there are still points on which we disagree with the Council : first of all its refusal to include in the enacting terms any mention of a specific disease , any explicit reference to patients ' rights , or the methods of action for preventing diseases .
Amendment Nos 16 , 22 and 47 are essential .
They emphasise the importance of a policy of prevention and epidemiological monitoring .
Finally , thanks to Amendment Nos 3 , 26 and 42 , the rights of young and adult patients are finally laid down in a Community programme .
The second point on which we disagree is the budget , on which Parliament has already made numerous efforts to reach a compromise with the Council .
The EUR 380 million which we had adopted at the time of the first reading in plenary session , on 4 April , is in our view the minimum minimorum .
Moreover , as far as the budgetary aspect is concerned the Council ' s position is to my mind somewhat paradoxical .
It has drastically reduced the budget to EUR 280 million , and at the same time it intends to open up this programme to the candidate and associated countries .
There is a problem here .
Should it be necessary to remind the House , as our rapporteur has done , that health is one of the most important concerns of the citizens of Europe ?
Food safety issues , changed attitudes in the face of the AIDS scourge , for example , or the threat of biological terrorism , remind us that the human race is not immune from outbreaks of new viruses or the reappearance of former pandemics .
This fully justifies an appropriate budget for the next six years .
The citizens - and I am just about to finish , Madam President - the citizens , the Members that represent them , and the Commission , all insist on that budget , in order to ensure that health is not sacrificed on the altar of budgetary dogmatism .
We want a strong health programme as early as January 2002 .
It is in Europe ' s interest .
This is why we do not understand the attitude of the Council which , by not wanting to fill in the details of this programme , is in fact leaving the Commission with all the powers , while Members of the European Parliament will be deprived of any right of review for the next six years .
The European Parliament must be consulted about the annual priorities , and I hope that our fellow Members will support us on this point .
Far from being innovative , this programme restricts itself mainly to the setting up of an epidemiological monitoring network .
As far as we are concerned , this is not the main priority ; we already have comparable data from other countries .
The Community added value should appear upstream , in the form of a reduction in the health risks emanating , for the most part , from our environment in the broadest sense of the word : transport , pollution , chemicals , food etc . , but also from our behaviour and from social , economic and environmental inequalities .
We recommend prevention throughout the world , but we have to start by applying it ourselves in our health programme .
This programme should also give greater consideration to the risks arising from transmissible diseases , including in the candidate countries .
AIDS remains a scourge in Europe , and tuberculosis is resurfacing everywhere .
We also need to think about the therapeutic technologies that we wish to give priority to .
The ' all-drug ' approach has revealed its limitations with the increasing levels of resistance to antibiotics and vaccines .
It is time to take other methods and replacement treatments into consideration , but this should also be done on the basis of relevant evaluations .
Finally , we cannot give in on this matter of the budget .
Even EUR 380 million over a period of six years is not enough .
By sticking at EUR 280 million , the Council would be demonstrating a desire to restrict the actions of the European Union on public health issues , which is something that we cannot comprehend .
That is why we support Mr Trakatellis ' report , which is the result of numerous exchanges between us and which enables us to demonstrate to the Council that the European Parliament ' s opinions on health matters must be taken into consideration .
They are reasonable and they are essential to the health of all Europeans .
To develop and harmonise public health at the highest level ought to be one of the tasks of the European Union if its raison d ' être is not merely to concern itself chiefly with the movement of capital and goods .
The recommendation contains some good intentions , but nothing about how they are to be put into practice .
Yet even in the most highly developed countries of the European Union , in any case in France , public health is short of resources , personnel , premises and equipment .
The idea of profitability is becoming more generalised .
Local hospitals and maternity hospitals are being closed down .
Because of staff shortages , nurses , carers and junior doctors have horrendous timetables .
Healthcare , and health itself , are commodities which a part of the population is finding it increasingly difficult to afford .
A proper public health policy implies disease prevention .
Yet how can we prevent disease in a society wracked by unemployment and poverty , in which we are witnessing the reappearance of diseases that we thought had been eradicated , like tuberculosis ?
A civilised society which has the resources of the European Union at its disposal ought to provide everyone with free , high-quality healthcare .
Its inability to do so is one example of its failure .
Thank you , Madam President , whenever there is a European Parliament debate on public health , people still assert for form ' s sake that the subsidiarity principle must still be observed .
However , this appears to be a hollow phrase .
I have noticed that the EU ' s public health programme is being extended and embellished by all manner of things related to public health .
Certainly in the field of education and the provision of information , I do not expect Europe to outstrip the individual Member States .
Moreover , the distance between Europe and the citizen is far too great .
I do , however , support the promotion of health in the candidate countries where even basic health care is below standard .
In those countries , the European Union can offer help to combat various illnesses effectively .
A great deal can be achieved with relatively limited financial resources .
However , the developments in the public health sector in the European Union are going one step too far , in my opinion .
According to the Treaty of Amsterdam , public health is national policy and should stay that way .
I am therefore opposed to public health programmes which are used as a means to undermine national policy while the present programmes hardly offer any added value compared to Member State efforts .
Finally , rather than spending more money on public health programmes , it would be better to phase out subsidies on tobacco growing completely .
This would greatly benefit public health in the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the European Community 's programme of action in the field of public health for 2001-2006 .
As we will , I think , probably end up going into the conciliation procedure , the programme will probably not become effective before early 2002 and its term will be delayed accordingly .
The European Commission had allocated EUR 300 million for all the European Union 's health projects over five years .
I feel provoked by the way the Council of Ministers has again cut this amount and is willing to authorise only EUR 280 million .
This programme set itself the extensive goals of continuing the eight existing action programmes , and there are additional tasks , considered to be urgent , especially in the area of information and , as Mr Trakatellis has already mentioned , in that of the challenges posed by international terrorism , whose scale we can as yet scarcely grasp .
That being so , I cannot do other than give my full , whole-hearted support to Parliament 's demand for EUR 380 million ; indeed , I consider that the very least that the European Community must make available .
We must not be amenable to compromise on this , and the Council must not be left under any misapprehension about this .
The common position on the other areas , however , is in my view a great improvement on what the Commission originally submitted and on the documents produced by the first reading in Parliament .
The great majority of the amendments that have now been resubmitted , and to which the Environment Committee has agreed , I do not see as an improvement in absolutely every respect .
Despite the difficulties I have with them , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Trakatellis for the work he has done and , in particular , for his efforts at achieving a broad consensus in Parliament .
I must say , though , that further and continuing education is certainly a good start across national boundaries , but I have great difficulty with training in healthcare , medicine , and so on , becoming a matter for the European Community .
I see it as a matter for the Member States .
Some Members have expressed doubt about everything having to be done at a European level .
Coming as I do from a large Member State , I have seen only that the centralised allocation of tasks does not necessarily represent an improvement , but that individuals must really be helped where they actually are , and that , I believe , is done better by the Member States .
Madam President , the adoption of Community action in the field of public health is greatly welcome .
The new public health strategy will determine the EU 's focus on health for the next five years .
That is why having clear priorities is so important : firstly , improving information and knowledge concerning health issues ; secondly , strengthening rapid reaction to health threats ; and , finally , tackling health determinants .
However , as many of my colleagues have mentioned , the budget remains an issue .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy would like EUR 300 million .
This is an EUR 80 million increase which would correspond to the amount already in the existing programmes .
As many have mentioned , this is EUR 100 million more than the Council asked for in the common position .
This is necessary in order for the programme to work effectively , and it is more than fair .
I would like to take this opportunity , in light of 11 September , to ask the Commissioner if any new action to combat bioterrorism will be funded by a new budgetary proposal and not from the framework programme ?
Finally , I would like to emphasise the importance of working with NGOs .
I am alarmed that the Conservatives in this House have called for a split vote on the issue of NGO networks .
I fear that this will undermine the partnership which has been built up under the previous programme where the Community relied on NGO networks to deliver messages such as the " Europe Against Cancer Week " .
The new health programme is about protecting the health of all EU citizens , not just the privileged few .
This will not be achieved without working with the EU citizens who are most interested and knowledgeable about public health .
Health is what matters to the majority of EU citizens .
We should make sure that this programme matters .
Madam President , we are in the process of providing ourselves with an excellent public health programme by 2006 , and I want especially to thank Mr Trakatellis for that .
I want to mention a few points I think need to be part of this programme .
The first is what is absolutely the most important objective of a health programme , namely to ensure that diseases do not occur at all .
Preventative measures cannot be emphasised enough , and consideration must be given to these in all policies and all activities .
That applies above all to environmental pollution which , as we know , damages public health when , for example , food is contaminated or poisonous chemicals that are dangerous to health are used in consumer products .
I therefore really want to urge everyone to vote in favour of Amendment Nos 24 , 40 , 49 and 54 .
My second point relates to complementary medicine .
It is important for this to be recognised in the action programme and for research , evaluation and the provision of information to be encouraged in the area of complementary methods of treatment .
That is what Amendment Nos 25 and 44 are about .
Thirdly , I want to draw your attention to Amendment No 60 , tabled by my own political group .
This says that we need to develop strategies for reducing resistance to antibiotics .
This is a major public health issue and a major public health problem , as the World Health Organisation has also pointed out by way of a warning .
My fourth and last point concerns the importance of the efforts in support of the activities of the not-for-profit and non-governmental organisations that operate in the public health field .
They do sterling work in the field and need all the support they can get .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
At a time when there are many questions with regard to what Europe is doing and what it is about , the one area where we can claim to have success and where we have responded to the concerns of European citizens is in the area of public health .
We have been to the fore with in bringing forward innovative programmes tackling common diseases such as cancer , biological hazards , risks to food and food safety , and also the ongoing problems of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease .
The one certainty , the one foundation stone that European citizens could depend on was the European Union .
This has been particularly the case because of the role of our present Commissioner , David Byrne with his proactive attitude to dealing with problems head on , refusing to hide behind any of the cloaks or daggers generally used to get through any difficult political situation .
Instead , he delivers clear and factual information quickly to the people .
What we are asking for in Parliament here , in the second reading of the Trakatellis , report is a continuation of that relationship with the European citizen , a continuation of the confidence that the European citizens have in us to deliver for them in real terms .
I , like my colleagues , do not think that the European Union should be involved in setting out treatment programmes or setting out the delivery of medical services to individual citizens - that is obviously best dealt with at national or local level .
However , there is much that we can learn from each other .
There are practices with regard to medical devices and new technologies which are in use in one Member State and are not even discussed in another .
The Commission and Europe can act as the honest broker in bringing together these sides to ensure that we deliver the best possible remedies for people within the European Union .
I have one area of concern in particular - and there is nothing in the report to help resolve the problem - and that is having a clear account of the illness and diseases suffered right across the European Union .
For instance , in areas such as autism , polio , cancer - breaking down the individual cancers is probably easier to collate than anything else - cystic fibrosis and other generic and genetic diseases , we have seen continuing problems for people trying to give services to sufferers .
If the Commissioner could come forward with an idea of being the collator of information , at least we could then say that there is 10 % or 12 % or 50 % , instead of using guess-work or guess-figures as regards the extent of disease , illness or disability prevalent in our Union .
Along with my colleagues , I will support the measures looking for increased funding to be made available .
We must live in the real world .
The work we are asking for costs money , whether in terms of personnel or resources , and we should be fully supportive of that .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , the Members of Parliament and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their work on this important and ambitious programme .
This programme is important because protecting and improving public health is at the very centre of our citizens ' concerns and their expectations .
The recent terrorist attacks have underlined the need to strengthen and extend the existing Community preparedness and response mechanisms .
Many of the amendments tabled are in line with our broad view of public health and how we should address it at Community level .
We can accept 38 of the 60 amendments - 28 in full and a further 10 in part .
I should like to concentrate on a few key areas where some clarification of the Commission 's position may be of help .
First , the implementation of the programme .
The success of the programme will depend on the availability of resources and expertise .
The Commission will do everything it can to ensure the necessary , effective coordination by establishing the appropriate structural arrangements .
Putting these in place requires , in our view , a step-by-step approach .
Firstly , the Commission services are engaged in the process of restructuring in order better to reflect the main areas of the programme .
Secondly , in order to strengthen the Commission 's capacity to coordinate actions , we intend to outsource some administrative and technical assistance .
For the longer term , we are looking at the possibilities to set up an executive agency .
However , this will have to await the adoption of the Commission 's proposal for a regulation on such agencies which I hope will be adopted in the fairly near future .
In the light of this , I can accept Amendment No 8 which calls for the appropriate structural arrangements to ensure the effectiveness and cohesion of measures and actions in the programme and to promote cooperation between the Member States .
However , I am unable to accept Amendments Nos 6 , 34 and 57 which impose a deadline on the Commission to carry out this work , and propose the creation of a coordination centre .
This constrains the exercise of the Commission 's executive powers under the Treaty .
Having said that , I hope that Parliament will accept the Commission 's firm commitment to proceed as rapidly as we can on the establishment of the structural arrangements to ensure effective coordination and monitoring .
The second area on which I would like to focus is the programme 's budget .
The Commission 's proposal was for a total budget of EUR 300 million over a period of six years .
Amendment No 36 increases this amount to EUR 380 million .
The Council 's common position proposes a budget of EUR 280 million .
The decision on this matter is for the Council and the European Parliament , as the budgetary authority .
I would simply say that the Commission is keeping to its original proposal which , in our view , provides a reasonable figure for the implementation of the programme .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 36 .
This amendment and the last part of Amendment No 56 also set limits on how we spend the programme budget .
Such restrictions undermine the essential principle that the programme must be flexible and able to respond to new concerns and threats to health , as they arise .
Recent events have clearly demonstrated the need to retain such flexibility .
Therefore we cannot accept these amendments .
Before I leave the issue of the budget , there is one point I want to make .
The Council and Parliament stressed the need to put in place new structural arrangements to ensure effective coordination .
This was not included in the composition of the original proposal in the budget .
In view of this , when we put forward our opinion on the amendments adopted , we intend also to present a revised financial sheet for that programme .
This would incorporate an increase in the budget line for expenditure on resources , for technical assistance and support which will be required for the structural arrangements .
I wish to turn now to the amendments concerning the scope and structure of the programme .
Amendments Nos 7 , 13 , 25 , 30 , 44 , 46 , 50 , 52 and part of Amendment No 58 touch on a variety of subjects , such as giving support to regional and national centres of excellence in various fields .
Complementary therapeutic methods - developing guidelines for medicine and healthcare interventions as well as actions to improve diet and eating habits .
These amendments cannot be accepted since they cover areas under the responsibility of Member States .
Moreover , there are a number of amendments that require specific comments .
Amendments Nos 41 and 59 seek to impose an obligation for the Commission to report annually to Parliament on the implementation of the programme .
Parliament will be informed on a regular basis of the development of the programme through both the comitology rules and the evaluation process foreseen in Article 12 of the common position .
Therefore , we cannot accept these amendments .
Amendment No 42 cannot be accepted since it limits the scope of the health information system by linking it explicitly to the right of patients to receive certain information on their illnesses and treatment .
I stress , however , that I favour the concept of the promotion of patient rights and I am following the policy on this , which is included in the health forum and - you will note - is specifically referred to in the legislation at recital 3 .
Finally , there is a group of seven amendments that we cannot accept because they take away the flexibility necessary for the implementation of the programme or because they duplicate provisions of the common position .
These are Amendments Nos 9 , 10 , 23 , 27 , 28 , 35 and 43 .
On the other hand , there are a number of amendments proposing important new actions that will reinforce the broad objectives and aims of the programme .
To name just a few , Amendment No 48 and part of No 26 that cover activities to counter health threats , including terrorists acts . Amendment No 47 which covers the development of a vaccination and immunisation strategy .
As these amendments , as well as Amendments Nos 3 , 11 , 29 , 31 , 45 and 60 will serve to strengthen the programme and improve its effectiveness , they are all acceptable to the Commission .
I should add that applicant countries can join in and that is provided for .
Furthermore , I also want to mention the reference made to the extent to which it is necessary to acquire information on diseases and disabilities , as Mr Prodi mentioned .
I can , of course , confirm that this particular programme can deal with these issues , particularly under the first strand of the programme dealing with information and data collection .
Let me , in conclusion , Madam President , repeat my appreciation for all the constructive work that the rapporteur and the committee have put in on shaping the future of public health policy in the EU .
For those points where difficulties remain , the Commission is , of course , ready and willing to assist in finding solutions .

Thank you , Commissioner Byrne , the vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The debate is closed .
Undesirable substances in animal feed
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position on undesirable substances in animal nutrition ( A5-0408 / 2001 )
I now give the floor to Mrs Paulsen , the rapporteur .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report has progressed very well .
The Commission and the Council adopted most of what Parliament requested at first reading .
Now , the user stage of the directive ' s application is , for example , being included , and we have obtained a generic term so that we know what we are talking about .
All products intended as animal nutrition are now defined by a common term in all animal feed legislation .
It is very good that the important rules on , for example , the ban on dilution are now being implemented .
This means that a batch containing unduly high levels of , for example , dioxin may not be taken and diluted with something else so that it comes within the limits .
Personally , I think it is excellent that we have incorporated what are called action thresholds into the directive . That , ladies and gentlemen , is in practice the precautionary principle .
It means that if , for example , a dairy discovers that the level of mycotoxin , a mould poison , is increasing in its milk , an investigation can be launched , in spite of the fact that the limit above which the substance becomes hazardous has not yet been exceeded .
An investigation can then be begun into why the level of mycotoxin is increasing in the milk , and preventative measures can be adopted further back in the chain before the limit has been reached beyond which there is a danger of poisoning .
The Council has accepted everything , except in relation to an issue which we in the committee have now been forced to re-address , namely that of whether or not unsuitable batches of feed should be returned to , for example , the Third World .
The committee and I believe it is profoundly immoral simply to pass on in that way products which do not fulfil the requirements of the directive .
We do not know in such cases where the products will end up , whether they will be used in the poorest areas or whether they will simply return to our own market in another guise .
The committee therefore chose to table amendments which remove this option of re-export .
We also chose to retain a transitional period of six months following the directive ' s entry into force .
Subsequently , the Commission and the Council came and offered negotiations under the Belgian Presidency .
We tried to reach a compromise and , in fact , did so .
I would thank both the Belgian Presidency and the Commission for the excellent and constructive way in which they have cooperated with me and my co-rapporteurs on this issue .
We agreed on a compromise solution according to which re-export was to be regulated in the same way as in the general food law which we have today voted through Parliament with a very large majority .
This solution is a technical way of plugging a time gap so that , when the general law comes into force , the provisions of this law will apply to re-export in accordance with this directive .
It is not , then , a new proposal but is concerned with bridging a particular period of time .
The compromise amendment we tabled has exactly the same wording as in the Whitehead report .
This evening , when everything was ready , we learned however that the Council did not want to accept this compromise .
I realise with deep regret that we have to withdraw our compromise proposal and are thus forced into a conciliation .
I want to say to the Council of Ministers that this is purely and simply a misuse of the conciliation institute .
This is not such a complex and serious dispute that we should need to go so far , but my co-rapporteurs and I find the situation such that Parliament is compelled to draw attention to it .
When five political groups sign a compromise , then we are serious about it .
Madam President , Commissioner , there are , under the circumstances , a lot of reports on animal feedingstuffs and animal nutrition before Parliament at the present time .
Yesterday , we discussed the circulation of compound feedingstuffs ; today , at a second reading , we are back with undesirable substances in animal nutrition .
Mrs Paulsen has confirmed that , in its common position of 17 September 2001 , the Council shared Parliament 's view that , in order to ensure a comprehensive level of protection , no mixing or dilution should be permitted and that , in addition , the Member States should be empowered to lay down action thresholds .
I think that the practicality of these proposals will be shown when the time comes to implement them , and if there are problems then we must be ready to make more changes .
We know that everything that is prescribed must be capable of being monitored , which does not mean that only the possibility of monitoring must exist , but that monitoring is actually carried out .
What we are actually hoping for is that we can complete this document today .
Our misgivings about the issues raised by Article 13 ( 2 ) have been put forward , and we continue to hope that there will be a compromise , even if Mrs Paulsen has now cast doubt on it .
The groups have come to an agreement among themselves .
What is at issue is the re-exportation of products intended for animal nutrition produced outside the Community and not complying with this directive 's requirements .
It is not enough to simply say , ' I do not want that , so I shall send it back ' .
We ask ourselves questions and we face responsibilities . What happens to feedingstuffs like that ?
Do they get destroyed , are they diluted , or do they reach us or other countries by other routes ?
' You shall not to others do / what they should not do to you ' , we say in Germany , so we are actually in favour of requiring the destruction of produce bought as feedingstuff but not permissible as such under this directive , and of it being done on the spot .
The objection now raised to that is that it means the European Union being misused as a disposal plant .
I think we would have no problems with that if we could resolve the question of how the costs would be met .
So it is not enough to simply send the stuff back , and does not do justice to our responsibility as politicians .
We continue to hope that the compromise that is taking shape , which we have brought in in Amendment No 4 , will be supported by a majority in this House , and that we will be able to persuade the Council as well .
It will make it possible to put abuses of the system on the record and to document them .
The authorities in the exporting third country must give their express consent to the re-exportation .
I would , though , see the next logical step as being for the exporting third country to also produce evidence of what has subsequently been done with the items taken back .
Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , and the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on desirable substances in animal feed .
The measures in the Council common position are a key element of the comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of feed .
Prohibition of dilution will reduce the overall contamination load of animal feed .
Operators across the production chain will also be obliged to put in place passive systems and good manufacturing practices to ensure that the feed materials and the feedstuffs they produce are safe .
The setting of action levels will act as an early warning system , triggering a proactive approach to identify sources and pathways of contamination and to take measures to eliminate them .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 as adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Regarding Amendment No 1 , the Commission considers that the possibility of returning non-compliant products intended for animal feed to the country of origin has to be maintained .
The Commission shares , however , Parliament 's concerns in this regard and agrees , therefore , that this return can only happen under strict conditions .
Regarding Amendments Nos 2 and 3 on the date of application , the Commission cannot accept the time period of six months .
Instead , sufficient time is needed to transpose these far-reaching measures into national legislation .
Serious efforts have to be made by the operators to apply the measures in practice .
The Commission is therefore pleased that compromise Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 have been tabled for this plenary session to replace Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
I should confirm that the compromise amendments are - should you decide to keep them on the table - acceptable to the Commission .
These compromise amendments address the Commission 's reasons for non-acceptance of the first three amendments .
Therefore the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 .
The Commission will also try to persuade the Council to do likewise .
I wish also to inform you that a revision of the maximum levels of the undesirable substances in Annex I is foreseen . The Commission has already requested the Scientific Committee for Animal Nutrition to provide updated scientific risk assessments .
These assessments are the key scientific input to the revision of the Annex .
The Commission hopes to finalise this review as soon as possible .
It should be available before this directive becomes applicable .
To conclude , I once again thank Mrs Paulsen for the excellent work she has done on this file .
Emissions from two and three-wheel motor vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council ' s common position on the reduction of the level of pollutant emissions from two and three-wheel motor vehicles ( A5-0406 / 2001 )
I now give the floor to Mr Lange , the rapporteur .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although we , sitting here together , are all good colleagues and agreeable people , one does wonder about the point of the five of us sitting here this evening to discuss this report , which is as much about lawmaking as it is about industrial policy and protection of the environment .
It seems , though , to be part of the higher purpose of this Parliament that we should have to do this here , and at this time of the day , all the same .
Since first reading stage , our aim has been to make motorcycles just as clean as passenger cars have become thanks to our legislation .
I believe we can take pride in the reduction of emissions from passenger cars , lorries and buses , because we have in fact , despite greatly increased traffic , been able to achieve a marked reduction in exhaust emissions .
One piece has not quite been fitted into the jigsaw , and that is motorcycles .
Here , too , there is a two-stage strategy for reducing the emissions of new vehicles by 2003 and 2006 to such an extent that , in 2006 , a newly licensed motorcycle will in fact be just as clean as a car complying with EURO III standards .
That being so , we now have to boldly take the last step and make the 2006 stage binding as well , firstly , in order to make the objective mandatory .
Secondly , though , in order also to make it safe for industry to plan ahead , as of course new emission technology and new engines are being developed , and 2006 is no longer quite so far ahead .
In that sense , I can also understand that it is in industry 's interest to ask for a safe space in which to plan ahead .
We must make the 2006 stage mandatory .
I do not believe there is much sense in waiting still longer for a new test procedure , perhaps one that will have been agreed on with the other world markets , Japan and the USA , and will be thoroughly suitable .
Looking at the horizon , though , I do not see that being feasible in the foreseeable future , and so I suggest that we go back to the test procedure we applied to cars and that has proved itself over time , thereby demonstrating a more realistic way of going about things than has previously been the case with motorcycles .
I believe , too , that the test procedure we now want to make applicable will tend not to produce results significantly differing from those produced by the new worldwide test procedure that is currently under discussion .
We can therefore rely on the test procedure for passenger cars .
What is more important is to decide whether or not to still discuss the procedure gradually .
It is also more important to stipulate that motorcycles should not achieve quite different emission values outside the test cycle , in other words that motorcycles are tuned only to the test cycle , and that electronic manipulation does not take place .
This is therefore both proper and vital , and , on this point , the Council has agreed with us that such electronic distorting apparatus should be unambiguously prohibited .
Secondly , we want , in addition to the 2006 fixed stage , tax incentives for the early placing on the market of low-emission vehicles and for the retrofitting of older vehicles where that is technically possible and without discrimination against their owners .
Another important point applies as much here as to other types of vehicles , such as passenger cars , lorries and buses , namely that it is not enough for vehicles to achieve great emission values only on a test bed ; they must be able to keep to them throughout their working lives .
For two-wheelers , too , demands must be made on their durability .
When we vote tomorrow on the package we have presented to you , I believe we will be on the right road , adding this sector 's chapter to the success story that is the reduction of emissions from European traffic .
Thank you , Madam President .
I would also like to thank Mr Lange for his excellent report .
Traditional air pollution will in a few years ' time be a thing of the past , thanks to the majority of the European Parliament .
With regard to new cars , the second generation of catalytic converters will be compulsory in 2005 .
A lengthy and difficult conciliation procedure was required in order to achieve this outcome .
Catalytic converters in lorries will be compulsory in 2008 .
This was not so difficult to achieve . The Council adopted the EP ' s position at first reading .
Today , we are discussing new motorcycles .
One could sum this up by saying that catalytic converters will be compulsory in 2006 .
This is a fair position .
BMW have had a motorcycle equipped with a catalytic converter on the market for a long time .
It is unfortunate that the environmental ministers should refuse to take this reasoning on board . Conciliation will now be inevitable .
However , because of the EP ' s unanimity , the Council is bound to lose out .
The significance of no more ozone smog and far less acidification outweighs the short-term interest of a few manufacturers .
Madam President , I first wish to thank the European Parliament , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Lange , for his speedy preparation of the report on the second reading of this matter .
In general I might say that Mr Lange ' s deep commitment to the issues in this area has been held in high regard in the Commission .
I am happy that the rapporteur agrees with the limit values for emissions and their application dates , which are scheduled as from 2003 .
The rapporteur is once again proposing , however , an amendment that appeared in the first reading , which has to do with a second stage of mandatory limit values that would apply from 2006 .
This stage would be based on limit values and test cycles that currently apply to passenger cars .
As you know , right from the start the Commission has supported stricter limits for emissions as from 2006 , in compliance with the following principles : that we should employ a worldwide harmonised test cycle for motorcycles that reflects the actual way motorcycles are driven on the highway , with the corresponding limit values ; that we should employ a reliable sequence of emissions measurements in a new test cycle for motorcycles , so that new limit values may be specified in a way that is scientifically sound and in accordance with improved emission control technology .
A UN / ECE working party entrusted with the task has completed technical development work on a test cycle for motorcycles .
In the last few months , a large-scale emissions measurements programme has been undertaken .
I could also mention that test results on fifty motorcycles are now available .
Next week the results will be evaluated by the working party .
We do not have to wait until worldwide consensus is reached regarding harmonised testing procedures .
The technical work carried out under this programme makes it possible to determine a solution for motorcycles that can perhaps be applied first in EU legislation .
The rapporteur ' s proposed approach is an option that nevertheless needs further improvements for it to be effective with regard to protection of the environment .
This is an important issue and the Commission cannot support any of the amendments that call for the introduction of a mandatory second stage .
However , the Commission is prepared to participate with the other institutions in shaping an agreement that would be ambitious in terms of technology and that would benefit the environment .
The common position now contains a package of measures for improved in-use emission control , but there is still a number of amendments in the report which define time limits and the details of the regulations more precisely .
The Commission supports Amendment No 6 , which has to do with preventing the test cycle from being by-passed , and the first parts of Amendments Nos 5 and 14 , which are connected with the conformity testing of in-service motorcycles .
The Commission also accepts Amendments Nos 3 and 12 , which would permit the retrofitting of older motorcycles .
The Commission cannot accept the demands in Amendments Nos 5 , 13 and 20 regarding durability .
Such regulations could lead to ever-changing regulations in the period 2003 - 2006 .
The Commission supports the proposal that the measuring of carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption should be included in the type approval system as an essential requirement for a future reduction in carbon dioxide emissions and improved fuel economy .
Measures connected with this can , however , only be taken after a thorough evaluation has been undertaken .
For that reason , the Commission accepts Amendment No 7 , but rejects Amendments Nos 15 and 19 .
Amendments Nos 8 and 9 are connected with the introduction of stage 2 limit values for mopeds .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 8 , as it would delay the application of stage 2 to new type approvals to a time past that agreed in the existing Directive ( 97 / 24 / EC ) .
However , the Commission accepts Amendment No 9 , which provides for a clearly defined period of validity for stage 1 approvals , which in the directive is open .
The Commission therefore accepts Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 17 and 22 .
In addition , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 and 18 in principle and Amendments Nos 5 , 14 and 23 in part .
The Commission does not agree with Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 19 - 21 , and 24 - 27 .
Thank you , Commissioner Liikaanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m.
Address by Mr Kim Dae Jung , President of the Republic of Korea
We now welcome to the European Parliament President Kim Dae Jung , a tireless defender of universal values such as peace , democracy and human rights .
Mr President , we have great respect for you and for your country , whose economic progress and , more recently , political progress over the last ten years have made a great impression upon us . We are pleased to welcome you here today .
You were elected President of the Republic of Korea at the end of 1997 , and came to office in February 1998 . These are the crowning achievements of your remarkable career as a fighter for democratic change .
Since the beginning of the 1960s , you have fought for free elections , founded parties and pressure groups and , on several occasions , stood as a candidate at elections , in order to defend the basic values which inspired you throughout your life .
On a personal level , you have suffered enormously from the initiatives you have taken .
When living in exile at the beginning of the 1970s , you were abducted on successive occasions in Tokyo by the secret services , arrested on numerous occasions , subsequently imprisoned for having criticised an unfair Constitution .
At the beginning of the 1980s , you were accused of treason and condemned to death .
This sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment .
You lived in exile for a second time but , at the end of the 1980s , you were able to return to your country and worked to restore democracy to it .
After having been elected President of the Republic of Korea , you continued to defend the values that underpinned your life and that we share .
We all salute , in particular , the work that you have done to improve relations with North Korea .
The list of international awards that you have received in recognition of your efforts is far too extensive to read out here .
However , allow me to tell you how pleased we all were when you were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2000 .
Your past is a lesson in determination and perseverance , given the terrible difficulties that you have experienced and overcome .
Your past has not only been decisive for your own country . It has had a genuine impact on the region as a whole and has served as an example for the whole world .
I am very pleased to welcome you here today , Mr Kim Dae Jung , and I now invite you to address the House .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner Prodi , distinguished guests .
It is with deep emotion that I stand here on this podium today .
I have always admired the European Parliament , this great hall of democracy and the very symbol of European unity .
This is the place where the unprecedented and monumental task of bringing the countries of Europe together was achieved .
Here , the Members of the European Parliament are working for the realisation of democracy , economic prosperity and social justice in Europe and throughout the world .
It is therefore my great pleasure and honour to speak from this most distinguished place .
I am deeply grateful , moreover , to you , Madam President , for your kind and gracious words of welcome .
When I was elected President four years ago , Korea was in a desperate situation , faced with a serious financial crisis .
EU members responded to my appeals and supported our efforts to overcome the difficulties by sending , among other things , an investment mission to Korea .
Thanks to such support , we were able to recover from the crisis .
Neither the Korean people nor I will ever forget your friendly help .
I thank you all .
The 21st century is witnessing what will probably be known as the greatest revolution in human history .
This great revolution is - to put it simply - about knowledge and information and about globalisation .
In the 20th century , tangible elements , such as land , capital and labour , were the sources of economic development .
In the 21st century , however , intangible elements such as knowledge and information , creativity and a spirit of adventure are becoming key to increasing competitiveness .
Two hundred years after the industrial revolution , a new paradigm is needed , different from that of the age of industrialisation .
Now , the age of knowledge-based economies is opening up .
It is now possible for under-developed nations and poor individuals to create wealth just by learning to use a computer .
However , humanity is also faced with a very serious problem .
It is the problem of what we can call the digital divide .
More than 75 % of the benefits derived from enhanced information capabilities are concentrated only in advanced nations .
Developing nations are being overlooked .
The gap in information capabilities between the advanced and developing nations means a widening gap between the rich and poor .
And the faster information capabilities are enhanced , the faster the gap widens between the rich and the poor .
On the other hand , the information revolution is inevitably linked with accelerating openness and globalisation .
Territorial boundaries are becoming practically meaningless as enormous amounts of information are spreading throughout the world almost instantaneously .
Meanwhile , cultural conflicts are arising .
The worsening of poverty and advent of cultural conflicts leads to various kinds of fanaticism .
Thus , enhanced information capabilities and globalisation could also threaten global peace in the 21st century .
I would like to stress that this is a very serious problem .
The digital divide is further raising the level of antagonism between the rich and poor within a single nation .
We must stop this .
I would like to tell you briefly about our own experience .
To overcome such problems , Korea has been pushing a policy of productive welfare .
Productive welfare , while guaranteeing a basic standard of living , aims to concentrate on human resource development , especially for low-income families , so that they can stand on their own two feet .
Furthermore , productive welfare strives to improve the overall quality of life for its citizens .
In particular , we place high priority on a thorough and systematic curriculum for educating the young as well as the disadvantaged , to enable them to acquire information capabilities .
This effort involves a broad spectrum of people , including elementary and middle school students , millions of housewives , 600 000 members of the armed forces , the elderly , as well as the disabled and prison inmates .
With this policy , we are trying to prevent the digital divide from becoming wider , which would create a gap in earnings .
And we are determined to cut off the vicious circle of poverty being handed down from generation to generation , parent to child .
Korea built the first nationwide high-speed information network in the world .
As a result , more than half of the 46 million citizens are now active users of the Internet .
To identify and effectively resolve the problem of the digital divide , international awareness and cooperation are vital .
I believe that advanced nations , including the members of the EU , must use their leadership to help developing countries , by providing various kinds of support , including the construction of a viable information infrastructure .
Korea will actively participate .
We have , in fact , already begun cooperating with individual countries .
Now I would like to touch on the future of Korea and the EU .
I proposed the construction of a high-speed information network at the Asia-Europe summit meeting in Seoul last year .
I am pleased to remind you that the leaders of all the member nations gave it their active support .
Under this project , we are envisaging the creation of a " Cyber Silk Road " linking Asia and Europe .
It is a project for the new millennium aimed at furthering the exchanges between Asia and Europe by setting in place an " e-EurAsia " .
In this respect , it is very fortunate that the Trans-Eurasian Information Network project is proceeding smoothly at present with the cooperation of all ASEM member nations , as well as the EU member nations .
There is another project that would greatly promote exchanges between Europe and Asia .
This is none other than the construction of an " Iron Silk Road " , directly linking Korea with Europe by land .
For this project , one thing must be done - the linking of the railway between South and North Korea .
This railway has been severed at the Demilitarised Zone for the past 50 years .
On the occasion of the historic inter-Korean summit last year , the two Koreas agreed to relink this railway , as well as an adjacent highway .
If we manage to link the remaining 14 kilometres of this railway , South Korea and Europe will finally be connected .
When the trans-Korean railway ( TKR ) is linked with the trans-China or the trans-Siberia railways , a train leaving London could reach Seoul and Busan via Paris , Eastern Europe , Central Asia and Siberia or China .
Then , goods could be shipped to all parts of the Pacific region , and beyond , from Busan , which also happens to be the third largest container port in the world .
Transportation costs would be cut by 30 % and time shortened by one third .
On the day we achieve our plans for an e-EurAsia and complete our " Iron Silk Road " , Asia and Europe will , for all practical purposes , become one landmass .
Geographically , Asia and Europe have always formed one landmass .
Historically , they have been interacting for a long time .
From the 5th and 6th centuries onwards , a large number of people and goods have travelled by land over the Silk Road and by sea through the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf .
History shows us that the cultures of the two regions have contributed to and influenced each other considerably , as they both developed .
In modern times , the West 's democratic system of governance , the industrial revolution and cultural achievements have exerted great influence on the politics , economy and culture of Asia .
Meanwhile , Asia , as the birthplace and cradle of three of the major civilisations , namely the Tigris-Euphrates , Indus and Yellow River civilisations , and the spiritual centre of Confucianism and Buddhism , greatly influenced the entire world , including Europe .
We all know that gunpowder and paper originated in Asia and then travelled to Europe .
The political system featuring a centralised government , which has been prevalent in Asia , had a tremendous impact on the way Europeans governed themselves .
Today , Asia and Europe are pursuing the common goals of promoting democracy and market economies .
Three-quarters of the world 's population now live in these two regions .
Economically , they produce half the world 's products .
It is very important for Asia and Europe to deepen mutual understanding and cooperate further , not only for the development and prosperity of the two regions but also for the peace and prosperity of the world .
This is the goal and ideal of ASEM .
I am convinced that close cooperation between Korea and the EU will help put into effect this ideal of ASEM and greatly contribute to efforts to bind Asia and Europe closer together .
The EU is a very important and substantive economic partner for Korea .
It is the number one foreign investor in Korea and the third largest trade partner for Korea .
Nonetheless , the room for expansion of trade and investment between Korea and the EU is boundless .
Korea is located in the middle of a huge market that includes the United States , Japan , China and Russia .
Its business and investment climate has been improved greatly through continuous economic reform .
It also possesses ample human resources and is equipped with the economic infrastructure suited to the knowledge-based economies of the 21st century .
I hope that the EU and Korea will continue to expand their cooperative partnership in the huge East Asia market with Korea as a bridgehead for the EU , as it advances into countries like Japan and China .
When this happens , we will no doubt score a " win-win success " .
As you know , the Korea-EU Framework Agreement took effect last April .
A systematic mechanism for further strengthening practical cooperation in such areas as investment and trade is now in place .
On the parliamentary level , the Korean-EU Parliamentarians ' Council was formed and annually discusses ways to develop Korea-EU relations .
In the process of negotiating the Doha Development Agenda , Korea and the EU cooperated closely .
Let me assure you that Korea will continue to step up its cooperation with the EU .
As you know , the world is currently experiencing a global economic downturn .
We must now reduce our dependence on the United States for our exports and open other avenues , while stimulating domestic demand .
The flexible management of our financial policy is necessary to stimulate domestic demand .
We must also push economic and social policies to raise the purchasing power of low-income families .
In addition , we must push for more active and large-scale trade and investment between big markets like the EU and East Asia .
Korea is opening its doors to EU members .
And we also want actively to advance into the EU markets .
Thus , I hope that both Korea and the EU will be able to overcome today 's economic downturn through mutual cooperation and jointly pave the way towards a new and common prosperity .
I would now like to take this opportunity to tell you about the issues surrounding the Korean Peninsula , in which you have taken great interest and given support .
Peace on the Korean Peninsula is an issue that concerns not only the 70 million Korean people - it is also directly linked to peace and stability in the East Asian region and the world .
I have consistently pushed the Sunshine Policy to prevent war and settle peace on the Korean Peninsula .
And , at last , the historic inter-Korean summit was held in June last year .
The crux of our Sunshine Policy calls for peaceful coexistence and peaceful exchange and cooperation between the two Koreas .
After a period of time , perhaps ten or 20 years , when the peoples of the South and North have come to trust each other and feel comfortable with each other , we hope to accomplish our ultimate goal of peaceful unification .
Unification will come .
The Korean people lived in a unified country for over 1 300 years from the seventh century .
It is unimaginable that we should abandon our desire for unification just because we have been separated for the past half-century .
As long as the Korean people ardently wish for unification , and as long as support from you and the world continues , I am firmly convinced that we will be able to unify our country in the not-too- distant future .
The EU has been taking part in the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation ( KEDO ) and has offered a range of humanitarian and economic assistance to North Korea .
It is also pursuing an array of diverse activities , including technological assistance and training programmes , for the North Koreans .
Many EU members are actively supporting our efforts for peace on the Peninsula by establishing diplomatic relations with North Korea .
In May this year , when the inter-Korean relationship experienced a temporary setback , an EU delegation , led by Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson and including EU Commissioner for External Relations , Chris Patten , visited North Korea and helped us resume our dialogue .
The EU is an important supporter of peace on the Korean Peninsula and exchanges and cooperation between the South and North .
You , the Members of the European Parliament are genuine friends of the Korean people .
I earnestly hope that your unsparing support will continue until the day when peace is settled and the first ray of unification shines over the Korean Peninsula .
Right now , the world is gripped with anxiety , and we are filled with tension over the recent terrorist attack .
This attack on the United States in September brought enormous shock and sorrow to all .
Terrorism does not declare itself before striking , terrorism is faceless and terrorism indiscriminately kills innocent civilians .
It is the most cowardly and cruel act one can imagine .
Under no circumstances should such acts be justified or condoned .
If we are unable to root out terrorism , the international order will collapse , and individuals will lose their lives .
Terrorism must be eradicated .
In this connection , I would like to praise the quick actions of the European Union in response to the attacks and for cooperating with the international community 's efforts .
Korea is also participating in the international coalition to eradicate terrorism , and we will continue to do so .
However , no religion or culture should be regarded with hostility under any circumstances .
We must keep this in mind as we carry on our war against terrorism .
On the contrary , we must work to strengthen dialogue and cooperation among different religions and cultures .
We must eliminate the fundamental causes of terrorism , first of all , by eliminating the gap between the rich and poor and addressing the social inequalities that are getting wider every day .
Achieving peace in the Middle East is one of the most important and urgent tasks in front of us .
People around the world are craving peace and a renewed sense of security .
Peace and security is the task of our time .
In this respect , I attach great significance to the World Cup games that are going to be held in Korea and Japan next year .
We would like to make next year 's World Cup a great turning point for establishing global peace and guaranteeing security for all peoples once again .
The Korean people and I will do our utmost to make the 2002 World Cup games the safest games ever .
We will make them a festival in which all people around the world will take part for peace and unity .
We will give humanity hope for the future .
There are only six more months to the opening of the World Cup .
Of the 32 competing nations , 10 are EU members .
I hope many of you will visit Korea then to watch your teams .
We will soon complete our preparations and wait for you .
For those of you who will watch the games on TV , we are putting state-of-the-art facilities and measures in place so that we can vividly transmit the lively action to you in images and in real time .
We will stage the 2002 World Cup successfully as befits one of the greatest festivals for humankind .
I hope all of you will take great interest in and help us make this a success .
Rudyard Kipling who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1907 once said : " East is East , and West is West , and never the twain shall meet . "
But if he were alive today , he would have said instead : " East is West , and West is East , and never the twain shall part . "
Mr President , I should really like to thank you most warmly for the very powerful address that you have just given before the European Parliament , and also for the very positive opinion that you have expressed with regard to this House .
You reminded us that it is the symbol of European unity , and you also mentioned the support that the European Union has been able to give you and hopes to continue to give you .
We have , of course , seen and heard with great interest the proposals , the very specific projects that you have in mind in order to encourage trade between Asia and Europe , and you have told us that these projects would help to strengthen our mutual understanding and cooperation .
You know that you have our full support in these undertakings , and we hope that the framework agreement that has been concluded will be a privileged instrument of that cooperation .
Yet you also emphasised , Mr President , the responsibility that the developed countries have to help the developing countries to adjust to the information society , so that the poorest countries will not be isolated from the future development of the world economy .
I can assure you that this is a view to which we in this House attach particular importance , and your message has been not only heard , but also understood and accepted .
Lastly , and this is something that we had talked about at length before your address , you spoke of your hopes for peace and stability in Korea .
I myself had pointed out how much you had encouraged cooperation between North and South Korea , and we share that hope with you , Mr President , with all our hearts and with all our strength .
My last point is that you appealed to us most sympathetically regarding the World Cup match .
We realise how enthusiastic you are about preparing to organise the World Cup .
On this subject I can also assure you that all members of this House will be following it closely , on television of course , but we have also heard your kind invitation that you extended to us .
Each one of us knows that sport and culture are forceful vehicles for bringing about peace , for developing freedom , the rule of law and respect for other people , and all those values that you defend with a perseverance and determination that we deeply admire .
For all this , we thank you Mr President .
( Loud applause ) ( The formal sitting was closed at 12.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like it noted as a matter of urgency that the case of Dr. Ganzert , an attorney from Wels , has been dismissed .
He is at present being held without good cause by the authorities in Nicaragua and has for three weeks been endeavouring to get permission to leave the country . I wish , though , to thank you , Madam President , for writing to the authorities in Nicaragua and asking for him to be given an exit visa .
I will raise that matter with the President .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved ) President .
I should like to inform the House that the Minister of Justice for Belgium , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Verwilghen , cannot be present at the beginning of this debate because of fog in Brussels .
We are expecting him to arrive at some stage .
I suggest to the House that we will have to continue the debate and our agenda therefore .
We look forward to the Minister 's arrival .
Mr President , I would like you to take note of my strong protest at the conditions under which this debate is to be held .
I am not referring to the absence of the Minister , although this is also a problem , but to the systematic manner in which the Conference of Presidents organises debates relating to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , amalgamating every topic into a joint debate .
It seems to me to show a total lack of respect that , at the same time and for the same duration as a debate of such great importance as that on annual progress in the field of Justice and Home Affairs , we should also be debating the Hazan report on the Council report on justice and home affairs : EU priorities and policy objectives for external relations and the Watson report on a recommendation to the Council on an area of Freedom , Security and Justice : security at meetings of the European Council and other comparable events , and any other matter that may be on this Committee ' s agenda .
Mr President , this is the same as if we were to debate the assignment of radio frequencies and the association agreement with Egypt at the same time because they are both the remit of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
I hope that more respect will be shown in future .
I suggest that you raise this matter with your own group leader and that this be a subject , therefore , for the Conference of Presidents to discuss .
Mr President , on Monday , when the sitting opened , I asked for Members to be provided with a copy of the letters exchanged between Mr Bush and Mr Prodi .
Mrs Fontaine assured us that she would do what was necessary .
At Monday ' s extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I put the same request to the Commission representatives , who seemed surprised that Members had not seen this correspondence .
We did in fact manage to find Mr Bush ' s letter to Mr Prodi , sent a whole two months ago , on the Internet , but we still do not have a copy of the reply Mr Prodi sent at the end of November .
Furthermore , it seemed that our Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms had agreed on the need to see this letter .
I therefore ask you whether a copy can be provided .
I have to inform you that the President did not say that she would make the correspondence available because the correspondence is not available to us as a Parliament .
That is the difficulty that we are in .
So I am afraid that cannot be instituted .
Area of freedom , security and justice
The next item is the joint debate on the following two oral questions :
Oral question to the Council ( B5-0534 / 2001 ) by Alima Boumediene-Thiery , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the 2001 annual debate on the area of freedom , security and justice ( Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty )
Oral question to the Commission ( B5-0535 / 2001 ) by Alima Boumediene-Thiery , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the 2001 annual debate on the area of freedom , security and justice ( Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty )
Ladies and gentlemen , the conclusions of the Tampere Summit have given new impetus to the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
With a view to attaining the objectives that were set , a plan of action was drawn up , which provides for its establishment between two and five years after the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force .
It is now time for a mid-term review of the progress made on the Tampere agenda , in the light of the Commission ' s timetable .
The area of security , freedom and justice covers three major aspects : the Community ' s asylum and immigration policy , strengthening judicial cooperation and police cooperation .
So let us look at the situation regarding each of these three aspects .
On the question of asylum and immigration policy and , more specifically , the management of migration flows , under the measures that have been taken , immigration is regarded as a palliative for manpower shortages and as compensation for the demographic imbalances of the states involved , without taking account of the human or social dimension or the consequences of the brain drain .
However , surely this Community migration policy calls into question the universal nature of fundamental rights ?
Is the re-admission policy consistent with international obligations regarding the protection of refugees and the right of asylum ?
As for the European Observatory on Migration , I have a reservation .
Surely we have to admit that first of all we need to reflect on its purpose , its usefulness and the position of the NGOs concerned with migration in this Observatory .
Not a single significant measure has been taken to ensure that third-country nationals are treated fairly .
As for their political participation and the re-definition of citizenship , this question has been evaded on the pretext of protecting national sovereignty , which comes down to denying the democratic rights of citizens resident in Europe .
How does the Commission propose to promote citizenship based on residence as a means of ensuring their rights ?
Furthermore , what action does the Council propose to take on the directives on reuniting families , on the status of non-Europeans who are long-term residents and on freedom of movement , establishment and work on the territory of the Member States ?
The Geneva Convention forms the basis of asylum policy .
However , the concept of refugee must encompass both the gender aspect and the social aspect .
Is the Council prepared to respond to the specific sufferings of women and victims of civil war ?
Surely the Eurodac system , based on a data bank of fingerprints , presents a risk to asylum seekers ?
Furthermore , should the Dublin Convention not be reviewed ?
The competence of a state to examine a file and the decision-making responsibility should be decided on the basis of the asylum seeker ' s choice of country of residence rather than by the country of arrival , which is so difficult to decide in a Union that has supposedly abolished borders .
The action plans adopted for partnership with third countries are looking more and more like a means of holding back immigration .
What is the situation regarding development aid , a corollary to restricting emigration ?
Has cooperation been reduced to financing extradition ?
Surely the introduction of administrative police at the points of entry from third countries is a negation of the right to seek asylum ?
Some progress has been made at civil level , in relation to strengthening judicial cooperation .
Several texts have been adopted on judicial powers , the notification of acts , the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions and their enforcement , especially in the matrimonial field and in relation to parental responsibility .
A proposal for a directive on legal aid is under consideration ; it aims to secure better access to justice .
The situation is much less promising with regard to reinforcing criminal judicial cooperation : the reservations here are mainly about what constitutes a specific offence .
In the legislative field , framework decisions have been taken on protecting the euro against forgeries , money-laundering , combating the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
The Council also appears to be preparing to adopt those decisions that concern the fight against terrorism and the European arrest warrant .
The slow progress is due mainly to Member States ' resistance to the principle of mutual recognition .
The setting up of Eurojust is a real step forward for the citizens ; the rights of defendants and the protection of data do , however , need better guarantees .
Unfortunately , we find that we are still far from establishing a European public prosecutor ' s office or from common legislation and judicial procedures .
We find the most marked progress in the field of police cooperation . There are now many areas where the police have to cooperate .
The procedures for Europol ' s participation in joint investigations , for the keeping of its records and for its cooperation with third countries need to be clearly defined .
Surely we urgently need to guarantee better data protection and finally ensure that we have democratic and judicial scrutiny ?
As for respect for fundamental rights , I believe we need to review the list of safe countries .
Turning to the Schengen Information System , and looking ahead to the enlargement of the Union , new questions arise concerning its tasks , its technical capacity and its institutional form .
We must not overlook the external dimension of justice and home affairs .
The fight against trafficking in human beings and the fight against organised crime are both areas that should be dealt with under the external relations aspect of justice and home affairs .
( The President cut the speaker off )
We cannot start off the day running overtime .
Otherwise , at the end of the day , our agenda would be totally out of place .
Mr President , this is a rather strange debate today .
Different reports have been put together into an omnibus debate .
My report deals with the question of security at summits of the European Union and similar international gatherings and it looks also at the question of citizens ' rights .
It is important that when Parliament looks at problems that affect the Union , it must do so without victimising individual countries .
Just as my recent report on terrorism sought to be a generic report and not one that referred exclusively to the situation in the Basque country in Spain , so this report sets out also to be a generic report and not one that seeks to be particularly critical of any one country .
We have seen violent protests at summits in EU countries - in Nice , Gothenburg and Genoa .
Such protests have been serious , in the last instance resulting in a death .
My report has been drawn up in my capacity as chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Rights and Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs and I am pleased to say that it has enjoyed a wide consensus in that committee .
I thank my colleagues for the work they have put into it and recommend that they adopt the report as it stands , and vote against the 30 amendments which have been submitted , which seem to me to relate to issues that have already been dealt with in committee .
In looking at the problems of violence that we have seen , the European Union must understand the causes of such violent protest and seek to prevent it .
There seem to me to be two requirements in this .
The first is that we must improve political dialogue on the right to peaceful assembly and to peaceful protest .
The second is that we must find a firm , but proportionate , response to criminal behaviour by demonstrators .
I note that in Sweden and in Italy judicial proceedings have followed from the violent protests that we saw .
The European Union , too , needs to look at whether citizens ' rights have been violated , particularly in reference to Article 6 ( 1 ) and to Article 7 of our treaties .
It must be recalled that Article 7 was strengthened by the European Council in Nice , which instructed the European institutions to monitor the application of fundamental rights even where there is simply a risk of a violation of them .
In carrying out such surveillance , institutions must be guided by the European Charter on Fundamental Rights .
Hence my report seeks to begin such a study of what has happened and look at whether we have in all cases abided by our commitments .
When hundreds of thousands of people representing NGOs and church groups gather on the streets to express their concern and choose to do so at a series of international meetings , it is not just a coincidence .
It demands an appropriate response and , indeed , a political response .
We must avoid a situation where no answer is given because a society where citizens are afraid of their institutions - and perhaps more importantly institutions are afraid of their citizens - makes for a very weak democracy .
In this context I welcome the démarche taken by Mr Guy Verhofstadt in seeking to engage in dialogue with civil society , in advance of the meetings that have been held under the Belgian Presidency .
This approach needs to be complemented by a White Paper dealing with globalisation , looking at the European Union 's position as a major actor in an area for which the Union is directly responsible and perhaps bringing together a number of Commissioners from different disciplines to look at a global strategy for the European Union .
We must look at Article 33 of the Treaty , which gives Member States the task of ensuring the maintenance of law and order , and see whether the responses have been appropriate .
The weakness in cooperation between the Member States ' law and order authorities is a fundamental weakness of the Union .
I hope that we will be able to examine this in the context of the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice .
Our citizens must know that they will receive the same treatment from authorities and enjoy the same rights under the law , whichever country they are in and wherever they are exercising their democratic rights .
As Mrs Hazan cannot be with us , her report has been taken over by Mr Poignant .
Mr President , I have stepped into Mrs Hazan ' s shoes .
This is unfortunate for you , but I hope you will excuse me and excuse her .
On the eve of the Laeken Summit , Mrs Hazan said she was very pleased to have the opportunity to present this report on the Union ' s priorities and policy objectives for external relations in the field of justice and home affairs and to play a larger part in this debate on the progress made in relation to the area of security , freedom and justice since the Tampere Summit .
The Union is at a crossroads .
We must not arrive late for this rendezvous that is so crucial and strategic to its future unless we want to end up one day with our back to the wall .
Moreover , we now have an opportunity to examine the degree to which the Member States are willing to put justice and home affairs in the forefront of the Union ' s policies .
That is the purpose of this report , which highlights the need to fully integrate issues relating to asylum , immigration , justice and police cooperation , i.e. issues of very direct concern to our fellow citizens .
With that in mind , all the Member States will have to take global , integrated and inter-pillar action .
We must also stress the fact that hitherto the European Union has taken too little action in this field , which is still in its early days .
This kind of report must be seen above all as providing food for thought on the added value of deepening the area of security , freedom and justice that is at the very heart of the Union , so that the Union can be prepared to meet the challenges of an external policy in this field .
It is up to us to establish the necessary instruments , a lack of which has meant that we have hitherto been unable to respond to our partners ' demands .
Some of these objectives have been listed .
They concern the following areas : combating all forms of organised crime , forming a common front against terrorism , coordination amongst Member States and candidate countries as regards training for the judiciary and police authorities , establishing a co-development policy , establishing close forms of cooperation with third countries in fighting racism , xenophobia and all forms of discrimination , establishing a strong link between immigration policy and development aid policy , the need to adopt a common asylum policy containing minimum standards for the reception and temporary protection of asylum seekers .
This is a difficult task , which will take a long time and calls for complex international negotiations .
By that token we must give the Union a mandate to take action to achieve this , by supporting the Commission proposals that do and will play their part in establishing this kind of coherent framework .
In this sort of situation , we have to be bold enough to put our foot on the accelerator and ensure that decisions that are still blocked in the Council can enter into force .
Obstacles do exist and we must do our best to overcome them .
We must not overlook the human implications of these problems .
Current events remind us of that , with the terrible tragedy of the eight refugees , including three children , found dead in a container in Ireland last Saturday .
We also remember the 58 victims found at Dover in June 2000 .
I hope it will not take other tragedies of this kind for our States to realise how important it is to make progress in these areas .
The Council must , of course , assume its responsibilities , because what is happening here is the result of its overcautious approach .
Similarly , we must not allow ourselves to be blackmailed by any one country - I am referring to Italy - but I believe that yesterday ' s events have changed things and Mrs Hazan cannot have known about this last night .
In this regard , the tragic events of 11 September make it even more necessary for us to look at these matters from a long-term point of view .
We must not now adopt an overly hasty position out of a sense of urgency .
On the contrary , only if Europe is equipped with instruments that are permanent , operational and coordinated to a similar degree can it exert its influence on the international scene and impose its vision of humanism and the protection of individual freedoms .
Lastly , we emphasise that Parliament must be able to exercise control over external policy and justice and home affairs policy by means of periodic consultation regarding the overall strategy pursued .
Let me point out that this is not so much a question of making unrealistic and well-meaning proposals and but rather of analysing the situation objectively , which means we must look at this external dimension as a key part of our policy .
The progress made since Tampere is not very encouraging .
Whose fault is that ?
It is certainly not the fault of the Commission , which is making a great effort to achieve these objectives . Instead , we should criticise the Council , which tends too often to put off the adoption of specific measures again and again , and the unanimity rule governing these areas , which blocks their adoption .
Once again , none of this is new , as you know , since this question was also raised at the Tampere Summit .
Today , we must seize the moment ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the main phenomena that threaten democratic values , people and civil rights today are as globalised as our economy .
Organised crime , drug trafficking , trafficking in human beings and terrorism are phenomena that no longer permit us to continue to think in national or regional terms .
It is therefore by no means too late for the European Union to apply its policy on justice and home affairs to its external relationships .
What is more , in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs we have noticed that there are more and more reports relating to cross-border problems , and Eurojust is only one example of this .
The reinforcement or even the preservation of the constitutional state and democracy in the European Union is determined to a large extent by the situation in the countries surrounding us and those further away .
A significant factor in this is the visible and invisible corruption that is particularly problematic in a number of countries and which is undermining our democracy .
Thus an efficient and responsible immigration and asylum policy cannot be achieved without appropriate efforts for the countries of origin .
However , in order to achieve a good understanding of the causes of migration and asylum applications , we must match our development policy to the actual socio-economic and political context in the countries concerned .
The proposal by the Council , in collaboration with the Commission , is an important document that is pointing in the right direction .
The principle of the constitutional state is being reinforced , both in the area of enlargement and in that of the European Union ' s collaboration with other countries , and we should now be aiming to achieve proper coordination in our external policy .
With her report , Mrs Hazan has furthermore managed to reinforce the original text .
Naturally , the objectives , priorities and measures being proposed will still have to be achieved and complied with .
It is also important that Parliament be kept properly informed about progress in this regard , because we have to be able to answer the question that concerns the man and woman on the street : ' What are you doing to solve all these problems ? '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , today ' s debate in this Chamber is taking place in a particular international context , which only underlines the need , the urgent need , to achieve the objectives of the Amsterdam Treaty and to respect the programme set out by the Heads of State and Government of the EU countries in Tampere in 1999 .
It is also taking place in the context of yesterday ' s Justice and Home Affairs Council whose heavy agenda reflected the intensive nature of the ongoing work , and of the forthcoming Laeken Summit , a mid-term meeting to evaluate the progress made since Tampere and , I hope , give new impetus to our efforts to bring our programme to fruition .
Finally , it looks forward to the medium-term prospect of the Intergovernmental Conference to be held in 2004 , against the background of the enlargement of the Union .
Some of the questions that have been raised , especially on the role of the European Parliament in the field of justice and home affairs and on protecting the citizen ' s fundamental rights in the European judicial area , will figure very largely on the agenda of that debate .
Starting , therefore , with the questions put by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery , I will try to reply to the questions of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The first question raised touches on a matter of principle : the objective of protecting the citizens , laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is a question that stands at the top of the Union ' s political agenda , in the light of the current , dramatic international events and of deadlines that are drawing increasingly near , such as enlargement .
I would say that this objective will certainly not prejudice respect for the fundamental rights set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission is most concerned to ensure that the proposals put forward for guaranteeing internal security and the protection of our fellow citizens are balanced and proportionate and are consistent with a system of values based first and foremost on the rule of law .
First of all , a number of quasi-constitutional texts guarantee these rights in the European Union and are referred to systematically in the Commission ' s proposals .
This applies to the European Convention on Human Rights as also to the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
These texts govern the rights of the Union as they do national rights .
Furthermore , I believe it is imperative to point out that the Union ' s objectives with regard to the protection of citizens are not just consistent with the fundamental rights set out in the EU Charter but are based on these rights .
In that sense , we welcome the recommendations made in the Watson report on demonstrations organised in conjunction with the European Council .
These recommendations are reasonable and we believe they create a balance between , on the one hand , the citizens ' freedom of expression and their full use of the fundamental right to demonstrate and , on the other hand , the need not to give free rein to those who are in fact against any democratic debate and believe they can pass on their messages by means of violent confrontation with the forces of law and order .
As for the recommendation to launch a dialogue on the internal and external impact of globalisation , let me say that the same concern will be apparent in the communication the Commission will be submitting next January on the external aspects of a sustainable development policy .
Turning to the second point , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery ' s question about the possibility of taking special measures to combat the threat of terrorism , I do not think one could say the European Union is going down that road .
Once again , although it is true that to some extent it is urgent to take decisions , and in particular measures to strengthen police and judicial cooperation to combat the most serious attacks on our freedoms , our values and our institutions , I do not believe that the initiatives the European Union has taken or has proposed can be described as special measures , i.e. as measures derogating from key principles because of special circumstances .
No , the proposed measures are basic measures ; they were taken , it is true , in special circumstances , but they are not makeshift measures and they are in fact consistent with the mandate our governments and our nations conferred on us when they adopted the Amsterdam Treaty .
Let me also take this opportunity to express my pleasure and my congratulations to the Belgian Presidency for managing , yesterday in Rome , to consolidate decisions taken by the Justice and Home Affairs Council to adopt the framework decision on combating terrorism and the framework decision on the European arrest warrant .
The rapporteur ' s suggestion that we should include a temporary validity clause or a review clause is interesting in principle , i.e. the idea of introducing an obligation to assess the impact of a proposal adopted in terms of its objective .
The third point that was emphasised concerns the delay in achieving the Tampere objectives .
The speaker is addressing all the institutions and authorities responsible for implementing the programme decided at Tampere .
The latest edition of the Commission ' s programme includes an initial evaluation of the progress made .
Delays have indeed occurred , especially in certain areas such as asylum and immigration or the minimal harmonisation of penal sanctions .
As you know , the mid-term review that will take place at the Laeken European Council is therefore a crucial step .
That will be the moment to check whether the commitments made in Tampere and reiterated on 21 September will be reflected by a real will on the part of the Member States to move ahead .
It will also be the moment to learn lessons from the successes achieved and difficulties encountered to date .
If the Tampere objectives were re-evaluated and , in particular , if the deadlines that were set were called into question again , we would see a crisis of public confidence vis-à-vis a political project , which , as everyone well knows , is essential and a matter of priority , whatever the remaining difficulties .
So what we need today is resolve as much as method , in order not to disappoint public opinion ' s legitimate expectations as also the men and women whose job it is to protect our freedom , guarantee our security and ensure that justice becomes more accessible .
The Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers held last week produced encouraging results in terms of the Member States ' resolve to match the commitments they made with their actions .
However , it also illustrated all the limitations and ambiguities of a decision-making process based entirely on unanimity .
In Laeken , the Commission will underline the fact that we can only overcome the reluctance to move forward if we begin by injecting a new dose of political will .
When the Heads of State and Government embark on a new , more general debate on the future of Europe at the Laeken Summit , that will also be the time to establish a link between the progress achieved , the progress still to be made and the future of the Union and of the way it functions .
They will have to reflect on how the next Intergovernmental Conference could introduce institutional changes and reform the decision-making mechanisms in such a way as to ensure the full achievement of the area of freedom , security and justice .
The fourth question concerns harmonisation in the field of criminal law .
First of all , let me remind you that the Treaty refers specifically to the harmonisation of criminal law as such .
The object here is not so much to achieve mutual recognition as to make sure the EU Member States combat acts that affect all the countries of the Union in a coordinated manner , in the same manner and by imposing penalties of equivalent severity .
This will be an instrument that complements the mutual recognition of judicial decisions .
Of course , as I have always said and will repeat today , harmonisation must be handled with sensitivity and applied only where it is necessary .
The Tampere European Council listed the sectors where this rapprochement is needed .
There have been Member State initiatives or Commission proposals covering all these aspects .
Several of them have been adopted , others are well on the way to being so and I believe I can say that we will soon have a common set of instruments to fulfil this mandate .
Regarding procedural law , however , I have already had occasion to say that the Commission intends to present a communication on this subject , which has become all the more necessary in the light of the most interesting political debate on the European arrest warrant .
The purpose of this communication would be to define common standards for the protection of individual rights in criminal proceedings in relation to a number of aspects that derive from the Convention on Human Rights and the Strasbourg Court ' s case law .
This approach would help strengthen the mutual trust on which the construction of the European judicial area depends , both in the Union as it is today and , later , in a Europe enlarged to 25 or 30 Member States .
The fifth point concerns the democratic deficit that still exists within the Union in fields relating to justice and home affairs .
This is a dual question , since it concerns , firstly , your institution ' s role in the decision-making process in the field of justice and home affairs , and secondly , how it can exercise its powers in the appropriate manner .
It is very important to ensure that our resolve to make progress in achieving our objectives goes hand in hand with improved democratic and judicial scrutiny .
Firstly , I must say that over these past two years the Commission has endeavoured to inform and involve the European Parliament as closely as possible in the definition of its strategic guidelines and its initiatives .
Nonetheless , it remains true that we need to think more deeply about Parliament ' s participation not only in defining the Union ' s strategy but also in its implementation . The Commission regards this as a key point with regard to the progress remaining to be made .
Mainstreaming matters that come under the first pillar with those regarded as coming under the third pillar is proving a source of constant difficulties .
Moreover , there is some risk that this situation could block the decision-making process ; even if this risk is overcome at the price of artificially separating acts that in fact have the same aim , this deadlock would make the Union ' s action unintelligible to the citizens .
I therefore welcome the Council recommendation , which your Parliament adopted on 15 November this year , on criminal sanctions and Community law , calling for , at the very least , the communitarisation of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
Regarding Parliament ' s access to sensitive information held by the Commission , one of the practical conditions allowing your institution to exercise its right of scrutiny properly , let me point out that a framework agreement , dated 5 July , exists between our two institutions and that the Commission will apply it to the full .
Finally , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery asked about strengthening the candidate countries ' institutional capacities .
I believe that in the reports we have published and in our constant evaluation of the improvement in the candidate countries ' capacities , we have borne this in mind and given all the necessary publicity to our evaluation of each of the candidate countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the enhanced cooperation between the Union and the United States in the fight against terrorism , I believe this cooperation shows the extent to which the European dimension cannot now be dissociated from any complete and effective international action taken against transnational incidents .
Of course , this cooperation is still in its fairly early days .
It has given rise to problems , especially in guaranteeing full respect for the principles of our European law and of international law .
I see the development of this European dimension as an opportunity to assert our values and our principles rather than sacrificing our principles on the altar of cooperation .
To conclude , Madam President , Mr President , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , the Union ' s response to the challenges and issues of our times must be well considered but rapid , transparent but effective , progressive but coordinated .
It is along these lines that I see the future of that vast building site , which is the area of freedom , security and justice , and that I intend to pursue the cooperative relations with the European Parliament on which we embarked two and a half years ago .
I personally am very grateful for the commitment of all the members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and above all its chairman , Graham Watson , to whom I offer particularly warm thanks .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , in view of the vast number of reports before us for discussion , I would like to make some fundamental observations , as Commissioner Vitorino has done .
If we briefly review the past year in flashback , we can clearly see that we have , as rarely before , made progress in the area of internal security , even before 11 September .
We have laid down the political guidelines on immigration and asylum policy ; we have drafted detailed regulations ; we have , in these areas , taken steps to deal with illegal immigration and also prepared for intensive judicial cooperation ; and , after lengthy discussions , have even implemented a directive on money laundering .
Progress has been made ; it was heavy going , but we succeeded in moving ahead .
We owe this in particular to the way Parliament and the Commission work so well together ; they have led us to these very advances .
Many thanks , Commissioner Vitorino !
There were more , indeed dramatic , developments after the attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September .
The Member States ' ministers - both of justice and of home affairs - appear at last to have woken up , with the consequence that the counter-terrorism package , which instituted Europol 's joint investigation teams , could be wrapped up with the sole exception of the European arrest warrant , and I wish to express congratulations to Prime Minister Berlusconi and President-in-Office Verhofstadt for having brought about a settlement that may eventually make it possible to implement the European arrest warrant .
The package of measures extends to the freezing of the money and other assets of suspicious organisations , as this will make it possible to sever the arteries of terrorism and organisations of a criminal nature .
Renewed consideration , though , has led indirectly to greater security , one example being our most recent discussions here , in which we urged that a visa should in future be carried in exactly the same way as a residence permit , a document in its own right and unambiguously indicating the identity of the bearer .
This is a plus for security , an added value which we have achieved through our discussions here .
Our concern must , however , be with pressing the Member States to speedily implement all the measures we have decided on .
I would , though , also like to use this opportunity to highlight some less positive developments .
The working conditions in this House are , as a rule , among them .
Cooperation with the Council leaves something to be desired .
It is increasingly the case that documents are presented too late or not at all , resulting in Parliament and the committees discussing castles in the air .
In important committee meetings , but also in the plenary sittings , the Council is frequently conspicuous by its absence .
Monday was the classic example ; in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , we met specifically to have important debates on the European arrest warrant and on cooperation with the United States , which involved an exchange of letters between Presidents Bush and Prodi .
The Council distinguished itself by not being present , and there was no written material for discussion .
Putting it mildly , that is unacceptable from the point of view of cooperation here .
Take one look at the timetables and you will know that they result in impossible working conditions .
We are increasingly getting documents at the last moment .
This is not on .
We want to make speedy progress , but not at the expense of quality .
Mr President , I congratulate Commissioner Vitorino and the rapporteurs , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and Mrs Hazan , whose report was adopted unanimously in committee , and the chairman , Mr Watson , whose report on security at international summits is meticulous from a legal viewpoint and politically balanced .
This report reflects on the need to respond politically to the problems posed by globalisation in order to contribute to the political , social and economic progress of the international community and to overcome violence .
Too many acts of violence have been committed during the anti-globalisation demonstrations , and also in some cases too many acts of violence against the demonstrators or even those arrested , as in the tragic events in Genoa in which a young man was killed , struck down in circumstances that are still unclear .
I am glad to say that the courts in my country are independent and still able to mete out justice , even if it is posthumous .
There have been too many acts of violence , too many violations of the rules and principles that govern the European Union .
When faced with alarming events , we must not give up respecting the fundamental rights which we solemnly affirm and expect third countries that have barely entered the democratic arena to respect .
Even today , when we are faced with terrorism , we must remember that these rights were won in Europe with the greatest difficulty .
They cannot just apply on holidays and in times of peace .
They exist to protect us in times of struggle and danger .
Therefore , ready as we are to defend ourselves against terrorists , enemies of human rights , by every lawful means , we reject any temptation to use instruments that reduce the levels of civilisation on which we pride ourselves , even when faced with pressing , genuine demands .
The end does not justify the means , especially when it is the means - respect for the fundamental rights of every human being , and the rejection of discrimination between citizens and non-citizens - that form the essence of our democracies .
In this parliamentary term , the Europe of rights is being constructed .
The Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights has been approved and appreciable progress has been made in setting up the area of freedom , security and justice .
We are behind schedule with asylum and immigration but we have made progress on judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters and police cooperation .
The delays in Member States ratifying the agreements approved by the Council reveal the need for the Community method even in matters of the so-called third pillar .
The strengthening of Europol , the creation of Eurojust , joint investigation teams and the fight against money laundering are just a few of the agreed objectives that are still waiting to be put into practice .
The 11 September slaughter gave rise to the proposal of framework decisions on a joint definition of the crimes of terrorism and on the European arrest warrant .
After incomprehensible resistance from - I regret to say - my own government , even the latter project is about to be implemented , and I hope my government does not make the country pay for its contradictions in this matter .
In any case , I am glad to say that the European Union as an area of freedom , security and justice really will be here soon .
Mr President , I wish to talk specifically about the Council statement which we are expecting on cooperation between the EU and the USA and cooperation in combating terrorism .
The events of 11 September were an excruciating flash of light and we had to react immediately .
However , we must not be blinded into forgetting that terrorism has been a problem on our continent for many years .
After 11 September , I remember Hans Gert Poettering saying here in a memorable debate ' we are all Americans ' , but we have learned since then that we must first be Europeans .
I welcome the Justice and Home Affairs Council 's agreement at the weekend on a framework decision on combating terrorism .
I welcome the Council 's recognition of a European Union legal base for the freezing of assets of groups linked to terrorism and , in particular , yesterday 's agreement between Council President Guy Verhofstadt and Prime Minister Berlusconi on a European arrest warrant .
Europe has put its house in order . Europe has shown its capacity to act .
In tackling terrorism there is a fine balance to be struck between the security needs of our citizens and the rights and freedoms which make democracy what it is .
The European Union has shown that it can be tough on terrorism and still be true to its treaties and to the values which underpin them .
It has recognised that networks of terrorism stretch beyond its borders and that we need cooperation between democracies , particularly across the Atlantic .
The next step must be an agreement on better cooperation with the United States .
Articles 24 and 28 of the TEU allow us to build a cooperation agreement on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters with our friends in North America .
We note that there is a famous exchange of letters between Mr Bush and Mr Verhofstadt - some 40 US proposals on what we could be doing to improve our capacity to fight against terrorism .
Most of these can be and I believe are being complied with .
Some of them cause a few doubts since the US appears to be asking for things which it does not require in its own laws , such as retention of traffic data .
Yet others highlight a difference of legal culture between our democracies .
On a visit to Washington DC last week , in talks with senators , congressmen and members of the Administration , I was concerned to learn that the US Patriot Act , adopted by the United States to fight terrorism , appears to discriminate against non-US citizens .
We will need to explore with our American friends quite how it affects those from the European Union .
I was struck too at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing of Attorney General John Ashcroft by the way in which the proposal for military tribunals - the executive order from the President - would provide for hearings in secret , for a prosecution being able to withhold evidence from the defence , for defendants not necessarily having the right to an independent lawyer or to a private conversation with their lawyer , and by how a sentence - including a death sentence - can be passed by a majority of two-thirds of the jurors .
Even if we were able to get an agreement on an extradition package in which the US would not apply the death penalty , the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights , to which all of our Member States are signatories and on which the Union is founded , would prevent extradition of suspects to appear before such military tribunals .
Here , in Europe , we have developed a rights-based approach to international law .
We would like a permanent international criminal court to try those guilty of crimes against humanity and we have called on the Americans to join us in that .
We recognise that democracies need to work together in the fight against terrorism and other forms of serious cross-border crime .
My fear is that , if the US goes down the path of military tribunals , we are on divergent paths .
We must make that clear to Mr Ashcroft on his visit to Europe later this week .
Mr President , one of the most enduring impressions of those who were victims of the violence in Nice , Gothenburg and Genoa is that of helplessness , especially towards the national authorities .
Increasingly often , these authorities close borders indiscriminately and unlawfully , expel citizens with a clean record ( as recently happened to a Swedish citizen , a member of a non-governmental organisation , who was expelled a few days ago from Belgium on no real grounds ) , and arrest defenceless demonstrators and subject them to unacceptable procedures , if not torture and terrible violence , as happened in Genoa .
How can it be possible that there is nothing we can do ?
How can it be that , with all the debates we have had on rights , on respect for dissent and the freedom to demonstrate , with all the talk on the Europe of the citizens , this same Europe is unable to take any action alongside the national courts ?
The merit of the Watson report is precisely that it shows the way for Europe to stop being mute .
The open statement that Schengen has often been violated and that this must not happen again ; the threat to the freedom of the individual from secret , illegally compiled blacklists ; the need to penalise , not least through international instruments , the disproportionate use of force by police forces ; the ban on discrimination between European citizens : all this , which is contained in the Watson report , is the plan of work for this Parliament , which , unlike the other parliaments in the Member States , manages to find a spirit of true unity on these matters .
I hope it is also the Commission ' s agenda , and I hope that this plan of work will succeed in preventing the horrors we have seen in Nice , Gothenburg and Genoa , and will be an important contribution to all the measures being taken against terrorism .
Mr President , I should just like to speak about the draft extradition agreement between the European Union and the United States .
On 7 December 2000 , at Nice , we signed , proclaimed and upheld the Charter of European Citizens ' Rights .
It is very clearly stated in Article 2 , under the heading of dignity , that nobody may be condemned to death or be executed ; the Charter thus makes a clear distinction between the two things and states that , for us European citizens , a prohibition on being executed is not enough and a prohibition on being condemned to death is also necessary .
Well , we are committing ourselves to cooperation with the United States , which has kept the death penalty , condemns people to death and applies the death penalty , has a justice system that uses military courts , and detains thousands of Arabs without charge and without defence .
We are about to vote on a joint resolution with the other groups - we , of course , will vote against it - stating that extradition may be granted provided the United States guarantees that the death penalty will not be applied ; that means that the United States courts may issue capital sentences provided they then refrain from applying them , and all that in spite of the Charter of civil , human and fundamental rights that we have been highlighting so much recently .
We are opening up an enormous breach in our defences against the death penalty .
Friends from the People ' s Party , Greens , Socialists , British Liberals , take care !
We are saying we can extradite our citizens to be condemned to death in the United States even if that country then undertakes not to apply the sentence !
It is a complete break with our tradition ; it is a complete break with our commitment !
Today , we heard Commissioner Vitorino give a speech full of references to our values and our principles .
What , then , are our values and principles ?
Extradition to a country that will condemn European citizens to death ?
I appeal to your feelings , but also to your moral integrity .
We must vote against this resolution !
Mr President , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms has done some notable work in opening up a debate within the European Union Member States and thus assuring the highest security at European Council meetings and other similar events .
Indeed , since the events of 11 September , the significance of these topics has increased enormously . Nevertheless , both the rationale underlying the organisation of these summits and the views of many of the peaceful demonstrators remain current .
First of all , it is important that international Summits should continue to be held regularly and , where possible , they should be expanded to include representatives of the Third World , as happened at the G8 summit in Genoa .
Indeed , it is only through discussion , dialogue and , especially , the preparation of a genuine cooperation and development policy that the poverty and marginalisation of vast regions of the globe can be overcome .
This is precisely why we do not share the extreme , though peaceful positions of those demonstrators who , in Genoa , called the validity of the Summits themselves into question .
Then there are the views of the so-called anti-globalisation movements , which are also topical and important ; they are the views of those who imagine a development model with greater respect for people and the environment , those who imagine a more just society in which wealth is redistributed more fairly .
That is why we should appreciate the innovative method introduced at the Genoa Summit by the Italian Government , which lined up a series of preliminary talks with the demonstration leaders in order to make participation in the Summit itself more democratic .
It must be made quite clear , however , that there can be no tolerance for violent demonstrators .
At Nice , Gothenburg and Genoa , some people , even politicians , succumbed to the temptation of seeking to justify violent behaviour .
We should , rather , have the courage to condemn it unconditionally in every case , because , in addition to the views of the authorities and the views of the demonstrators , there are the views of the silent majority of European citizens , who want practical answers to the issues discussed at these Summits , and that is also thanks to the stimulus provided by the demonstrators , but without the unfortunate excesses and violence that completely devastated the city of Genoa .
Lastly , I should like to mention the views of many men and women in the forces of law and order who , every day throughout Europe , strive to deal with major and minor emergencies of public order and crime , often with inadequate resources .
If , as happened in Genoa , some of them went too far , they should be identified and punished individually , but without a whole class of people who often risk their lives for the good of society being unjustly and undeservedly criminalised .
Finally , I congratulate the Italian Government and its Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , and the Belgian Prime Minister for having reached that important agreement yesterday on the European arrest warrant .
I hope this will be the first step towards European harmonisation on matters of justice , and especially an important precondition for a European political Constitution guaranteeing all European citizens the right to security , freedom and justice .
It is important to put this very broad debate in perspective , and the perspective is terrorism .
Now , we are able to put names to the world ' s most dangerous terrorists .
What has for a long time been clear to some people is now , following the military operations of recent weeks and months , obvious to everyone .
The terrorists who are most deliberately and effectively ravaging our planet and threatening world peace are the governments of the United States and Israel .
Daily , these two governments combine in using their huge death-dealing military technology to wreak far greater destruction than any other of the countless terrorists of world history .
Monstrosities of military technology , they practise terrorism in multiple senses of the word .
For one thing , they leave their victims in precisely that state of desperation and impotence that creates fertile ground for reactions similar to Bin Laden ' s .
It is absolute power , economic and military , that creates terrorism .
In addition , there is the psychological warfare that is in the process of doing away with the concepts of justice which Europeans usually regard as fundamental to the values to which we subscribe and which , specifically , are a defence against terrorism .
Two months ago , the United States sent Mr Prodi a list of 40 different decisions which , according to the United States Government , should be taken by the EU and the Member States in order to satisfy the United States : surveillance , control , arrest with no counsel for the defence or court hearing provided , and the handing over of suspects for legal proceedings in the United States , involving military courts and the death penalty .
On the last point , I entirely agree with Mr Di Lello .
We must protest most vigorously against the handing over of suspects in any form as long as there is the possibility of the death penalty ' s being carried out and as long as no guarantee can be given by the United States of its not being carried out .
It has been shameful to see the way in which the institutions of the EU have complied with demands that are also aimed at abolishing our concepts of justice .
What is at issue here is not military technology but politics and the defence of the law .
Mr President , the documents on terrorism are certainly notable , although I believe we should pay far greater attention to the dangerous , worrying , serious signs of anti-Semitism and aggression against Jewish institutions and figures , including religious ones , as shown by the extremely serious attack on the Chief Rabbi of Brussels .
These are also very worrying signs in a climate of passive habituation to such acts by exponents of Islamic fundamentalism in all the countries of Europe .
The European arrest warrant : what a great result for liberal Europe !
Giuseppe Mazzini and the revolutionaries who breathed life into ' Young Europe ' in 1840 will be turning in their graves at the thought of a Europe which before giving itself a democratic Constitution is already thinking of a European arrest warrant : necessary certainly for terrorist and criminal emergencies but certainly not for other areas .
We autonomous Members see it as a dangerous sign and therefore we have addressed an open letter to all autonomous and independent movements that are fighting for the principles of freedom .
Some Italian Members have spoken here to stigmatise our government ' s behaviour regarding the events in Genoa : well , then , I should like to remind them of the serious acts of delinquency and hooliganism that the false anti-globalisation protesters in Genoa were responsible for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , nothing in this world is certain any more , and to illustrate this I would like to return to the presidency which Belgium had prepared .
We had focused primarily on the interim evaluation of Tampere , of the decisions and recommendations made there , and on the four priorities which we had chosen for our presidency , namely the conversion from pro-Eurojust to Eurojust ; the fight against trafficking in human beings , not only by standardising the laws but also operationally in the field ; the fight against the disappearance of children ; and last but not least , the freezing of assets .
However , who could have guessed at the beginning of our activities that there would be two incidents which would have a decisive impact on some other choices which the Presidency had to make ?
More specifically , I am referring to the problems in Gothenburg which obliged us , as Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs , to take measures to guarantee freedom of expression , and to secure the safety of citizens , states and also demonstrators .
Who would have thought that the events of 11 September would have had such a profound impact on our political attitudes , now that the framework decisions relating to the fight against terrorism and the European arrest warrant have seen the light of day and have experienced an accelerated genesis .
All the same , I also offer my apologies on behalf of the Presidency for the fact that no one from the Presidency was present during your proceedings on Monday .
However , I am sure you will understand that in the context of the European arrest warrant , which is a matter very close to our hearts and with which we are determined to make headway , we have taken every opportunity to continue our work in this area and , I may say , with some success , as we achieved the breakthrough yesterday , and the European arrest warrant has become a reality .
I would like to focus particularly on some of your questions , which in my opinion were very appropriate .
Firstly , the possibility of achieving the aim of the European Union , namely to create a high degree of security for our citizens in an area of freedom , security and justice , whilst - and this has also been clearly expressed by the various speakers - our fundamental rights as set out in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights are fully respected .
The Council recognises that it is immensely important to fully respect fundamental rights in all areas in which it is active , particularly in the area concerned with guaranteeing the security of our citizens .
I would like to illustrate this issue on the basis of two topical examples which I know have been the subject of intense discussion in your Parliament .
I am referring in particular to the framework decisions relating to the definition of terrorism and the introduction of the European arrest warrant .
In our response to the threat of terrorism , we need to be able to take effective measures quickly in order to demonstrate that Member States are capable of common action , whilst at the same time ensuring that decisions are made quickly , with top priority being given to our devotion to and constant vigilance in respect of the freedoms of our citizens .
Our work has been done at top speed , but no one , and I would like to emphasise this , no one has ever been willing to sacrifice the quality of the texts in order to achieve rapid acceptance .
By working enormously hard over the past three months we have succeeded in taking this justified endeavour into consideration , and in this regard I am particularly pleased with the input provided by the members of the Article 36 Committee .
Furthermore , I understand the apprehension that some people initially expressed when they saw what we were doing in connection with the increased public concern about security after 11 September .
I understand that this apprehension clearly played a role at times during the negotiations .
I understand this fear and I admire the vigilance , but the outcome of our work and the compromises made by the Council of 6 and 7 December demonstrates that the Council never intended to sacrifice the rights in the European Charter , and I think that this is the only result that counts .
The framework decision on the combating of terrorism contains clear instructions for national legislators , which makes it impossible to interpret it in an unnecessarily repressive way .
The obligation to honour these rights as set out in Article 6 of the Treaty has been added , as has the work we have done on the European arrest warrant .
The preamble bears the traces of a well-considered advice by your Parliament which we took into account .
Finally , these precautionary measures are rounded off by the political declaration of the Council included in the decision .
It makes it clear that the decision does not relate to people whose actions are aimed at protecting or restoring democratic values , nor to those exercising their right to freedom of expression , even if they break the law when doing so .
Our work is now complete , and last Thursday the Council reached a political agreement in respect of this framework decision .
There are similar guarantees for the European arrest warrant .
In addition to the explicit references to fundamental freedoms in the preamble , Article 1 contains the connection with Article 6 of the Treaty which I have just explained in respect of the previous instrument .
That the 15 Member States ultimately reached agreement on the European arrest warrant is therefore only to be expected .
Besides the developments that have resulted in the explicit integration of the fundamental guarantees in the European Charter , I would like to add that it is advisable not to lose sight of the future role that the Court of Justice of the European Communities will have to play in the bringing together of the guarantees and the fundamental rights , especially on a procedural level .
In view of its pre-judicial competence , and taking into account the traditionally sensitive relationship between criminal law and fundamental rights , it goes without saying that the Court is ideally placed to perform a particularly important role which consists of harmonising the guarantees offered to our citizens .
To return to the implementation of the action plan to combat terrorism , negotiations on an agreement with the USA in respect of Article 38 of the Treaty on the European Union concerning mutual legal assistance in criminal matters are on the agenda .
At the moment we are still in a preparatory phase .
This is a very important activity , and I am convinced that you will maintain your vigilance with regard to the protection of human rights in this area .
As far as the points on extradition that could be stated in this agreement are concerned , I would like to draw attention to the European Union ' s unchanging position regarding cooperation with countries in which the death penalty is still in force .
Extradition cannot take place without the inviolable guarantee that the person will not receive the death sentence .
The Council ' s standpoint on the special military courts in the USA for crimes connected with terrorism is not yet known , but I can already tell you that certain delegations are of the opinion that this situation may entail considerable risks in the area of fundamental rights , particularly with regard to the right to fair treatment as set out in Articles 47 to 49 of the Charter .
I would also like to come back to another delicate point , namely the possibility of reaching an agreement on proposals for which negotiations have now reached deadlock , which is preventing the set deadlines on the scoreboard from being met and is preventing the creation of the area of security , freedom and justice .
The Council is aware that some negotiations on the proposals currently on the table are being postponed , albeit , I may say , primarily for impartial reasons .
I do not have the impression that negotiations have reached deadlock per se .
Instead , the Council noted that there were several reasons for this delay and in fact it took the necessary steps to ensure that these discussions could be put back on track .
The blockades without doubt form one of the points of the Laeken debate and I think that this will give the evaluation of Tampere a boost , especially that part in which we have not yet managed to achieve as much progress as we would have liked .
At the same time I would like to draw your attention to the particular progress that we have made in legal matters in the extremely short time in which we have been in action .
I think that a certain amount of quantitative and qualitative effort still lies before us , but I reiterate that everything we need to enable us to achieve this is in place , namely harmonisation of legislation , mutual recognition of court decisions and the creation of a number of European players .
Concrete and decisive progress was made on all these levels in 2001 .
The framework resolutions on trafficking in human beings and the combating of terrorism in the area of harmonisation , the European arrest warrant in the area of mutual recognition , and Eurojust in respect of the players , are likewise elements which demonstrate the substantial progress we have made and which should enable us to achieve a truly European policy on criminal law .
On behalf of my colleague Antoine Duquesne , President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs , I would like to bring you up-to-date with regard to the progress of the files I know are close to your hearts , namely asylum and immigration .
I have already told you that the progress in this area does not meet our expectations . Nonetheless we must remain objective .
We have achieved a breakthrough during the course of this year .
Both the Swedish and the current Belgian Presidency have made efforts to achieve progress in these affairs , which are particularly sensitive .
These efforts have not been fruitless .
Various basic texts , such as the visa regulation and the Eurodac regulations , the directive on temporary protection and the European Refugee Fund have been approved in this manner .
However , it is clear that if we want to adhere to the deadlines set in the Treaty as well as at the Tampere Summit , we will have to redouble our efforts and make it even clearer that subjects such as managing the immigration flows , asylum policy and family reunification will have to take on a European perspective .
I think that we still have a very great deal to do in this area , but you can be sure that the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs , just like you yourself , are as keen as you are to achieve this .
Please also allow me to pause at another subject that has also been touched on briefly , namely the question of whether the fact that numerous arrangements and international agreements , particularly those relating to the prevention and combating of organised crime , have not been ratified by the Member States , is being taken into account in the acceptance of measures .
The Council is aware of this matter .
The Council forums regularly examine the ratification situation and try to make it clear to delegations that it is absolutely essential that the decisions be rapidly enforced .
However , the Council realises that every Member State wants to achieve a ratification procedure that fits in with its own constitutional requirements .
This matter is also on the agenda as part of the evaluation of the implementation of the Tampere conclusions .
I am sure that the conclusions of the Laeken summit will demonstrate how important the Council considers this matter to be .
The Council has established that national procedures have been speeded up , and that almost all Member States have completed the ratification procedure for some instruments ; for example , the agreement to protect the European Community ' s financial interests as well as the two conventions on extradition of 1995 and 1996 .
We will continue to endeavour to ensure that these efforts bear fruit .
I might add that the Council has been paying particular attention to this in the adoption of the action plan on the combating of terrorism .
The action plan identifies various instruments including the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and the United Nations Convention on the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism .
These conventions must be ratified within carefully defined deadlines .
Then of course we come to the questions concerning the democratic deficit within the European Union , about which the European Parliament does in fact have a number of issues to which it regularly returns . These include not the absolutely essential democratic control over activities that come under the third pillar , and in particular over Europol and Eurojust activities .
With regard to Europol , the Council first wishes to emphasise that since 1 May 1999 , the date on which the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force , all legislative decisions to be adopted on the grounds of the Europol Convention have been presented to the European Parliament for advice .
By doing so , the Council has tried to guarantee that the European Parliament would have control of Europol as far as legislative measures are concerned .
With regard to the executive board ' s activities , as well as Europol ' s operational activities , the Council is currently studying ways and means of organising effective democratic control whilst at the same time meeting the organisation ' s operational needs .
Various scenarios are being examined .
One of the problems that need to be dealt with is the involvement of national parliaments in the control procedures .
The Presidency has made this a priority .
The Integrated Security in Europe conference which was held in November gave rise to a debate on stricter control of the sector .
The Council wishes to point out that the concern expressed by the European Parliament is at the top of the agenda .
However , the careful implementation of such mechanisms is a complicated process in which the balance in the Europol system must be carefully monitored .
According to the draft instrument , Eurojust , for its part , should only be assigned a cooperative and coordinating role .
All decisions will be taken by the competent national authorities who will be handling the cases .
However , it is possible for the European Parliament to be kept up-to-date with Eurojust ' s activities provided that they are not of an operational nature .
The instrument establishing Eurojust therefore specifies that Parliament will receive an annual activity report which deals amongst other things with data protection .
Parliament is also giving discharge for the implementation of Eurojust ' s budget .
A democratic deficit has also been observed by the European Parliament . This deficit refers to the lack of the EP ' s involvement in the definition of the strategy of the European Union in all its parts , both inside and outside the Union , except for the fact that Parliament is only kept fully informed and has access to the so-called sensitive information .
I must say at this juncture that the Council is applying the institutional convention provisions to the letter .
In this context , when the matter relates to a proposal or initiative that falls under police or judicial cooperation in criminal matters , the Council applies the provisions of Article 39 of the Treaty establishing the European Union , and when the matter is one that is covered by Title IV concerning asylum and immigration or judicial cooperation in civil matters , it applies Article 67 of the Treaty establishing the European Union .
Experience shows us that the Council has consulted the European Parliament whenever the Commission or one of the Member States has submitted a proposal or an initiative to it .
The Council was in fact present during the plenary sessions and meetings of the appropriate committee of the European Parliament , and Parliament was given ongoing information about the state of affairs .
And now to the final set of problems I would like to discuss with you , which concern the need to keep the European Parliament informed about important changes occurring in the negotiation process within the Council , both in relation to legislative proposals by the Commission and in relation to initiatives developed by the Member States .
As I have already said , it was the Council ' s wish to fully involve the European Parliament in the legislative procedures at Community level in accordance with the provisions of the convention .
It is true that the activities of the Council bodies will result in changes to the tenor of some provisions of the proposals or initiatives being submitted to them .
This is in fact in keeping with the common wish to find solutions which have the support of everyone in the Union .
In practice we know that if the European Parliament has not yet issued its advice on a proposal or an initiative , the Council has always been willing to provide the information requested so that the European Parliament can satisfy itself as to the direction the activities are taking .
This having been said , the Council knows that the European Union ' s standpoints have a specific value added which differs from those of the Member States . Since it aims in its advice to respond to a different institutional logic and give the Council the right elements within the framework of the democratic task with which it is charged , this task must obviously not depend on developments of the work done by the Council on one decision or another .
What is more , the Council consults the European Parliament , if necessary , in accordance with the provisions of the convention .
Please allow me to conclude this part of my speech by expressing my satisfaction as President for the way in which we have been able to cooperate with the European Parliament .
We sometimes had to seek advice about very profound matters in particularly difficult circumstances and at very short notice .
I think that this is something that may even have been unique to this Presidency .
We have never appealed to you in vain .
The European Parliament has exercised flexibility when giving advice , sometimes at very short notice .
This method of cooperation , coupled with our cooperation with the Commission and the Commissioner , has made it possible to take a major step towards , amongst other things , the European arrest warrant , which I believe is the most important common denominator , because this has enabled us to undertake an action in this area which is comparable to the introduction of the euro in the financial and monetary sphere .
Thus the European arrest warrant has also come into being as far as cooperation in judicial matters and mutual recognition in criminal matters are concerned .
This is only possible if all players demonstrate the good , positive attitude that we have encountered .
I am therefore pleased that in these circumstances , the early annual report relating to judicial and home affairs matters has been given a different perspective than it has in the past .
Mr President , first of all , allow me to say that , once again , I consider this Parliamentary procedure whereby the Commissioner speaks after three speakers and the Minister after seven , as if to say that all those who will speak from now onwards are not even worthy of an answer , to be strange .
Having said that - I do not agree with it but I abide by it - I shall speak particularly about the Watson report , which proposes a useful , appropriate initiative to regulate the security side of future summits of any kind .
The proposal started off , it must be said , in decidedly lifeless tones as regards an objective analysis ; then the tone improved along the way .
This is just the opposite of what happened with a parallel initiative for the fight against terrorism , which arose out of the emotional response to 11 September and then all of a sudden became an opportunity not only to produce a European arrest warrant but more especially to cause a real witch-hunt within Italian politics .
But the leader of my Group , Mr Tajani , will speak at greater length on this .
I return now to the Watson report , which proposes the requirement of agreeing public order measures for major summit meetings .
A truly appropriate idea , I was saying : it is a pity that it should have become both an excuse for preparing a summary trial of the events at previous Summits , and especially a Trojan horse in its attempts at party political speculation in a decidedly national vein .
This has all come about through instrumental amendments , in the form of direct attacks on the Italian Government and its President .
Not just this , but it also reiterates a defamatory action , as has already been mentioned , against the Italian forces of law and order , which are accused of serious offences and Gestapo-like behaviour that have never been proved in the numerous inquiries that have so far been opened .
This , then , amongst other things , violates the Italian State ' s legitimate autonomy and sovereignty to deal with public order issues .
To those Members who still confuse the limits between national sovereignty and Community competences I say quite plainly - but still calmly - that it is time to stop doing the dirty washing of national politics in the European Parliament , but it is also time to put an end to the widespread sport of misusing points of order and questions in order to provoke improper debates and vitriolic attacks on persons rather than on ideas and political positions .
I say this particularly to the Italian left-wing Members , the diligent supporters who regularly find room to express themselves in this House and also in the newspapers , thanks to the work of partisan reporters with little objectivity .
Fortunately most of Parliament has understood this .
In the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , almost all the amendments from the left were rejected .
I propose that Parliament should do the same in its plenary session , and to make it quite clear I shall indicate the dangerous points : Amendment Nos 22 , 25 and 29 are real chemical weapons against the truth .
They should be rejected , otherwise I shall be forced to ask my coordinator to vote against this report .
Mr President , I am glad that , although you are from Regensburg , you are willing to give a minute 's speaking time to a Nuremberger like myself .
Mr Santini , who has just spoken , has shown what this is all about .
If we are talking about an area of freedom , security and justice in Europe , if , like the President-in-Office , we are talking about a European home affairs policy , then even such a faithful servant of this master as Mr Santini will have to come to terms with the fact that we will also discuss Italian domestic politics .
Now , I am not an Italian left-winger , but a German left-winger , and I can tell you that I do not share the view expressed by Mr Verwilghen and Mr Vitorino , according to whom what happened in Rome yesterday represents progress .

Yesterday saw us achieve a victory in the first round , for 14 States of the European Union were consistent and determined in ensuring the failure of the attempt by the Italian Prime Minister , out of naked self-interest , to make use of his office of state to obstruct a criminal investigation that could involve him , and in ensuring that private interests were prevented from paralysing the European arrest warrant .

Yesterday , this same Mr Berlusconi - a former Member of this House , who , thanks to its President , was not subject to any proceedings to lift his immunity - had this to say , and what I quote relates to what was told me by President-in-Office of the Council Verwilghen , who drew a parallel between the European arrest warrant and the euro - accurately , in fact , in terms of their dimension and political significance .
What does Mr Berlusconi have to say about it ?

Mr Berlusconi says : " Other nations have named 2004 as the deadline for the European arrest warrant to be put into effect , although it could be later . "
I quote word for word .
If the Italian constitution is not amended , then we cannot join in , in much the same way that Great Britain is not joining in the euro .
Why do I speak in terms of winning a round ?
I prophesy this to you : After all we have experienced in the Council , after all Italy 's stonewalling in the interest of its Prime Minister , I tell you here and now that the same Prime Minister will now hold a referendum in order to prevent the European arrest warrant from being effective in Italy .
This is very likely , and so I do not yet believe that we have now implemented the European arrest warrant .
I do believe that this House will have to insist , with the utmost consistency , on the isolation Italy has imposed on itself over the last few weeks being maintained by the 14other European states , because anyone who has , like me or like Mrs Paciotti , crossed swords in this House with Mr Berlusconi or Mr Dell 'Utri , will be painted by the Berlusconi press , as I was , as an old Stalinist - and I am not old yet , nor am I yet a Stalinist - or , like Mrs Paciotti , will be described as head of a communist conspiracy against Italy .
Looking at you , Mr Tajani , I understand why the people of Rome did not elect you as their mayor .
I can understand it , above all , when I hear you speak .
Anyone who , even tentatively , questions Italian policy , gets slandered in this House .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Watson , who has presented a very balanced and good report despite the ongoing attempts at blockade and the policy of permanent obstruction which Forza Italia , part of the Group of the European People 's Party - though hopefully not for much longer - has adopted .
( Applause )
Sir , your speaking time is up .
Mr Tajani has a point of order .
On which item of the agenda do you wish to speak , sir ?
Mr President , Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure must be enforced !
It seems that in this House there is a claque supporting Mr Schulz in the public gallery , although in this House , as in all parliaments , members of the public are forbidden to applaud or call out in support of one argument or another .
I therefore ask you , Mr President , to enforce the Rules of Procedure and perhaps have spectators removed if they are supporters of one side and do not intend to watch the work of Parliament but just want to cheer someone on .
Mr Tajani , on this point you are right , but I ask you what the President is supposed to do .
Should I have the visitors removed from the gallery ?
Should I have their hands tied behind their backs ?
What has happened , has happened , and I cannot do anything about it .
You are right , but I cannot do anything about it now .
In the fight for security from terrorism , we have rightly proclaimed that we are defending fundamental values but , if we compromise individual rights in the pursuit of security , we will have sacrificed some of what we hold so dear .
In the last two years since Tampere , the programme of cooperation on justice matters has been heavily weighted to the security side of the scales - especially since 11 September with the anti-terrorism package .
All this is necessary , but it is time to rebalance the work programme .
At the Laeken Summit , Heads of Government should commit themselves to a thorough review of the degree of respect in practice for the standards we have signed up to in the European Convention of Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
There needs to be a programme to ensure observance of minimum standards of due process , fair trials in criminal proceedings and approximation of rights of defendants .
We should project these standards in our international agreements because there are some worrying developments .
In the UK , there are proposals for executive decisions for detention without trial and an attempt to avoid any significant degree of judicial review .
In the United States , President Bush has signed an order providing for trial in military courts in the absence of fundamental safeguards for fair trial provided for in international law .
The EU must not agree to any extradition agreement with the US whereby people could be convicted in these military tribunals .
Finally , the case of the 14 British and Dutch plane-spotters detained for nearly five weeks in Greece without trial is extremely disturbing .
They have been denied bail , the evidence has been presented in secret and there has been no transparent schedule of court hearings .
They may be guilty at most of a misdemeanour .
It will be a disgrace if the European arrest warrant is agreed this weekend and this situation has still not been resolved .
I call , in particular , on Prime Minister Blair to withhold agreement if they have not been either charged or released by Friday .
Mr President , Mr President-in-office of the Council , Commissioner , fellow MEPs .
Our desire to create a European area of safety and justice is a common one .
Over the past few weeks and even over the past few days , we have taken some important steps , and I would like to personally congratulate you on the efforts you have made in this regard and on the results you have achieved , because efforts are not always enough ; we also have to achieve results .
Having said this , I would like to point out - and I share your opinion , but I know that there are others who do not - that security cannot be used as an excuse for threatening fundamental rights .
I am indeed a little concerned when I see how quick some people are to use the word ' terrorism ' and to apply it to all kinds of things they do not like , both in international and national politics .
The European Parliament has rightly been pressing for a strict definition , and has been knocking the eagerness to label all dissidents as terrorists on the head .
I am pleased to hear you say that the Council is following Parliament on this .
I would also like to see this confirmed in all texts , because people who want to change the constitution in their country are not necessarily terrorists , and people demonstrating against globalisation and injustice in the world are also not necessarily terrorists .
Absolutely not , in most cases .
We believe that anyone who equates this with terrorism is violating fundamental rights .
We would like to return to the European arrest warrant , including the guarantees being demanded by the European Parliament .
However , I think it is very important that you have been able to implement this and that you were able to bring us this message today .
Mr President , in correspondence that is still being kept from Members in spite of my requests , Mr Bush put four intolerable demands to Mr Prodi .
They are intolerable because they are made by a government that has set up military courts and introduced measures described as ' patriotic ' but that in fact take away any right to defence , by a government that , since 11 September , has kept nearly a thousand immigrants in prison without lawyers and without charging them , by a government that , when all is said and done , has still not abolished the death penalty .
In the name of urgency , but also in a state of total confusion , the Council and Commission are trying to make us swallow texts on terrorism that are always questionable and often have not even been put to the vote .
I believe it is time to call a stop to this masquerade and this caricature of democratic debate .
In the name of the war against terrorism , they are waging war against democratic freedoms and the social acquis .
This is not our war ; the war we should be waging is against violence , poverty , unemployment , hunger in the world and dictatorships , against corruption and safe havens for Mr Berlusconi .
Mr President , the Watson report uses the issues of the day to accelerate the communitisation of the EU .
This is because better coordination between Member States overcomes the problem described to a large extent .
It is incomprehensible that the report only refers to the Charter , a political statement , whilst the European Convention on Human Rights , the perfect convention for the protection of our citizens ' rights , is not mentioned in it .
Since the US terrorist attacks of 11 September , the EU ' s attitude towards the US has been highly critical as well as supportive .
The object of our criticism is the new anti-terrorism legislation . Some discretion in this regard would not be out of place .
Please do not get me wrong ; I am no advocate of trials by military tribunals without the possibility of appeal , and I believe that the USA must reconsider this , but I do wonder how we would have reacted if these attacks had taken place in the EU .
Refusing point blank to extradite terrorists to the USA is sending out the wrong signal .
It would be more reasonable for the EU to make clear arrangements with the USA about the conditions of the extradition .
Mr President , first I would like to say that I entirely agree with what Mr Vitorino said about the problems besetting our quest for an area of justice , freedom and security , while remaining very much aware that we cannot have an area of security without justice or justice without police .
We should be lucid enough to realise that generally speaking Europe is in quite a privileged position in this respect , for we have a fairly well-established level of citizens ' freedoms , even though we have to remain very vigilant .
We know how to alternate Community responses - and I hope the arrest warrant and our response will be worthy of us - with the proper degree of subsidiarity .
We base our activity on a system of values that have been set out and listed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and on an approach under which monitoring by the states of the level of citizens ' freedoms alternates with recourse to the Court of Justice , both the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the Strasbourg Court .
Unfortunately , however , Europe is not an oasis and the world is interactive : if I may put it this way , the world around us does not stand still , which justifies taking external action in the field of justice and home affairs .
First there are the candidate countries .
We cannot allow any differentiation in respect of these countries .
Naturally , we will have to require the same level and the same perception of citizens ' freedoms .
Then there are the countries close to us , the countries that will become close to us by what I might call capillary action .
I am thinking of countries such as Russia , Belarus and the Ukraine , in respect of which we will have to decide how to act .
Lastly there are the partner countries , countries that are the source of immigrants and asylum seekers and with which we must maintain a constant dialogue .
Hence the need for external action . We have two types of external action .
The first type is rather messianic , involving the export and globalisation of law and order and the constitutional state as we understand it .
Then we have protective action vis-à-vis this external world , because , of course , there are crimes and scourges that know no frontiers , a problem to which we will have to find the appropriate answers , without of course ever abandoning the values we have set out and proclaimed .
In this respect I would like to defend the European Parliament , which has to play its full role , because traditionally parliaments are meant to be the custodians of citizens ' freedoms and we have to play this role .
Obviously this means more than involving our Parliament in the strategy and implementation of external actions in the field of justice and home affairs .
It is also a question of our resources .
In this regard , in my few remaining seconds of speaking time and under the authority of Mr Watson , the chairman of our Committee on Citizens ' Freedom and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I would plead for this committee to be given additional resources in terms of staffing .
After many struggles , including a decision this Chamber adopted unanimously , we have managed to acquire one extra member of staff for the committee , although this person is in fact employed by DG IV ; meanwhile the Committee on Foreign Affairs has nine members of staff assigned to human rights .
I find it irresponsible that if a Parliament wants to give its Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms the resources to do its job , it does not to give it the staff needed to assist the colleagues who are responsible for the committee ' s reports .
Mr President , the European arrest warrant was saved in the nick of time .
It was dragged away from the gates of Laeken .
How pleased should we be now ?
The creation of an area of freedom , security and justice goes to the very core of the relationship between governments and citizens .
The exercising of legitimate pressure versus the upholding of the citizen ' s essential fundamental rights .
In the past , revolutions were fought and extensive constitutional debates were held in Europe over this tense relationship .
However , legislation on this matter is now being introduced in the third pillar of the European Union by means of framework resolutions engineered by the Council using secret diplomacy , monitored by national parliaments and the European Parliament .
In this respect , we are back in the 19th Century .
Our desire to reform the European decision-making process and to close the so-called democratic loophole are well-known .
However , it will require a Treaty change and sufficient political will to do this , but we cannot wait that long .
The procedure concerning the European arrest warrant demonstrates that a critical boundary has been crossed .
Our own credibility as representatives of the people is at stake , so democratic legitimacy must also be increased in the current Treaty in the near future .
The proposal that was recently adopted in the Dutch Upper Chamber is one way of doing this .
It asks for the introduction of a phase of active openness in the Council ' s decision-making process .
According to this proposal , a final decision on draft framework resolutions is only taken after a period of at least six weeks , during which time citizens and organisations in the Member States are given the opportunity to form their opinions .
The role of national parliaments and the European Parliament should also gain in significance in this way .
This would at the very least prevent us from voting on out-of-date documents as we did in November , or only nodding our assent retrospectively , which we may do this week .
I propose that we lay down such a modest reform of the decision-making process in a new interinstitutional agreement , and if anyone thinks that this is asking too much , they should say so .
Mr President , of course terrorism must be combated , but a number of the measures currently being introduced at breakneck speed are in danger of undermining the rule of law in society which the war against terrorism is intended to strengthen .
Sweden , for example , has frozen all the assets of a number of Swedish citizens of Somali origin on the basis solely of a US list .
They have no opportunity to defend themselves or to lodge an appeal .
Two days ago , a Swede was expelled from Belgium for having put up posters for one of the legal demonstrations to be held in conjunction with the Laeken Summit .
With this in mind , one may well ask how far we can go before destroying both the rule of law and freedom of movement within the EU .
Are all these precipitous measures really only targeting terrorism or is it in actual fact the case that , despite all promises to the contrary , this is in practice turning into a campaign on the part of the authorities and the establishment against both immigrants from Muslim countries and normal legal protest movements against the neo-liberal class-based society ?
It would be excellent if the Commission and the Council could show that this is not the case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whereas Mrs Hazan seeks by means of her report to make the methods of ' Fortress EU ' an export hit around the world , the Watson report expresses concern for the safety of the Heads of State and Government at their meeting within the framework of democracy as it really exists .
What security in Laeken will mean was learned by the people , who , in the run-up to the summit , got a letter in which the police in Göttingen advised against participation in protest actions and threatened that disregarding this advice would meet with preventive measures .
The murder victim Carlo Giugliani probably did not get such a letter , any more than did the people who were beaten up and shot at in the Diaz School or on the streets of Gothenburg .
They were told about the framework programme on terrorism only after the event , because they had demonstrated against the EU and G8 and had defended themselves against police violence .
I wanted to say in addition that the rulers are enforcing their right to security , which is defined in the context of security , justice and freedom , at the expense of the lack of freedom for demonstrators , and so it will not only be demonstrators at Laeken who will not have much to laugh about .
Mr President , an agreement was reached in Rome yesterday on the European arrest warrant ; Italy too will sign it .
It is certainly a positive step , but it is no more than the beginning of a long process of trying to set up , at last , a genuine European area of freedom , security and justice .
The new European Constitution should lead to harmonisation of criminal law and procedure in our Union .
The Member States should work towards a situation in which crimes and penalties do not differ from one place to another .
We must all , in short , commit ourselves to establishing fair trials , that is , to having a third judge , allowing evidence to take shape in the course of the trial and to having the prosecuting magistrates separate from the judges .
This is not blackmail , Mr Watson ; it is not an Italian caprice , as has been suggested in this House ; it is the will of Parliament , which , in 1997 , voted for the Roth report , which invited the Member States to carry out a genuine reform of justice in favour of a fair trial .
That is why so many criticisms levelled by the left against the Italian Government in this House are unfounded and the result of propaganda by a handful of fundamentalist magistrates .
Moreover , the foreign press in Italy has recognised this ; in this respect , I quote the words of a respected journalist in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , Hans Jürgen Fischer , who said , ' All these charges against the Berlusconi Government seemed quite out of proportion to me . '
It is therefore our duty to reject all the attacks made on the Italian Government by left-wing MEPs who do not understand the situation in Italy and who , beginning with the leader of the Socialist Group , Mr Barón Crespo , have made absolutely unfounded attacks on the Italian Government and on Italy .
I repeat , they are attacks that we firmly reject because it is all just propaganda .
In short , a lot of fuss has been made about nothing and Parliament has not achieved any results .
The results were actually achieved thanks to the action of the Italian Government , which concluded the agreement with Mr Verhofstadt yesterday .
Mr President , Mr Tajani , who has just spoken , makes me very glad that I have a minute less in which to speak , and that is the least I can offer , for what is a mere minute against Mr Berlusconi ? .
After an intervention like that , I am glad Mr Schulz got a minute from me and was able to speak for longer .
Now , though , I really do want to deal with different subject matter , one that is very , very important to me .
For 16 months we have had an EU-wide problem that we have not yet been able to resolve .
It was terrible for us to have to face what happened at Dover .
Now we have another 13 people found in a lorry in Ireland , eight of them dead , among them two children .
Minister , I ask the Council , the Commission and Mr Vitorino , that in this area , above all , we should , as we must , carefully go over our homework again , in order to bring in the measures that are so urgently needed if we are not to find even more refugees dead .
Mr President , more than two years ago , on the initiative of the Aznar Government , a new page was turned in Tampere with regard to European integration : to make a politically and judicially viable new common European area of freedom , security and justice , which would make the freedom and security of citizens compatible - and here is the great political debate - with the efficient functioning of , and access to , justice within this area .
The events that have taken place over these last two years , such as the tragic deaths of Moroccan and sub-Saharan citizens in the Straits of Gibraltar and off the Andalusian coast , the death of immigrants in Dover or the recent incidents in Ireland , the repugnant traffic in , and corruption of , minors , and prostitution , combined with the horrific murders committed by ETA and the tragedy of 11 September , have caused an upheaval in the debate and have accelerated the need for the speedy implementation of measures to cope with such a dangerous and worrying situation .
Ladies and Gentlemen , the work carried out by the Council , the Commission and Parliament in this field has its good and bad points .
The good points include the fight against terrorism , where the important role which our President , Nicole Fontaine , has played in this area , as well as Commissioner Vitorino , deserve a special mention ; the European arrest warrant and the definition of terrorism are the result of a difficult battle against terrorism that started in this House before 11 September .
I would also like to stress what a good thing it has been to separate the debates on economic migration and asylum , which has helped us to clarify ideas , debates , and even approaches .
However , in my opinion , there is still a long way to go .
There are too many bad points and the most worrying of these in my opinion is the disorder caused by the hastiness and lack of agreement in the Council in areas such as the family reunification of immigrants , minimum standards on the asylum process , conditions for the reception of asylum seekers - to give but a few examples - where our work is sometimes ineffective due to the fact we have to chop and change what is carried out by the Council , which shows that the method with which we have to work is not ideal by any means and needs to be amended .
Mr President , Commissioner , as the last Justice and Home Affairs Council demonstrated , the system for taking unanimous decisions on matters of justice and home affairs has come to the end of its cycle .
If the Berlusconi Government manages , even for a short time , to block the decision on the European arrest warrant , can you imagine what will happen when the Union of the 15 becomes a Union of 30 if we continue to insist on an intergovernmental rather than a Community method for taking decisions ?
A propos , my congratulations to the Belgian Presidency on the battle which it won in Rome yesterday .
The Council is clearly unwilling to make any fundamental reforms on the basis the commitments made in Tampere , despite the assiduous efforts of Commissioner Vitorino and the political will demonstrated by the European Parliament .
The only sector in which the Council has evinced any particular interest or enthusiasm is in the fight against terrorism , under pressure from and at the suggestion of the United States which , I am afraid , is trying to export and impose its system of justice on Europe , a system which clashes with European customs and values .
How can we extradite European citizens to the USA when the United States cannot guarantee that it will not impose the death penalty ?
I am afraid , Commissioner , that the alliance with the USA is becoming more and more dangerous for the European Union .
The fact that strict rules are being promoted within an already strict framework is understandably causing concern among citizens , who fear that the fundamental liberties and human rights which they have fought long and sacrificed much for will be restricted .
The end clearly does not justify the means .
For the rest , half way through the five-year period set by the Amsterdam summit for creating a European area of freedom , security and justice , we are seriously behind schedule , for example in formulating a common immigration and asylum policy .
Finally , I wonder , what has happened to European sensitivity and our humanitarian values , when we are incapable of resolving the drama of refugees and immigrants despite witnessing daily tragedies such as the recent suffocation of eight immigrants in southern Ireland ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , a little more than two years have elapsed since Tampere and the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is important to point out that major progress has been made but that , on the other hand , there are still many obstacles to be overcome .
The Union is proud , and rightly so , of its constant defence of respect for human rights in the world and within the Community .
The recently proclaimed Charter of Fundamental Rights reinforced our commitment in this regard and the area of freedom , security and justice only makes sense if all three of these elements are taken together and if no one of them prejudices any other .
The tragic events of September 11 and the intensified attention to safety measures cannot detract from this fundamental approach .
Since it is necessary to meet citizens ' expectations in terms of fighting terrorism , special care must be taken not to fall into excesses or exaggeration , that is to say , ' everything for security ' .
The Member States ' commitment to building an area of freedom , security and justice was once again reaffirmed at the last Justice and Home Affairs Council .
It is vital that within this area citizens may enjoy the right to express themselves , demonstrate and meet freely and peacefully , provided that they do so in a way which does not constitute a threat , either to their own safety or to the safety of other citizens and property .
Here too , we must not exaggerate .
Any individual or group of people wishing to take part in legitimate demonstrations should not be blocked at the borders , that is , they cannot be denied the right to cross frontiers , i.e. they cannot be denied freedom of movement , which is a fundamental right granted to all citizens of the Union by the Treaty .
Because security is merely an instrument to ensure freedom . Security loses its meaning when it prejudices freedom .
Security without freedom is tyranny .
In this festive season , my best wishes to Commissioner António Vitorino for the continuation of his excellent work .
Mr President , as this is a debate which deals with various topics , I would firstly like to say that I completely agree with all that Mr Watson said in relation to his report .
It appears to me that Parliament is going to make a worthwhile contribution today in confronting a violent situation in the streets of Europe which is a worry to us all .
With regard to the advances made in the area of freedom , security and justice , I would firstly like to congratulate the Commission on what they were able to achieve yesterday , especially with regard to the European arrest warrant , and I would also like to congratulate the Council for a very particular reason , for the sincerity of the report from the Belgian Presidency with regard to the progress made .
Just as the Council does in its report , I would like to express my concern at the lack of progress made in the area of common asylum policy , and even more so in the area of common immigration policy .
Not only is there no European policy but , as we have seen recently , there are quite a few governments who are developing their own new national policies , and , what is inexcusable in some cases , justifying these decisions citing Europe as the underlying cause .
I hope that in Laeken we can make progress , however small , and make a new commitment in accordance with what the Commission said in its two communications on asylum and on immigration .
On the other hand , I think that the agreement reached on the mutual recognition of judicial decisions , the so-called European arrest warrant , is very important .
This seems to me to be a giant step forward , of course , in the fight against terrorism , but also in the fight against money laundering , in the fight against corruption , in the fight against human trafficking , including of women for sexual exploitation , and in the fight against organised crime .
To me , this seems important , but it also seems that we should take some time to think and it is this that , thirdly , I would like to ask the Council : I think that in Laeken you should take into account not only the advances made in the agenda but also how these have been achieved and which problems must be dealt with .
It seems to me that the unanimity and the lack of real power of this Parliament do not help .
We are living in a world of paradoxes .
A few days ago , in a manner of speaking , we said that Bin Laden had provided the impetus for implementing methods for fighting terrorism that the Commission had been planning and that Parliament had requested some time ago .
Paradoxically , it was also the spectacle made by Mr Berlusconi ' s government that brought the debate on the European arrest warrant onto the front page of the papers .
I would sincerely have preferred for this debate to have taken place in Parliament , for there to have been a public debate and for you to have accepted it .
I would like to tell you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that I am pleased that you appreciate the institutional loyalty of this Parliament .
I would just like it if you could , in return for this , display a little more institutional loyalty in the analysis of our texts , in the inclusion of some of our positive ideas in your documents and I think that this would help in strengthening the positive nature of the Commission / Parliament / Council work cycle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be relatively brief .
I only have four objections : one about the past , one about yesterday , in a manner of speaking , one about tomorrow , although I really mean the day after tomorrow , and one about the future .
Let me start with the past .
I think that the concept of creating a European area of freedom , security and justice first saw the light of day about 25 years ago .
I think that we have taken a number of essential steps in the right direction without crowing about it , but also without achieving the results we want to achieve .
We did not - and I would like to say this here in the European Parliament - have to organise a witch-hunt or use Gestapo-style practices .
On the contrary , anyone who has read the Watson report and the advice from the European Parliament and who knows the position of the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs and that of the Commission , knows that we do not use such methods .
However , yesterday - and I am now thinking back to Tampere 1999 when we took the decision to put a series of recommendations to the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs - I discovered that since then we have in fact been correctly following the three paths that were delineated there to create this area , namely those of harmonisation , mutual cooperation and the creation of players .
Tomorrow , and by that I mean the day after tomorrow , I hope that at the Laeken Summit we will give new impetus to the Amsterdam resolutions and the Tampere recommendations that have not yet been implemented .
I am saying this here with all the more conviction because I believe that there are two areas to which attention absolutely must be paid : the fight against trafficking in human beings and the fight against the sexual and economic exploitation of children .
And finally to the future .
I have often heard people say that we would have to choose between freedom and security , but I do not think that is necessary .
Justice and security are two instruments that are necessary in order to guarantee freedoms .
A pertinent comment that I often hear , and one that we cannot ignore , is that we will have to ask ourselves about institutional decision-making and more specifically whether unanimity should be maintained in the third pillar .
These are a number of objections that I wanted to put to the European Parliament at the end of this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me tell you very briefly , in reply to a question put during the debate , that the American President wrote a letter to the Belgian Prime Minister and to the President of the European Commission pointing to a number of areas in which the United States of America considered that there was a need to deepen cooperative relations with the European Union in the fight against terrorism .
Prime Minister Verhofstadt and President Prodi replied to that letter on 28 November .
That is the first point I want to clarify .
There is no private or special correspondence between the President of the European Commission and the American President .
There was an exchange of letters between the American President and the European Union , represented by both the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission .
On the substantive questions , let me tell you quite frankly that the truth is that we had already taken decisions on most of the aspects referred to by President Bush , during the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting of 20 September ; these decisions were in fact supported by the Heads of State and Government at the European Council in Brussels on 21 September .
Looking to the future , I believe that there are some difficult areas in the context of cooperation with the United States ; we must not conceal that fact .
Incidentally I have always said this and I said it again to Mr Colin Powell , the American Secretary of State , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting last week .
Of course we supported and still support the agreement signed between Europol and the American police agencies on cooperation in the fight against terrorism .
The agreement does not cover possible exchanges of personal data because we realise that this is a sensitive area in which the Europeans and Americans apply different standards . So this area will have to be approached separately as a specific task , which we will indeed do as soon as possible .
Secondly , there is one rather important area of cooperation , namely judicial assistance ; as soon as Eurojust is established definitively , we will have an important tool in our hands for mutual judicial assistance with third countries .
Here again , however , we will have to clarify the rules on exchanges of personal data within the framework of mutual judicial assistance involving third countries .
Thirdly , on the subject of extradition , I agree with what Mr Watson said about the internal imbalance of the US Patriot Act as regards the legal status of US citizens vis-à-vis other citizens , including Europeans .
That is no doubt an area we will have to look at together with our American friends .
I also had occasion to say that Europe has not taken any exceptional measures to combat terrorism .
We have not derogated from the Charter of Fundamental Rights ; we have not introduced any exceptional measures to combat terrorism , so I do not think it is fair to criticise Europe for being in the process of adopting measures it is not in fact adopting .
All the measures that have been taken to combat terrorism and that are now in force are measures based on the existing legislative framework or are measures , such as the European arrest warrant or the framework decision on terrorism , which were planned well before 11 September .
Furthermore , in the case of the European arrest warrant , there is no doubt at all : we were asked to introduce it by the Heads of State and Government in October 1999 to replace extradition .
All those who keep on trying to interpret these measures as emergency measures are wrong : no , Europe did not react to the terrorist threat by departing from its fundamental principles or taking emergency measures .
It reacted by taking measures that were no doubt introduced in an exceptional climate , but that are measures we had been asked to take and that had been planned a long time ago .
Moreover , on the question of extradition , let me repeat to the European Parliament that the Commission has always said that we have never changed our position on the death penalty and that we have said quite plainly that our position in this dialogue did not allow for any possibility of extradition to Member States that apply the death penalty .
Having said that , I will certainly read the resolution the European Parliament is about to adopt very closely and reflect carefully on the implications of your recommendation .
I do not agree with Mr Di Lello , for , in my view , if there are guarantees that the death penalty will not be applied that is sufficient to guarantee respect for the fundamental values .
This needs to be said very plainly .
Finally , Mr President , I want to tell you that I hope the Laeken European Council will enable us to give fresh impetus to the major task of establishing the area of freedom , security and justice , in the field of asylum and immigration as in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation , by accepting the gradual and pragmatic approach we are taking .
I have no illusions , however .
When it comes to turning Europe into an area of freedom , security and justice , we are looking at the very heart of European political cooperation . We know , from our 50 years of experience , that this political integration is never easy .
That said , we shall persevere because I believe that our citizens expect us to find a political response to the needs of European integration .
That is why I am so excited to be taking part , at your side , in this project for an area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , I should like to say to Mr Tajani , who has accused my Group of criticising and being against his government and Italy , that only the first part of what he said is true and that the confusion between criticism of the government and criticism of the country , nation or its people is the first step on a very dangerous path , which in Europe we all know very well .
( Applause from the left )
I inform you that I have received two motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the reports will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
The vote on the motions for resolutions will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )


Mr President , I wish to denounce the unacceptable behaviour of Mr Schmid , who was acting President this morning , who during the debate allowed some left-wing Members to make really personal attacks on Members of the Italian centre-right and in particular the Italian Prime Minister , Silvio Berlusconi , as well as involving President Fontaine by accusing her somehow of blocking in an evidently improper manner the request to waive Mr Berlusconi ' s parliamentary immunity .
I believe and we believe it is unacceptable that Members from other countries should attack the sovereignty of the Italian Government and the democratic choices of its people .
If this unfortunate habit and this constant lowering of tone are not stopped , next session we shall make sure we bring to this House ' s attention all the examples , public and private , of European party leaders who , in our view , damage Europe ' s image .
Mr President , I want to appeal to the Rules of Procedure , with regard to Rule 116 .
This morning , during the debate on the Watson report - a particularly heated debate - in the course of the speech by Mr Schulz , who had attacked the Italian Prime Minister , the President of Parliament and certain Italian Members , there was an interruption from the public , who loudly applauded what Mr Schulz said .

I appealed to the acting President - I did not argue with Mr Schulz , naturally - and asked him to make the members of the public present in the House remain silent .
I recall that Rule 116 says : ' Members of the public admitted to the galleries shall remain seated and keep silent .
Any person expressing approval or disapproval shall immediately be ejected by the ushers . '
When I turned to President Schmid I was given the following answer : ' You are right , but I cannot tie the hands of those present in the House . '
I believe the acting President contravened the Rules of Procedure .
I believe the Rules of Procedure should be obeyed to the letter : this applies to the left , the centre and the right ; it applies to everybody , because it is the Rules of Procedure that dictate civilised coexistence in this House .
This is Parliament , not the Strasbourg stadium !
Mr President , on Monday evening I asked Mrs Fontaine to make the exchange of letters between Mr Bush and Mr Prodi available to all Members .
Mrs Fontaine replied that it would be done .
The next day , during the meeting of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , the Commission representative expressed surprise that Members had not seen Mr Prodi ' s letter of reply to Mr Bush .
These letters have still not been made public .
In plenary this morning , Mr Vitorino acknowledged that this exchange of letters was not private and that Mr Prodi had replied in the name of Parliament as a whole .
Before the highly important vote we will soon be holding on relations between Europe and the United States , I would urgently ask for the exchange of letters between Mr Bush and Mr Prodi to be made available to all Members .
Mr Krivine , I am informed that Mrs Fontaine has not received a copy of this letter .
If one arrives before the end of the day , a copy will , of course , be sent to all Members .
Mr President , personal reference to me having been made for a second time , I am unfortunately obliged to comment on it , and I do so referring not to Mrs Angelilli 's assertions , but to what has just been said by Mr Tajani .
Mr Tajani is right to say that the Rules of Procedure do not permit manifestations of approval from the galleries , but we have to recall what happened .
Mr Tajani had made several interjections during my speech , whereupon I remarked that I could better understand his behaviour now that I could see him , or have a better understanding of why the citizens of Rome did not elect him mayor .
Vigorous applause then broke out in the galleries .
" Vox populi , vox dei " - even if the Rules of Procedure make no provision for that .
( Vigorous applause )
Mr Schulz , allow me to comment that appealing to this saying is not at all appropriate in this House because , if vox populi were the voice of the galleries , we could also do without debating , speaking and voting .
Mr President , I would like to clarify just two things .
The first is that , while chairing the sitting , I heard applause , but was not sure that it came from the gallery .
Secondly , when the honourable gentleman spoke up , I told him that he was in the right and also pointed out that I could do nothing about the gallery after the event , but it was made clear that applause is not permitted .
That is what has to be done under the Rules of Procedure .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote
Owing to financial interests , I shall abstain from voting on this report and the following four .
Mr President , although strictly speaking Rule 9 does not provide for this , I would like to declare an interest in relation to the four reports on the Telecom package .
Mr President , the Commission has passed its opinion on the amendments to the Sittings Directorate , and this is widely known by Parliament .
In addition to that , I wish to reply to the rapporteur 's question .
If this directive is adopted as now proposed , the Commission will publish the relevant MHP multimedia home-platform standards in the list of standards published in the Official Journal of the European Communities under Article 16 of the Framework Directive .
According to this directive , Member States have to encourage the implementation of the standards contained in the list .
One year after the date of application of these directives , the Commission will examine whether interoperability and freedom of choice for users have been adequately achieved in the Member States .
If that is not the case , the Commission can propose making implementation of relevant European standards mandatory .
The directive requires the Commission to carry out a public consultation on such a proposal .
Following the public consultation , the proposal would be submitted to a regulatory committee procedure requiring support from a qualified majority of Member States before being adopted as a formal Commission decision .
I should like to remind Members that there are links between amendments that may be adopted or rejected and amendments that may lapse , and between the Paasilinna report and other reports in the whole telecommunications package , and therefore we must be rather careful .
Mr President , I understand the need to maintain the integrity of the telecoms package , but I understand there have been some final changes to the declaration the Commission has issued on ' must carry ' rules .
I would like to know whether this text genuinely reflects Parliament 's views , particularly the amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and whether the Commission would be kind enough to read out that text so that we can see what we are agreeing to vote on .
Mr President , if you had given me the floor first , as rapporteur , I would have been able to cover the point raised by Mrs McCarthy .
Could I just formally ask you for a separate vote on Amendments Nos 2 , 11 , 23 and 24 ?
I have been asked to do this as a formality , even though it is included in colleagues ' voting lists .
Could I also say to colleagues that this is part of the compromise package we discussed .
I want to make it clear in your voting list , colleagues , that the first part of Amendment No 15 is part of the compromise text and I am recommending you vote against the second part .
My Amendment No 36 is also part of the compromise text , and for clarity for colleagues on the Legal Affairs Committee , this is the amendment you voted on in committee with just the addition of the word ' television ' after ' digital interactive ' .
That was a compromise .
I agreed with the Council to clarify the wording - there have been no other changes .
Can I also make it absolutely clear that Amendment No 11 is also a compromise text and that is shown at the bottom of your voting list .
I turn now to the points quite rightly raised by my shadow rapporteur , Mrs McCarthy , on the question of ' must carry ' obligations .
This is an issue that many colleagues are concerned about and reflects Article 31 of the proposal .
I am recommending that you vote against the committee amendment as part of the compromise but I would ask you , Mr President , to give the floor to Mr Liikanen .
He has prepared a statement clarifying the access provisions for public service broadcasters in the whole electronic communication package .
That access provision is the key concern of colleagues .
So , can I ask you to give Mr Liikanen the floor ?
Mr Harbour , if I had seen you before Mrs McCarthy , I would have given you the floor before her .
I could not have foreseen that she would speak first .
In the light of Parliament 's concern over the extension of ' must carry ' obligations to conditional access and other associated facilities , the Commission wishes to make the following statement .
First , the provision of Article 6 of the access and interconnection directive guarantees all broadcasters access to conditional access systems on fair , reasonable and non-discriminatory terms .
Under Article 5 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the access and interconnection directive , Member States may impose obligations to provide such access on fair , reasonable and non-discriminatory terms , on other associated facilities , in particular application programme interfaces ( APIs ) and electronic programming guides ( EPGs ) .
Second , the Commission will monitor the application of these provisions at Member State level , including ' must carry ' obligations , taking into account any problems that public service or any other specified broadcasters may have in gaining access to satellite and other broadcast networks .
The possibility of guidelines for Member States could be considered .
Third , the free movement of television broadcasting services in the Union is covered by the ' television without frontiers ' directive .
In its forthcoming review of this directive , the Commission will assess inter alia the impact of technological and market developments on the production and distribution of European audiovisual networks .
In conclusion , I have noted the importance the European Parliament attaches to the promotion of multicultural and multilingual Europe , also in this context .
Mr President , if I heard the Commissioner correctly he said the possibility of guidelines ' could ' be considered .
Did I mishear that ?
The House needs to know whether they ' will ' be considered .
Commissioner Liikanen spoke in your language , Mr Perry , so I think it is quite clear !
Perhaps the Commissioner would like to repeat this part ?
Mr President , please permit me to address a question to the Commission before the vote is taken .
The text that the Commission originally submitted for a resolution envisaged the formation of an expert group on radio spectrum policy to continually discuss radio spectrum matters .
The European Parliament was to be involved in these discussions .
Legal and institutional considerations make it impossible to embed the founding of this group in the Frequency Decision , but I would ask the Commission whether they are holding to their original intention and establishing such a group by a Commission decision , that is to say on a voluntary basis .
If so , will Parliament be involved in the work of this Group ?
I turn to the Commission again for its opinion on the amendments .
Mr President , as the EPP shadow rapporteur I should like to ask if your secretarial office is in possession of an erratum regarding point 5.5 , which the translation office has circulated but which , oddly enough , does not yet appear in the text distributed so far : it is a note made some time ago regarding a very serious translation error which falsifies the rapporteur ' s original text .
In point 5 , fourth line , the rapporteur wrote : ' The use of guns must be absolutely avoided . '
I repeat , the rapporteur ' s text says : ' The use of guns must be absolutely avoided ' , and the translation is : ' The use of guns must be absolutely forbidden . '
There is a substantial difference there , apart from the fact that Parliament can , I believe , neither consent to nor forbid the use of guns by any police force in this Community .
In any case , the translation is evidently wrong .
I should like to check whether you are in possession of this corrigendum before voting - irrespective , therefore , of the result of the vote .
Mr Santini , at the beginning of the vote on the Watson report I had already pointed out that there was a corrigendum to the Italian version .
A further check will , of course , be made on the basis of your remarks .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0414 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hazan , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Council report on European Union priorities and policy objectives for external relations in the field of justice and home affairs [ 7653 / 2000 - C5-0102 / 2001 - 2001 / 2051 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Jackson report ( A5-0383 / 2001 )
. I voted against the Jackson report on Codex Alimentarius because I am heartily sick of the gross intrusion into the European Parliament e-mail system of mass mailing of lobby letters .
It has been totally counterproductive and every effort will be made in future to prevent similar intrusions .
Dary report ( A5-0443 / 2001 )
For more than thirty years , the European Union has worked hard to construct its special partnership agreement with the African , Caribbean and Pacific States .
It was within this policy of openness and solidarity that the common organisation of the market in bananas was established to guarantee access to the European market for a certain percentage of the bananas produced by ACP countries , which include some of the poorest countries in the world .
This measure was opposed from the outset by the major , multinational banana companies , which are very competitive , but this often entails exploitation verging on slavery !
Owing to political pressure , economic sanctions , compromises and concessions , the entire quantity protection system will be abolished from 2006 and will be replaced by a protection system based solely on tariffs .
As yet , no one knows how effective this will be in protecting the interests of the traditional ACP banana producers .
The agreement reached in April 2001 did of course end the trade war that had poisoned our relationship with the United States for almost ten years .
But some of the measures genuinely are a bitter pill for the ACP countries to swallow .
These include the abolition , in 2006 , of quota protection guaranteeing traditional producers access to the European market and a 100 000-tonne reduction in the guaranteed production quantity from January 2002 . In addition , they are affected by the deficiencies and delays of the financial and technical assistance measures established to help ACP producers adapt to the new market conditions .
They are still waiting to receive their payments .
Michel Dary ' s report , that we will reach a decision on today , proposes that we offer the ACP countries a number of safety nets to be used during the transition period , before they step out into the unknown when the common organisation of the market in bananas ceases to exist .
( Speech shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Ever since 1993 , the issue of bananas has been at the heart of trade relations between the European Union and the United States .
Some have even gone so far as to say that it has poisoned transatlantic relations and that this conflict should be resolved as quickly as possible .
I would even venture to say that it should be resolved at any cost .
Those in positions of power , like Louis Vuitton , Hermès and Gucci have had enough !
So much so that people all over the world from the West Indies to Brussels and Strasbourg , some individuals have decided to fight back rather than capitulate .
But who in Parliament can fail to recognise that by giving in to the diktat of the United States , in the guise of the WTO , the European Union is supporting future unemployment ? At some point in the long term , 35 000 people in the Canary Islands will be made unemployed , and 30 000 in the West Indies .
Who can fail to recognise that by progressively giving in on this issue , the European Union is disregarding its social model , which it is so keen to export throughout the world ?
Finally , who can fail to recognise that by giving in now on this issue , in the future we will inevitably have to give in on sugar , and not just on sugar cane but also on sugar beet ? Soon we will have to write off our own agricultural model .
Mr Dary has not avoided these various issues and I think that this Parliament should be proud of having voted in favour of his report today .
Inspired by the strength of our democratic legitimacy , we have chosen the path of resistance , in the face of the intransigence of the European Commission .
Our request for ' cyclone ' licences to be available when crops are destroyed and , particularly , our demand for a transition period prior to the start of a purely tariff-based system in 2006 illustrate our opposition perfectly .
This is why I naturally voted in favour of the report by Mr Dary . Overall , I felt it was pertinent to the issues involved , despite having some reservations , which , as I explained to the rapporteur , relate to the distribution within quota C between Caribbean and African producers .
Given Africa ' s trade links , in which France has been pivotal for historic reasons , I fear that this change will represent a further blow for the European producers of Guadeloupe and Martinique .
Paasilinna report ( A5-0435 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Paasilinna ' s framework directive refers in general to all rules concerning the creation , maintenance , development and improvement of citizens ' communications networks that are integrated together , that is , they provide for the use of televisions , computers and telephones .
I voted for this report with pensioners and the elderly in mind , Mr President .
What have the elderly and pensioners to do with this document ?
Well , they are the ones who spend most time in front of the television and so , as end-users of these technological advances , they should be taken into consideration .
Unfortunately , they are not taken into consideration enough in this document .
Brunetta report ( A5-0434 / 2001 )
Mr Brunetta ' s report , Mr President , also refers to telecommunications , and particularly access to and interconnection of electronic communications networks and associated facilities .
Going back to what I said in the last explanation of vote , although this is a document that I approve of in its entirety , here too , unfortunately , I have noticed something missing : there is no provision to allow access to these means of electronic communication - i.e. television , the Internet , mobile telephones - at rates suited to those who are elderly or pensioners , receive modest pensions and should be entitled to have access to these means of electronic communication without any further financial burden , and even with state support .
Niebler report ( A5-0433 / 2001 )
The Niebler report , as you have said , Mr President , refers to authorisations for electronic communications service networks .
As the representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I voted for it , but I should like - and this is something lacking in this document - exemption from payment of various fees , charges and rates when authorisation is granted for new television service and network players to enter the market .
In this document there is nothing to help those who propose to use these means of communication to give information on employment rights , pension rights or social matters of interest to all citizens , particularly the elderly .
Harbour report ( A5-0438 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Harbour ' s document - another directive on telecommunications , on universal service and users ' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services - seeks amongst other things to obtain the greatest possible benefit for consumers .
If , then , what I said in the previous explanation of vote is true , that consumers are for the most part the elderly and pensioners , that means that it should seek the greatest possible benefit for the elderly and pensioners .
That is precisely what many pensioners asked me when once again they went with me to the airport on Sunday afternoon , when I was catching the plane to Strasbourg .
They asked me to tell Parliament , with regard to these documents , that they would like there to be much more on television about their problems and their desires .
Can I say that we fully understand the wish of the Commission and Council to ensure the success of the telecom package in advance of the Laeken Summit .
It is vital to achieve the Lisbon targets , but as the shadow PSE rapporteur , I wish to complain about the procedure .
I also object to the deals which have been struck at the last minute behind closed doors resulting in a compromise package which seriously weakens the provisions for must-carry services and for people with special needs and disabilities .
These were approved unanimously in the Legal Affairs Committee .
It was of course disappointing that the British Conservative rapporteur informed me of his decision to abandon these important provisions for consumers and users in order to achieve political expediency .
My delegation or the Labour MEPs voted in favour to maintain the committee 's positions on these important provisions .
Can we remind perhaps the Commission and Council that we are co-legislators , not co-drafters of declarations which have no legal force and rely on the Commission 's goodwill to deliver on must-carry .
We will , of course , monitor the Commission 's progress to deliver on these provisions .
I have to say that today was a victory for Laeken , for the Commission and Council on the telecoms package , but it was not a victory for democracy in this House .
I would first of all like to remind you of the background to this report . To begin with it was allocated to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , like other reports on the telecoms package .
At that time I was appointed rapporteur . Then the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market declared that it was the responsible committee and the report was handed over to Malcolm Harbour , a British Member of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I remained the draftsman of the opinion , but the opinion I expressed had little influence in the discussions !
This is a terrible shame , especially when the issue is the protection of universal service in such an important sector which is undergoing such important changes .
The report adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs last November makes astonishing reading . The measures relating to universal service have been reduced to a disappointing level and the report focuses mainly on consumer protection .
As I said in my report of the opinion , if universal service includes , within the definition of its component services , the same kind of criteria that are usually used to assess services provided for consumers ( affordable prices , availability , delivery timetables and quality ) , its raison d ' être has different types of objectives if we look at the issue for the point of view of regional policy , social policy ( preventing the poorest people from being excluded ) or public safety policy .
I would like to stress the importance for democracy of the ability to access new communication networks .
New technologies make it possible for people to speak out , to participate in democratic debate and to influence decisions .
Technology can also be used to bring government closer to the people .
Local democracy can benefit greatly from the interactive aspect of online local public services .
Public services can be given a new lease of life through these new technologies , if the means are made available to them , and of course if they have the will to do so .
Lastly , Internet access is essential to the creation of a knowledge-based information society .
The committee ' s proposal needs to be improved in order to meet these challenges . This is what I attempted to do in my amendments , all which were rejected by Mr Harbour .
Today we have voted on a report that proposes some interesting changes concerning the protection of consumers , particularly disabled consumers , and the ' must carry ' principle , but which , regrettably , cannot claim to provide universal service in this sector !
Niebler report ( A5-0432 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Niebler ' s report on the radio spectrum in the European Community and its distribution , just as I voted for all the measures on telecommunications .
In my opinion , however , a quota should have been reserved for Europe of the frequencies available for the electromagnetic emissions with which the electronic messages are sent which are then converted into pictures on our televisions and computers and into signals in fixed or mobile telephones .
Europe must take the lead in the future , and it will only be able to do so if frequencies are available for Europe as such and not just for the national States .
Trakatellis report ( A5-0420 / 2001 )
Mr President , EUR 280 million is being appropriated to public health care .
Do not worry , I am not about to suggest you become a surgeon - although , for all I know , you might be dreaming of becoming a surgeon . I would just like to say that , with regard to this Community action programme , that I hope that the resources of all 15 Member States of the Union will be combined to fund a single European programme which , in addition to the funds appropriated by us , will also benefit from the funds that the individual national States make available to it from their national budgets .
In particular , however , I call for a reduction in the working hours of those who work in toxic environments and , as a result , suffer from occupational illnesses , for this is one of the causes of the high public health costs , not just in terms of human lives but in financial terms as well .
The programme of Community action in the field of public health is an important element of the work towards improved public health in Europe .
Public health is an issue close to the heart of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and a precondition for a dignified and decent life .
We therefore support the Commission ' s proposal and the amendments proposed by Parliament in its first reading .
However , it is our view that the amendments proposed by Parliament in its second reading would only lead to the concept of public health being undermined , to a breach of Article 152 of the Treaty and to encroachment upon Member States ' self-determination in the area of health care .
We have therefore chosen to vote against all the amendments , with the exception of Amendment 1 on respect for the principle of subsidiarity in the area of public health and Amendment 60 on reduced resistance to antibiotics .
. ( NL ) Without democratic regulation by the state , health becomes a commodity .
This commodity is available to anyone who is rich and powerful but not to anyone who is poor and powerless .
We see that the average life expectancy of disadvantaged population groups is shorter than that of privileged groups .
There is constant pressure to replace income-dependent insurance premiums with a premium that is the same for everyone regardless of their income .
Commercial companies offer special care to anyone who can and will pay for it .
Hospitals are going into the commercial market ; people with the most money can queue-jump and loss-making treatments are being scrapped .
Waiting lists are being created , people are being referred to distant hospitals in other Member States , and the number of unnecessary deaths is increasing .
To combat this trend , it is important for governments to provide good healthcare that is accessible to everyone .
A European programme of Community action in the field of public health can contribute to this .
However , it is necessary that the amendments rejected after the first reading get a comfortable majority today , so that we can clearly establish that health is not a commodity and is not subject to financial compromises , and that there is a great deal to be improved in the area of healthcare in many Member States , which has been neglected for the past twelve years .
With regard to this programme , I have voted against the proposal to ' develop a specific action to promote , by means of public awareness / information campaigns , an improved diet and eating habits which are better suited to the needs of the human body ' at European level .
The European Union must concentrate on its main tasks - promoting peace and democracy , human rights , free trade and initiatives for improving the environment .
This is the only way for our cooperative venture to win public support and understanding and gain legitimacy among our citizens .
Otherwise , the EU project will still principally be seen as centralising decision-making among only a few people .
This weekend will see discussions on the outline of future EU legislation / new instruments or treaties at the European Council at the Royal Palace of Laeken in Brussels .
Here , it is more important than ever for the European Parliament to show the political maturity and discipline required not to demand new policy measures at European level , but instead to rally around the central joint undertakings .
It is vital that the principle of subsidiarity , as set out in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam , is actually applied .
A body wholly independent of the EU institutions , the European Court of Justice , should be given the authority to monitor adherence to and respect for the principle of subsidiarity , in order to ensure that more powers are not transferred to European level .
This certainly does not include the centralised implementation of a uniform Europe-wide campaign for ' an improved diet and eating habits ' involving all the various cultures , eating habits and tastes that characterise the 370 million citizens of the EU Member States .
Let taste , culture and lifestyle remain different for Greeks , Spaniards , Swedes , British and Germans .
Such diversity is a great asset .
Paulsen report ( A5-0408 / 2001 )
Could I express surprise that the compromise package negotiated by the three largest groups has been rejected by the Council ?
We would have preferred to have voted on the compromise amendments .
The compromise on the two contentious issues , namely time allowed for setting limits and the right to return contaminated feed to the country of origin with the consent of that country 's government , was realistic and workable .
I wish to put on the record the position of the ED wing of the EPP that the Council was crazy to reject the package that was on the table .
If it thinks it can get a better deal in conciliation , then it has another think coming !
Incidentally , the compromise was the best deal for the Italian pensioners as well .
. The implementation of key provisions of the EU White Paper on Food Safety is of paramount importance if we are to restore confidence in the food chain .
The inclusion of undesirable ingredients by feed manufacturers in animal feed was responsible for BSE and the Dioxin scare .
It is to the credit of this Parliament and the other EU institutions that measures were quickly put in place to deal with the crisis and to agree long-.term measures to prevent any re-occurrence .
Today ' s debate is a further positive step on this important road ensuring that animal feed available to farmers is of the highest quality .
Not for the first time do I want to put on the record that in all of this sorry debacle , farmers were the innocent victims of circumstances which were beyond their control .
It is also important to say that farmers welcome the controls concerning animal food production .
It is to be regretted that some people used the debate on food safety to undermine the profession of farming and the role of farmers as guarantors of a quality food supply for citizens .
We need to be careful as to how we deal with comments concerning food .
The Dioxin and BSE debates failed to get across the strong message that the quality of European food is the best in the world , and consumers get both quality and value for money .
Any exceptions to this are condemned outright by European farmers .
Recent reports concerning the future of CAP are certainly worrying .
If we are serious about the European model based on family farming , then we must ensure that those who operate within that framework are all guaranteed a decent living .
Lange report ( A5-0406 / 2001 )
This document we have just adopted regulates pollutant emissions , particularly from motorcycles .
Mr President , I am sure that you can hear now the deafening noise caused by large numbers of motorcyclists riding through the streets near Parliament .
The noise is unbearable and , most importantly , the pollution is not odourless : quite the opposite , it often stinks .
It is not the effect on our noses which is important but rather the fact that harmful substances are released into the atmosphere .
Would you not agree , Mr President , if you were a policemen trying to enforce these directives we have adopted , that the motorcycles of those who produce so much noise and pollution while using them should be seized without delay ?
I would have voted for the motion much more willingly if the directive had included these measures .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report on the Directive on the reduction of the level of pollutant emissions from two and three-wheel motor vehicles .
We believe that the recommendation has intrinsic environmental value .
However , in this explanation of vote , we wish to state that we do not agree with Mr Lange ' s desire for a binding emission limit for 2006 .
We believe that the limit should be voluntary until there are improved grounds for a new limit to be set .
If the limit were to be established now , there would be a risk of emissions from future motorcycles becoming higher than necessary .
We believe Mr Lange ' s proposal to use the test cycle for cars is inappropriate as motorcycles are not driven in the same way as cars .
They accelerate in a different way and are usually driven at higher speeds .
Instead , we should wait for the new test cycle currently under development for motorcycles and , until then , have voluntary emission limits .
Turchi report ( A5-0439 / 2001 )
Mr President , before I tell you why I voted for the Turchi report , which is on the granting of Community financial assistance in the field of Trans-European Networks , that is to the transport , energy and telecommunications sector , I would like to thank Mr Goodwill , who has joined me in protecting the interests of the pensioner citizens of the whole of Europe , not just Italian pensioners , that is .
We are back to televisions and television programmes - this certainly is the day for telecommunications !
I voted for the motion but I hope that , when we vote on this document in future , in the coming years , economic support will be laid down for television stations which broadcast , in one of our States , programmes made in other States of the European Union .
We have to get to know each other , Mr President - Italians , British , French , Finnish and so forth - and what better way to do so than to watch programmes made in another State , translated into our own languages of course ?
I fully agree with the conclusions reached by Mr Turchi .
I would reiterate the points made by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism with regard to the lack of information on financing provided by national , regional and local bodies and by the private sector for the completion of TEN projects , since 95 % of the financing still comes from outside the EU .
There is also a lack of information on specific investment in modes of transport via EIB loans , the financial instruments for third countries , other public and private programmes and the Structural Funds themselves that is broken down by transport mode .
Indeed , the Commission only provided information broken down by transport mode for budget heading B5-0700 .
We feel we should also point out that , in future , the Commission should attach to the report a clear , simple table containing dependable , transparent data which can not just be used to monitor the correct use of the amounts already made over but will also improve the scope for planning .
This is a monitoring procedure which the Commission ' s report reserved exclusively for the 14 priority projects established at Essen which , as we know , are not the only ones on the list .
Finally , I feel I must draw the Commission ' s attention to the need to address properly , once again , the issue of Corridor 8 - which does not even feature in the White Paper - and peripheral regions , which are isolated even more by the excessive focus on Trans-European railway lines and the neglect of the air transport crisis .
Watson report ( A5-0396 / 2001 )
I voted against this report , Mr President , because it should have been more vehement in its condemnation of demonstrations .
Demonstrations are legitimate in themselves as a means of displaying one ' s opposition to a policy - where this is the case - but they must be always and exclusively peaceful .
I myself , Mr President , have demonstrated many times against government decisions with which I did not agree .
What method did I use ?
I chained myself to the furniture in the Bergamo municipal council building , I chained myself to the furniture in the Bergamo provincial council building and I chained myself to the furniture in the Lombardy regional council building in Italy .
Who knows , maybe one day in the next two and a half years , I will chain myself to your Presidential bench , Mr President .
In any case , this is a peaceful means of protest ; it does not involve arms or violence , unlike the protests which , I am sad to say , have been taking place for some time now throughout the world , which I condemn , which the Pensioners ' Party condemns and which everybody here condemns .
Should you decide to act on that deplorable idea , you will be freed from your chains , if necessary against your will !
. ( EL ) I worry that the European Union is on a slippery slope , with the recent plethora of measures reducing civil liberties .
Unfortunately , Europe is to acquire an arrest warrant before it acquires a constitution .
This being the case , the EU-USA extradition agreement as part of the fight against terrorism is particularly worrying .
Article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights adopted by the European Union Council in Nice in France on 7 December 2000 does not allow anyone to be sentenced to death .
This being so , it is unthinkable to cooperate on extradition to the USA , which has the death penalty and where the conditions for a fair trial do not apply following the courts martial or the detention of hundreds of immigrants with no judicial guarantees .
Even if people are only extradited to the USA if the USA promises that " the death penalty will not be applied " , the death penalty may be imposed by the court without being enforced .
In this way , with this agreement with the USA on criminal matters , the European Union is reintroducing the death penalty through the back door .
And that is a huge step backwards .
Finally , I should point out that the USA is applying the death penalty en masse in Afghanistan without even any judgements from their own courts .
This was confirmed both by Defence Secretary Rumsfeld yesterday when he said that we would kill Al Qaeda and in its use of the 15000 pound daisy cutter bomb , which is the most powerful non-nuclear bomb of mass destruction .
Dismantling the Taliban and Al Qaeda and punishing those responsible for the crime perpetrated on 11 September in order to set an example is one thing and the mass murder of all its members and supporters , which not even the Nazis suffered , is another .
It is Europe 's duty to react .
. ( EL ) In its own initiative report entitled " Security at meetings of the European Council and other comparable events " , the European Parliament committee wrongly named the " Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights ... " , has forged another link in the heavy chain which the ruling class intends to use to stem the swollen tide of resistance and opposition to its policies .
The rapporteur , Mr Watson , suggests how we can become peaceful and legitimate demonstrators , the first requirement being to work together peacefully and avoid any manifestation of violence .
Ôhe question is , who is guilty of violence and terrorism ?
In Nice , Gothenburg and , even more so in Genoa , violence was indeed perpetrated , except that the perpetrators were the police and state forces .
And , more to the point , in both Gothenburg and Genoa , the target of police violence was clearly not the few hot-blooded demonstrators , but the huge crowd of " peaceful " demonstrators .
Then we read that organisers of demonstrations should avoid cooperating with people suspected of carrying out acts of violence .
It is easy to conclude that , if they do not , they run the risk under the forthcoming terrorism law of being sentenced as terrorists for the crime of supporting terrorist action .
Our response is that protecting demonstrations from extremist elements , who are often agents provocateurs , is a matter for the mass grass-roots movement itself .
According to the report , if we want to cross the borders of our country and take part in an international demonstration , we must earn the authorities ' trust by convincing them that we intend to demonstrate peacefully in a legitimate demonstration .
We are extremely worried that soon we will be asked for credentials or to sign a statement .
It also suggests that we need to agree on a common definition of " dangerous person and dangerous behaviour " for all the Member States .
This proposal refers to articles about two new black lists which Europol is planning to publish , one for " troublemaking " demonstrators and one for foreigners .
This being so , the report 's recommendation that there should be no black lists or new databases is pure hypocrisy .
As far as police violence is concerned , the only thing the report has to say is that a disproportionate use of force should be avoided and it sits firmly on the fence as regards the conduct of the demonstrators and that of the police forces .
In fact , especially in Genoa , the demonstrators faced unprecedented violence on the part of the police , with illegal charges , hundreds of illegal arrests , dozens of injured and the cold-blooded murder of a young man .
It is no coincidence that the UN Commission against Torture has called for a report on events in Diaz and Bozaneto jail in Genoa .
Obviously , the political mouthpieces of the European monopolies know full well that their anti-grass roots policy is going to come up against more and more grass-roots opposition , which is why they are attempting to use repressive measures to terrorise and restrain popular unrest .
However , history has shown that this sort of action always brings in the opposite results .
The reasons behind the grass-roots movement are increasing social inequality and the attack on fundamental social rights .
The longer these reasons apply , the more mass grass-roots resistance and opposition will grow .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the Watson report .
Hazan report ( A5-0414 / 2001 )
Mr President , thank you for your response to my explanation of vote on chaining myself to the President ' s bench .
I remember , on one occasion , I could not release myself from the chains because I had unwisely thrown the key out of the window , but your comment makes the idea of carrying out such a peaceful form of protest and there being such a peaceful likely conclusion to it more feasible , more probable and more pleasant .
As regards the Hazan report , which I voted for , I have to say that I particularly welcome the intention it expresses to combat the intolerable level of corruption which persists in all the States of our Europe , but also - and , I would say , in particular , regrettably , in the candidate countries .
Genuine progress must be made when the chapters are closed with these candidate countries .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.48 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Middle East
The next item is the joint debate on the statements made by the Council and the Commission concerning the situation in the Middle East and on the proposal for a recommendation ( B5-0747 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the crisis in the Middle East and the role of the European Union in the region .
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , you have the floor .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of December , we once again witnessed a tragic series of events in the Middle East . As time passes , there is a growing risk that the situation could spiral out of control .
The prospect of a serious political dialogue is becoming an increasingly distant possibility . Dialogue however is the only way forward ; there is no other credible option .
The various parties appear to lack the confidence and the political will needed to end this crisis , so opening the way for violence and extremism .
It is now more important than ever that the parties concerned are offered help in reaching a different way of thinking .
However , the recent active re-engagement of the United States in the Middle East lead to the expectation of progress towards the resumption of talks .
Unfortunately , the terrible events of recent days have made this work much more difficult .
Nevertheless , the United States , the European Union and the other players most directly concerned have no other choice than to reiterate the firm intention of the international community to prevent extremism and terrorism from undermining diplomatic efforts .
Although the situation in the Middle East is extremely serious , the European Union must not give in .
Both the Israeli and the Palestinian people have the right to live in peace and security .
The Members States of the European Union must therefore work indefatigably towards reconciliation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is therefore the reason why Mr Shimon Peres and Mr Navril Shaath were each invited to meet the Foreign Ministers separately within the framework of the General Affairs Council of 10 December .
By inviting them , the European Union once again wanted to express its intention to relaunch and continue the political process , and it has therefore used this additional opportunity to prepare the ground for a return to the negotiating table .
In short , it is of prime importance that the European Union once again focuses on the essential need for a political perspective in order to lend weight to the current security negotiations .
The European Union published a declaration after the General Affairs Council of 10 December which was mentioned earlier .
At this juncture , I would like to very briefly repeat the most important elements of this , but at the same time I would like to point out that the text was not shown to either Mr Peres or Mr Shaath before publication .
In this declaration , the European Union clearly sets out the obligations to which it expects both parties to adhere straight away .
With regard to the Palestinian authorities : most importantly , the dismantling of the Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorist networks , including the arrest and prosecution of all suspects and a public call in Arabic to cease the armed Intifada .
With regard to the Israeli government : the withdrawal of its troops and the cessation of all summary executions , the reversal of the area closures and all the restrictions imposed on the Palestinian people , and finally a freeze on the building of new settlements .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this wording clearly demonstrates that the European Union always holds a middle position , siding with neither party . Other external players should follow this example .
The wording also clearly explains the conditions necessary for restoring a basic trust between the parties , and also the conditions needed for a genuine peace process .
The European Union is aware of the complex nature of the undertakings that it is calling for the parties to agree to , especially given the current situation on the ground .
However , these requirements have been established on the basis of a rational assessment of the present differences between the parties , and of the ways of overcoming these in the context of a peace process .
The High Representative Mr Solana has undertaken another visit to the region on a mandate from the General Affairs Council .
He will report back on his mission at the European Council at Laeken .
On this basis , it is thus up to the European Union to continue its work to find the most effective ways of bringing the parties to engage fully in the search for a just and lasting peace .
In the meantime , we remain convinced that the implementation of the Tenet ceasefire plan and Mitchell Committee recommendations is the only way to re-establish a political process in the short term .
The plan and recommendations should be implemented without prerequisites or conditions which extremists only use for their own ends . We must not allow extremists to prevent the resumption of negotiations .
As far as the European Union is concerned , the basis for political negotiations is well known .
These are Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 and the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference , including the principle of exchanging land for peace and the Oslo Accords .
Lastly , the political negotiations have two objectives .
Firstly , the irrevocable right of Israel to exist in peace and security , within its internationally accepted borders , should be fully recognised and reaffirmed . Secondly , a viable and democratic Palestinian state should be established , and the occupation of Palestinian territories should cease .
The European Union also continues to believe that establishing an impartial monitoring body would be in the best interests of both parties . This could help them to overcome the distrust and obstacles encountered in trying to achieve a definitive settlement .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I know that I do not have to explain that the situation is and remains very serious . I know I do not have to explain how important it is that we remain vigilant and ready to act .
Along with the United States and other interested parties , we need to continue to evaluate the potential options , including the possibility that the situation will deteriorate .
The European Union has more than proved its interest and active commitment to seek political solutions , especially in the last few months .
Of course , the parties themselves bear the principal responsibility , but it is important that the international community reaffirms its willingness to help them back onto the path to peace .
( Applause )
Madam President , over the last couple of years I have had the opportunity - perhaps I should say that alas I have had the opportunity - of making all too many statements to this Parliament on the situation in the Middle East .
It is with regret that I note a dramatic deterioration of the situation in the region despite the tremendous efforts of the international community , in particular the United Nations , the United States , the Russian Federation and the European Union .
I am dismayed by the fact that more than 1 000 people , Palestinians , Israelis - among them , as we heard this morning , many women and children - have died since September last year .
I am also dismayed at the fact that we have seen the withering away of the aspirations and the hopes that Israelis and Palestinians have pursued since the peace process began ten years ago .
We need to focus our efforts on how to prevent the death of the peace process itself .
Much of what has been achieved with the help of the international community is now at risk .
We want to see two states living side by side , peaceful and prosperous .
Today , that prospect seems all too distant .
The number of deaths keeps increasing and so , less importantly , does the record in physical and economic damage .
The World Bank has estimated that the Palestinian economy has suffered losses of between USD 155 million and 165 million in physical damage and USD 2.4 billion of gross national income since September last year .
The number of Palestinians living below the poverty line on less that USD 2 per day will have risen from 600 000 to between 1.2 million and 1.5 million by the end of 2001 .
Even worse , the World Bank projects more than 50 % of the population may fall below the poverty line by the end of this year .
The economic decline and the non-transfer of taxes owed to the Palestinian Authority by Israel have caused a fall in Palestinian revenues from a monthly average of USD 91 million to USD 22 million .
Palestinians lost more than 100 000 jobs in Israel and about 66 000 jobs in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip as a result of Israel 's closure policy .
But the Israeli economy is also suffering , which is not surprising when one considers the extent of economic interchange that was taking place before the current Intifada .
According to recent forecasts , the year 2001 is going to be one of the worst years since the 1950s for the Israeli economy .
This is mainly caused by the global economic slowdown but also by the current political security crisis .
Preliminary figures indicate that one in five Israelis live below the poverty line , absolute numbers are up by 10 % compared to last year and the rate of unemployment stood at 9.3 % in the third quarter .
What is the European Union 's stance , given this dramatic undermining of political and economic stability in the Middle East ?
We understand Israel 's longing for security .
We respect the fact that it is the Israeli Government 's duty to try to provide safety for its citizens and we also understand Palestinian frustration over the continuous military occupation and the remorseless spread of settlements .
On Monday , as the Minister has just pointed out , the General Affairs Council discussed these issues with Shimon Peres and Nabil Sha 'ath .
As ever , they were extremely eloquent in what they said .
The Council 's declaration reaffirms Israel 's irrevocable right to live in peace and security within internationally recognised borders and the need for the establishment of a viable and democratic Palestinian state and an end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories .
The way chosen by people like the late Prime Minister Rabin was to find a negotiated solution leading to two states with the 1967 line roughly as their shared border , Jerusalem as capital of both , and a solution to the refugee issue acceptable to both Israelis and Palestinians .
Unfortunately forces on both the Palestinian and Israeli sides have been working against this goal .
They have set out quite deliberately to destroy the achievements of the Oslo process .
It is our collective duty to try to stop them doing so .
The only way of returning to meaningful negotiations is to embark once and for all on the path laid out in the Mitchell report .
The Council on Monday strongly encouraged the parties to take the first steps to end this devastating and self-fuelling cycle of violence that we have seen over the last 14 months .
I confirm our strong call for the parties to implement the Mitchell report without delay .
It is crucial to apprehend extremists and continue fighting those terrorist groups opposed to the peace process , as the Minister said .
The Union must continue to press the Palestinian Authority to take concrete steps to arrest and bring to justice those who commit terrorist acts .
This is why the Council on Monday called clearly for the dismantling of the terrorist networks of Hamas and Jihad .
And it is equally crucial that Israel withdraws its military forces , ends the extra-judicial killings , and ends the closures and restrictions on Palestinian people , particularly the senseless bombing of property and infrastructure .
It is difficult to see how the destruction of the Gaza airport , the destruction of an EU-funded forensic laboratory and the destruction of vast areas of arable land can help fight terrorism or increase Israel ' s security .
I would strongly argue the opposite .
In the World Bank report , they state ' that the main proximate cause of the recession is closure ' .
Removing , or significantly easing closure is the most important requirement if further decline is to be arrested and economic pressure removed from the Palestinian population .
Continued economic hardship will make people easier prey for extremists .
We need to persuade Israel that its security will be increased , not hampered , by allowing the Palestinian economy to develop so as to give people a reason to hope for a better future .
Where in history is there an example of poverty and economic decline leading to greater security and political moderation ?
Let me add to this an argument put by Henry Siegman - a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and a distinguished expert on the Middle East - in the article in the International Herald Tribune today , which I strongly recommend to all Members of this House .
Mr Siegman wrote as follows : ' policies which reinforce the despair of Palestinians by killing their hope for an end to the occupation will inevitably fuel escalating violence ' .
We must not allow ten years of political and financial investment to be wasted .
The European Union has contributed more than EUR 3 billion to the West Bank and Gaza Strip since 1994 .
Some may say unfairly that the European Union is only a payer and not a player .
I have heard that remark in this Chamber .
But what we have done is to provide some grounds for hope - and in recent months to prevent further economic misery and to keep the Palestinian Authority barely alive and in place by providing EUR 108 million in budgetary aid over the last 14 months .
Some people have criticised us for that , although members of the Israeli Government have explicitly supported these efforts in the past .
We have worked to maintain the only viable partner in peace that Israel can find and we should continue to support the Palestinian Authority , especially in its fight against terrorism .
Although the Palestinian Authority has made mistakes and must correct them , the Palestinian Authority is the only structure that can provide stability in the Palestinian territories .
It is the provider of necessary basic services and in the end the guarantor for a minimum of security for both the Palestinians and the Israelis .
If the Palestinian Authority is disabled , we will face a situation of anarchy where Hamas and Jihad will no doubt gather increasing support and local extremist committees will compete in an escalation of violence .
It is utterly absurd to suggest that by doing this we are funding terrorists .
Our funding actually helps to strengthen the secular administration against the real terrorist organisations .
We have put a considerable number of safeguards in place that allow us to monitor the use of our funds .
The most important of these is the regular checking and reporting by the International Monetary Fund on the austerity budget agreed by the Palestinian Authority .
I want to make this point very strongly .
The European Union has done more than anyone else to promote elections , the fight against corruption , and the rule of law in the Palestinian territories .
There is much further to go .
But how do we best promote decency , moderation and pluralism ?
By allowing public services in the Palestinian territories to collapse or by trying to keep them going against the odds and by trying to promote reform ?
The alternative to the Palestinian Authority is Palestinian anarchy .
However long and difficult the road , we should remain committed to supporting moderates , whoever they are and while - thank God - they still exist , on both sides of this tragic feud .
Some commentators have referred to the problems in the Middle East as one of the root causes of terrorism - or they have pointed out that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been and is abused as a cheap excuse for violence or as a wicked justification for committing evil criminal acts .
The international community needs to take action now to help resolve this potentially explosive situation .
The risk of wider regional spillover is very real and we must use every means to prevent a return to the time when the Palestinian cause was pursued largely through terrorism .
One final point . Today the focus is mainly on Afghanistan .
But increasingly it will shift to the Middle East .
If we are to solve the problems there , it is no good dwelling in the past , exchanging half-truths , casting blame , arguing about what Mr Arafat should have done at Camp David or what Mr Sharon should not have done on the Holy Mount .
What is past is past .
Peace will only come if there is a real and brave and lasting commitment to achieving it , looking ahead to a brighter future , ignoring those who try to derail the whole process through terrorist acts of violence and by disproportionate military responses .
That is the way progress was made in the past , for example by Mr Rabin .
It must be the path that we Europeans advocate for the future .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I must say that these two speeches and also the Council 's decision this week demonstrate how seriously we have to approach this problem , and that the European Union , both in the observations that have been made here , and also in this resolution , has sent a clear signal as to what is to be supported .
We in Parliament would like our recommendation to contribute to the European Union 's ability to be an intermediary in this region , finding an opportunity to achieve a peaceful solution .
If I might put it in cautious terms , we will assuredly be able to achieve a balanced text within the framework of the resolution , that is , during tomorrow 's procedure .
There is no need for me to analyse the situation now , and I wish to support what Chris Patten said - that there is no point whatever in looking for questions of guilt among the issues currently facing us . What we do know is that the situation has got worse since Arafat refused to give way at Camp David and Sharon went to the Temple Mount .
Moreover , 11 September did not contribute to a more reflective mood . Instead , things have worsened since then , and what is now at stake is the breaking of the cycle of violence .
There comes a point where it no longer makes sense to ask who is guilty and who innocent , because the cycle of violence no longer has a discernible beginning or end .
As Europeans , we not only have a great interest in peace being genuinely established in this region , but it is in our most fundamental interest , as the whole issue of the Mediterranean and the issue of terrorism defy solution unless the conflict in the Middle East is resolved .
I am not saying that the Middle East conflict is at the root of these issues , but it serves as an excuse for many of the things that cause us grave concern , and it is for this reason that the resolution of this problem in our neighbourhood is in our own fundamental interest .
Having , as Chris Patten rightly said , given this amount of financial help to date , we therefore want to take this situation as our starting point in joining the United States in playing an active political role in this region .
It is clear that we are working with two basic presuppositions .
As far as the first is concerned , it is absolutely clear that Israel 's citizens must be able to live within frontiers that are secure and recognised .
That is an absolute requirement .
It is not even up for discussion , as Israelis have a right to it for reasons which I , as a German , do not need to justify in detail , and which are obvious .
The second point is that the Palestinian people , too , must be able to look forward to a state of their own in which they can shape their own future .
What this means is that we must make an attempt at progressive removal of the factors that work against this .
Settlements and occupation do not help the Palestinians to develop in an appropriate way .
Terrorism on the part of the Palestinians does not contribute to a feeling of security in Israel and to Israeli withdrawal .
I do think we can now clearly see that Arafat is , for this reason , in a position to act against Hamas and Islamic Jihad .
It would , then , have made sense for him to do so at an earlier stage , but if it is to be done now , that should be enough , and combating them with all vigour should be seen as a precondition , just as much as Israel ' s refraining from hampering subsequent development by riddling the infrastructure in Palestine with bullet holes .
It must , though , be clear to us in exactly the same way that the return of the refugees must not be used as a means towards imperilling the existence of the State of Israel .
The Arab states must also see that keeping people in camps is not the right way either .
With our financial support , the whole of the Arab world must help young people to come out of the camps and to have enough of a chance to grow up .
The Council and the Commission are well aware that Parliament is ready to contribute financially , too , to significant solutions , if it would help to achieve peaceful development .
We believe that our position on the guaranteeing of human rights must be seen in the right context , both by the Palestinian Authority and in the State of Israel .
We have seen three winners of the Sakharov Prize here today - a Muslim , a Jewish woman and a Christian , thus representing the three monotheistic religions .
This , I believe , is where the starting point is to be found .
These three religions , which have so overwhelmingly given the world its shape over the past millennia , must find in themselves the strength to achieve a peaceful solution in that centre which was their source , so that people adhering to these three faiths may be able to live together in the city that is holy to them all , Jerusalem .
I believe that this is what our actions must accomplish .
I believe this to be one of the tasks for us in our day , perhaps the central one .
Madam President , from the start of this legislature , the European Parliament , through its various bodies , has been working extremely hard to achieve peace in this region , making its contribution , of both a political and an economic nature , through the Union budgets .
As Chairman of the Delegation for relations with Israel , it has been a privilege to share initiatives and trips with Mrs Morgantini , the Chairperson of the Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council .
Although we have certainly not always shared the same point of view , I am convinced that we have always shared the same good intentions .
We have travelled together with Mrs Fontaine , the President of this House , and last Monday , as has already been mentioned , we received Mr Avram Burg , President of the Israeli Parliament and Mr Abu Ala , President of the Palestinian Legislative Council .
We had lunch with this year ' s winners of the Sakharov prize this very afternoon - as Mr Brok has just mentioned - a prize whose award is intended to symbolise and be understood as an expression of the European Parliament ' s good intentions .
We are now participating in this debate on a recommendation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I think that , right now , for the first time , we are facing a situation where no reason can be found to be optimistic and for this very reason , I think that the Council recommendation is most appropriate and useful , above all in its final version which the Groups agreed on this morning and which I am sure we will vote for , because the only thing left is intercession , even international intervention , without which we would probably be facing a situation of all-out war .
Faced with today ' s tragic circumstances , which are worsened by the international crisis , I firmly believe that the various parliamentary Groups should put our party political differences to one side , which would make our contribution , and that of the representatives of the European Union in this region , all the more effective .
The situation we are experiencing is not akin to some kind of movie with good guys and bad guys and for this reason , and to maintain credibility , we need to call on the Israeli Government to stop its bombings , and the Palestinian Authority to prosecute without exception those extremists who are at the root of this terrorism which , under no circumstances , can be justified .
At times such as these , political leaders cannot withdraw . They must stand up , for example , against the hatred of Israeli youth who call on the streets for the bombing of the Palestinian people in response to the terrorist attacks , and also stand up against this horrendous image of Palestinian children who gleefully celebrate the death of numerous innocent Israeli citizens in Jerusalem or Haifa .
What exactly is being taught to these youngsters in schools ?
And if the current Israeli and Palestinian leaders are not capable of putting a stop to this , I am sure that sooner or later their peoples will punish them with their contempt .
Madam President , whilst we are talking here today in this House , in the Middle East , Israeli tanks are once again occupying the supposedly autonomous Palestinian territories .
The Israeli army continues to carry out extrajudicial executions and its planes are still bombing Palestinian police - not army - headquarters , a police force that has no freedom of movement but which has been asked to dismantle terrorist networks and to detain all suspects .
I am not ignoring the fact that the Council , and especially the High Representative , Mr Javier Solana , are redoubling their efforts to achieve some kind of tangible result .
I wonder whether the declaration made by the Council last Monday will contribute to this in any way .
In any case , I would like to refer to this declaration .
In it , the Union , as is well known , insists , in the following order : firstly , that the Palestinian Authority dismantle the terrorist networks , detain all suspects and make a public call for the end of the Intifada .
Next , in second place , that the Israeli Government withdraw its armed forces , put an end to the extrajudicial executions and also to the blockades and restrictions that oppress the Palestinian people , and that they put an end to the building of settlements .
I applaud this declaration , like Prime Minister Sharon , who stated that this is the first time such a demand in the fight against terrorism has been addressed in such a clear and unambiguous fashion to Arafat by the Union .
Obviously , Sharon ' s satisfaction refers solely to the EU ' s demands to the Palestinian Authority .
There was no declaration from Sharon on the Council ' s demand that Israel end its violence .
The Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs , Shimon Peres , also liked the declaration .
He said that he thought it was ' a responsible European stance ' , which was a more positive statement than that given by Sharon , but he went on to state that the Israeli military action is necessary .
He states that this action - which the EU calls for an end to - is necessary to prevent attacks being made on Israeli citizens , and added that ' it is very easy to give advice to countries whose problems are very different from your own ' .
It appears that the EU ' s attitude is responsible if it gives advice to the Palestinian Authority , but this is not the case if it tries to advise the Israeli Government .
In my humble opinion , it is probably this type of statement that prompted Louis Michel to say that the EU did not have Israel ' s interests in mind when it made such a declaration .
I am aware of this , but the question remains that there continues to be a situation where there is an occupier and the occupied , and the occupier wants to continue playing the game by its own rules , whilst the second - the occupied - is asking for a straightforward end to the occupation , and , with this , peace .
The Council is also aware of this , and it has always hoped to have , like this Parliament , greater influence in the peace process .
I think that it also knows that this cannot simply be requested , it has to be worked for and achieved .
Finally , I would like to say that I expect - and I am sure of this - that this recent mission led by the High Representative and the possible decisions to be made at Laeken will take us in this direction .
Madam President , I think it would be difficult for myself and the other speakers to find words more appropriate or of more use than those used today by the winners of the Sakharov prize , especially Mrs Peled-Elhanan and Mr Ghazzawi .
But we must go on .
Let us follow their example .
I think that the Groups should congratulate ourselves on the agreement reached with regard to the recommendation , but it should be of concern to us that , even though we are not part of the conflict , it should have cost us more than what is reasonable to reach it .
During the discussion , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party attempted to give priority to both the agreement and a balanced position .
However , I think there can be no doubt that our greatest demand is to be efficient , given that our purpose here is not to be conflict analysts , but to be politicians with responsibilities within the framework of the European Union .
From this point of view , I think that the clear position that has been taken with regard to the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government is logical and in line with the position of the Council .
However , while insisting on this required level of efficiency , I would like to associate myself with the opinions already expressed by Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck and Commissioner Patten , that there is much need for international action , that the conflict must stop and that the basic approach well established by the Mitchell report must be followed .
In this respect , I would say that it is not sufficient to remain observers and apply pressure .
In a conflict there needs to be strong advocates .
The European Union , the United States , and , obviously , the UN and Russia , are all strong advocates , and it would be difficult to name another moment in history when it has been possible for them to act together in a such an efficient and balanced way .
However , I believe , without a doubt , that this should be our priority : to be able to act as forceful and powerful advocates , if this is a possibility for all of those involved , for the gravity of this conflict requires this .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , it is a somewhat peculiar experience to be talking about the Middle East here a few hours after the impressive and emotional presentation of the Sakharov Prize to Mrs Peled and Mr Ghazzawi .
But it is just that - the existence of wise people on both sides of the line who have managed to remain tolerant under tragic personal circumstances - it is precisely the existence of people of this kind that makes it meaningful and necessary for us to continue to search for a solution to a problem that at first glance seems so hopeless .
It is to the cynics in this room , and particularly those outside Parliament , that I say : yes , the European Union has its own special role to play .
We will not succeed without the Americans , but neither will we succeed with the Americans alone .
What does that mean from my point of view ?
It means that the European Union must be critical of both sides ; critical towards Israel with regard to her reoccupation of Palestinian areas , the erection of blockades and extrajudicial executions .
On the other hand , however - and let there be no misunderstanding on this point - critical of the Palestinian authorities who could have done more and must do more in the future to combat terrorist attacks and dismantle networks .
However , whilst we wish to keep a balance , let us not forget that this is not a struggle between two equal parties .
It is the State of Israel that bears prime responsibility for the current conflicts and their resolution .
This means that we must exert as much pressure as possible on Israel to find a solution .
This means exerting pressure in order to prevent them from finding ways out and excuses for not starting negotiations when they could in fact be taking place .
This also means exerting pressure on Israel to distance herself from the kind of thinking which , for example , equates Arafat with Bin Laden .
This is a highly dangerous comparison which will only serve to make it extremely difficult for a solution to be found .
We also owe it to the winners of the Sakharov Prize to do all we can to keep their hope alive .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , I had just returned from a memorable trip to the Palestinian territories and Israel when I heard the news of the terrible carnage in Jerusalem , followed by a second attack in Haifa .
I was horrified by these deliberate and cruel acts of murder and I immediately expressed my deepest sympathy to the families of the victims .
I stressed that no cause can in any way justify the killing of innocent people .
Those responsible must be arrested , tried and punished .
You do not have to be a genius to understand that these latest crimes are disastrous for the Palestinian Authority .
During my visit to the region I was able to appreciate the difficulty in containing the exasperation of the people , especially those living in the refugee camps , in the face of the daily violent attacks by the occupying forces , and especially after the irresponsible assassinations of the long-established leaders of the fundamentalist groups .
I thought to myself , if the Israeli Government has decided to take revenge for the victims of attacks in its own way , the Palestinian Authority ' s remaining small margin for manoeuvre will be greatly reduced .
It would then become almost impossible to break the terrible vicious circle of humiliations , attacks , reprisals and revenge which the conflict has been in since the election of Ariel Sharon .
Now this has all come true , and how terribly !
Israel has wreaked revenge on the fundamentalists in a barrage of fire targeting Arafat .
The Palestinian police force , charged with arresting Hamas and Islamic Jihad activists , has itself been bombarded .
International Human Rights Day was marked in Hebron by the intolerable image of two children aged three and 13 blown apart by an Israeli missile that missed its suspect target .
Who can now doubt Ariel Sharon ' s desire to destroy the Palestinian Authority and all that remains of the Oslo process ?
What is Europe saying in the face of the very real danger of the total annihilation of the Palestinian nation and the overwhelming tidal wave of the fundamentalist reaction that would follow ?
Do we condemn Sharon ' s policy of adopting the worst possible line ?
Are we encouraging those courageous people in Israel who are calling for the resumption of negotiations ?
Are we congratulating the Palestinian Authority on its first arrests of fundamentalist activists , at some risk ?
Do we deplore the death of Palestinian civilians as much as we deplore the death of Israeli civilians ?
Do we at least repeat our long-standing call for international observers to be sent to the region ?
However unbelievable it may seem , none of the points I have mentioned appear in the European Union ' s press release .
On the contrary , the European Union has sent a message to the Palestinian Authority , whilst the press has highlighted the unprecedented severity of its tone .
Now the only hope rests on strong political intervention from the international community . At this time , it would be a tragedy if Europe were to turn a blind eye to the situation , and do nothing to stop George Bush from giving the green light to Ariel Sharon .
I think of the men and women of Israel and Palestine , who , like our Sakharov prize-winners Mrs Peled-Elhanan and Mr Ghazzawi , are counting on us to support their resistance , their hopes and their work towards a just peace .
Their struggle must remind us of our responsibilities .
Madam President , the day before yesterday the Council took a very clear position on the escalation of the Israeli / Palestinian conflict .
The fact is that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the EU Member States are placing political responsibility for the ongoing Palestinian suicide attacks on Israeli citizens where it belongs : with the Palestinian Authority .
Because of this , they demanded three things of the Palestinian Authority : the dismantling of the Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorist networks , the arrest and prosecution of all persons suspected of terrorist activities , and a public announcement in Arabic of the end of the Intifada , the Palestinian uprising .
Regrettably enough , I cannot consistently trace the Council ' s political clarity with regard to Palestinian terrorism back to the recommendations of this Parliament .
I am therefore standing by my Amendment No 6 even after the coordinators ' consultation this morning . The linking of support for the Palestinian Authority with the demands of the Council .
This amendment meshes with the spirit of the compromises that resulted from this consultation .
I therefore ask my colleagues to support this vote by roll call .
Madam President , if this Parliament does not clearly follow the same political line as the Council with regard to the insidious spread of Palestinian terror , the evil forces of 11 September will capitalise on this , because they are really not interested in what the European Parliament expressly states in this recommendation : a safe Jewish state in the Middle East .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are continuing to conduct an anti-Israeli campaign in the style of Picasso ' s Guernica , with children ' s bodies , usually , elsewhere , the victims of the US , here victims of the Israelis .
Commissioner Patten and we ourselves , with this draft motion , are rushing to provide the Palestinians , at last , with what they need , with what the Palestinian men and women - the Arabs , moreover , in general - and the victims of the dictatorships in the Arab world are certainly demanding .
We are making promises to Mr Arafat and we are agreeing to fight , but for what ?
To give them rights ?
To give them what all the human rights declarations in the world , including the European declarations , fail to recognise as an individual right ?
So you want to give them a national State .
This is precisely what they need : another Syrian or Yemeni national State , a State of whatever kind ; they need a national State .
Commissioner Patten , maybe this is what we need in Italy too to solve our problems ; maybe this is what you need in Great Britain to solve yours , would you not say ?
The illusion of possible national independence affects Israel too .
You wanted a Yugoslav national entity which would be neutral towards both parties .
Our pleas for democracy and Europe went unheeded .
Do not take sides . Be good Samaritans .
Mrs Morgantini is probably all set to call upon the Israeli soldiers to desert , as , on Italian television broadcast throughout the world , she urged the US and British soldiers to desert in the Afghanistan war .
You are the just like the pacifists and communists of 1938 who supported nazism and urged the allies and the French to desert in that war .
Well then , if this is what you are going to continue to propose , I feel that it is our duty to point out that the Palestinians and all the citizens in the world - but the Palestinians , in particular - have the right to say " no " , as do we on their behalf , to this illusion .
If there were three States - Jordan , Palestine and Israel - the State of Jordan would go immediately , and there would immediately be attempts to use Palestine to eliminate this oasis of democracy between Israel and Palestine representing a third of the democracy in the Middle East .
An emphatic ' no ' to this document , which places a condition on continuing our cooperation with Israel and places no condition on our supporting Yasser Arafat .
Well then : this Europe , this Palestine and this Arab world are , quite frankly , not ours .
We will vote accordingly .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , this morning we have all been moved by the testimony of Mrs Peled-Elhanan , who made this Chamber echo to the cries of child victims and the voices of mothers in mourning for them . Because these women have given life , they are now working to prevent further deaths as men continue the senseless killing .
We have also listened to Mr Ghazzawi ' s appeal for the dream of peace .
Our founding fathers shared this dream and it remains the cornerstone of the European Union .
In listening to Mrs Peled-Elhanan and Mr Ghazzawi , painful memories of past events in the Balkans came back to me . Political and military leaders ignored the fact that the majority of their people wanted peace .
They fought from intransigent positions , the result of their deep-rooted distrust of their enemies . In order to allay this distrust , the international community had to take resolute action .
This led to the signing of the Dayton agreement , which eventually led to a lasting cease-fire , guaranteed by the deployment of troops .
This force has not yet achieved its aim , but Mr Wurtz , it has succeeded in finally breaking the vicious circle of fear , violence and hate .
I think that the international community must today display the same resolve and commitment in response to the desire for peace of the majority of Israelis and Palestinians .
The European Union should lead this action .
I therefore welcome the statement made by the Council the day before yesterday explaining the impartial position of the European Union . The statement was remarkably strong and no less remarkably concise .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I am delighted to hear the European Union express its determination not to give in to a slide towards increasingly indiscriminate violence .
In the same spirit , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has worked on the recommendation drawn up by our chairman Elmar Brok . This will be submitted to our fellow members for approval .
I hope that Israeli and Palestinian political and military leaders will finally understand that we are only aiming to help them restart the peace process . They have already agreed on the basis of this peace process , but they do not want to implement it because both sides mistrust each other .
We implore them at least to trust the international community to guarantee the implementation of the peace process with the utmost impartiality .
We can and must undertake to do this .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , eight years after the Oslo accords and 15 months after the start of the second Intifada , the situation in the Middle East in December 2001 is disastrous .
Mr Sharon has not been able to keep his electoral promises regarding improving the security of Israel and its population .
The leader of the Palestinian Authority is weakened , surrounded and besieged in territories which are autonomous in name only .
The Palestinian civilians are more subjugated than ever before and do not have any future prospects .
The international community wants peace . It is now working towards an intermediary objective , but this is unattainable .
The objective is the plan named after the American Senator Mr Mitchell . The Mitchell Plan is well intentioned in that its primary aim is to put an end to the killing .
It is however misconceived . Every mini-agreement is reached on such a restricted basis that they remain at the mercy of the next suicide attack and then have to be re-established all over again .
Even supposing that the preconditions required by Mr Sharon are satisfied , and even supposing that the Mitchell Plan is implemented in full and with great difficulty , this will in no way address the fundamental causes of the conflict . Nor will the deep-seated personal hatred of Mr Sharon for Mr Arafat disappear as if by magic .
The fundamental causes of the conflict are to be found in the continuing occupation of the Palestinian and Syrian territories seized by Israel during the 1967 war . According to the winner of the Sakharov prize , Mrs Peled-Elhanan , who spoke to us this morning , this occupation is cruel .
Only when the army of occupation has withdrawn from all of these territories , including East Jerusalem , as the United Nations ' resolutions demand , will the conditions for a stable and lasting peace be created .
This is why the European Union should speak out in support of an immediate and definitive agreement to establish secure and internationally recognised borders . These would be protected if necessary by an international force for an interim period .
With the support of the European Union , all the countries of the region would then be able to embark upon the reconciliation and reconstruction process from new foundations .
Israel should withdraw to its 1967 international borders , and the Arab world must give its formal and binding recognition of these .
This is the overall objective that the Council should pursue determinedly on the world stage .
If we act in this way on the issue of Middle East , we will fulfil the role everyone wants us to take on .
What is required today is not an equidistant role but a fair role .
Madam President , the war in the Middle East has been going on for over a year now .
The Intifada and the Israeli reprisals continue , and the number of dead on both sides is growing . We feel impotent , concerned and extremely angry .
The extent of our anger is a measure of the hope we felt last year when the Middle East was within a whisker of a peace agreement .
We can blame Ariel Sharon for his policy of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' .
However Mr Sharon was not in power when Ehud Barak , Shlomo Ben Ami and Bill Clinton tried to persuade Yasser Arafat to sign a peace agreement which would have been historic .
That said , the past is the past , as Commissioner Patten so rightly said .
We still want to believe that there is light at the end of the tunnel , to paraphrase the words of the Belgian Presidency of the European Union .
We want to believe that the unprecedented appeal the European Union sent on Monday will be noted . Contrary to what was previously said in the House , this appeal was sent to both parties .
It presents Israel with her responsibilities , but for the first time the European Union makes an equally clear appeal to Mr Arafat to dismantle the Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorist networks .
There may be light in that yesterday Israel recognised that the Palestinian Authority had , for the first time , begun to take serious action to combat fundamentalists .
There is also light in that Mr Arafat has admitted , quite objectively , that the European Union ' s appeal is fair .
At lunchtime today , the Israeli Nurit Peled-Elhanan , winner of the Sakharov Prize 2001 , expressed the hope that the voices of the mothers of the Middle East would drown out the voices of those calling for arms .
We also hope and want to believe that European Union ' s voice will ring out loud and clear and help re-establish a spirit of hope .
Madam President , I am becoming more and more inclined just to stand back and watch us and watch you in silence .
I am tired , so tired of these repeated debates where it is so difficult to make progress : it would , however , be a silence in which you could hear the muffled voices of those who have been killed , who are calling for peace and justice , as Izzat Ghazzawi and Nurit Peled said this morning ; it would be a silence which tells the consciences of all men and women that there can only be peace in Palestine and Israel if the Palestinian people is allowed to exercise the right to live in its own State , existing alongside the State of Israel , in mutual security .
We must make this peace possible and not just by providing economic aid .
We see it every day .
What we build and our citizens pay for is destroyed by shells and bulldozers : from the airport to the port ; even the anti-terrorism laboratory was destroyed the day before yesterday .
I support the positions of Commissioner Patten and the Minister , but there can be no economic development if there is no release from Israeli military occupation .
Europe is resolutely taking this line .
A decision must be taken , even a unilateral decision , to establish international protection for the civilian population .
There is no equality between occupied and occupier .
We must take a balanced approach but not be afraid to make political choices .
For peace to be achieved we need clear measures , for our benefit and for the benefit of both Israelis and Palestinians .
Madam President , my group is deeply shocked by the violence that has once again flared up in the Middle East .
The people of Israel live in grief , fear and anger , but they at least have political freedom , elections , economic development and the hope of a better future .
It is in Israel ' s interest that the Palestinians also have hope for the future .
People who have hope have something to lose .
Without hope , there will never be the willingness to enter into compromises .
How can people be expected to hope as long as settlements are being built in their back yards , as long as collective punishments are being meted out for the outrages of the few , and as long as Europe does not take a stand against the gross violations of international law ?
It is a delusion that more force and more suppression will make the Palestinians more compliant .
There should be an international peace-keeping force monitoring the implementation of the Mitchell Agreement so that a start can be made with the immediate withdrawal from occupied territories and the immediate dismantling of all settlements .
Finally , I would like to ask the Commission a question .
European projects have been destroyed in Israeli attacks ; Commissioner Patten himself has already mentioned the forensic laboratory .
How extensive is the damage , and can Commissioner Patten promise that the Commission will recover the loss from Israel ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not really have much to add to what has been said during this debate , except to emphasise that the decisions of the Council , also in the light of what Commissioner Patten has said , are entirely focused on the future , and therefore contain a number of urgent reminders in respect of the two main parties involved , that is to say Israel on the one hand and the Palestinian Authority on the other , and are not intended to be a balanced and reasonable way of commemorating , mourning , and perhaps honouring the victims on both sides .

The violence is terrible . So indeed is the spiral of violence .
It seemed to us that an urgent call to action was required and that this urgent call needed to be addressed both to the Palestinian Authority and to Israel .
However , the operative part of the conclusions contains a plea for an early meeting at which the European Union , the United States , Russia , the Palestinian Authority and Israel sit down at the table to try to find a way out of the spiral of violence and extremism . That is our most fervent hope .
I do not think that it is helpful to try to accuse the Council of favouring one side over the other . That is not the case .
We are in favour of peace , and we are trying to do our level best to achieve it .
That is what this presidency is doing ; the next one will undoubtedly also be doing so , and we can definitely use all your support .
Mr President , I will first of all respond to the characteristically direct question from Mrs van der Laan .
We have done a calculation of the damage so far to our projects .
There are nine projects in all which have been damaged in one way or another .
The very approximate loss estimation is EUR 2.289 million with , for example , EUR 60 000 also lost with the bombing of the forensic laboratory which we had provided .
There was also some support from the Israeli Government to try to help the Palestinian security forces .
Those figures are extremely approximate .
If you think of the investment that has gone from Europe to the West Bank and Gaza over the years to try to establish decent services , to try to help in the creation of a potential viable state , the loss is incalculable .
That is the chartered accountant 's balance sheet so far and I hope it does not get any worse .
Perhaps I can just add one or two points in relation to the debate .
The honourable Member , Mr Poos , who does not use words lightly - he knows about these matters very well - described the situation as catastrophic and that is not too strong a word .
My honourable and gallant friend General Morillon reminded us of the consequences in the Balkans of intransigence .
Mr Lagendijk and Mrs Morgantini and others spoke about the moving speeches that we had heard this morning about the sacrifice of the next generation because the present generation cannot find a way of living peacefully together .
I suppose that when people can behave with that extraordinary resilience and courage and moderation , there is still some hope for the region .
My friend , the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee , Mr Brok , has said that the aim was that the three great religions that we saw represented here this morning should be able to live one day in the holy city in peace together which , in the words of an English poet , is " a consummation devoutly to be wished " .
I would just say one thing to Mr Belder - and I say it very gently and not critically because people are entitled to their own passions - and that is that I am not sure I share his view of balance .
I will tell you what my idea of balance is .
On Monday of this week a number of Palestinian and Israeli parliamentarians and intellectuals met at the Qalandia checkpoint to emphasise " the urgent need to continue dialogue between the two sides " , even when this is the only venue where it is possible to do so .
They argued that these meetings are especially important in the light of the escalation of violence through the past week which they said is threatening to drag their whole region into war .
If an immediate halt to the current cycle of violence is not achieved , the situation may spiral out of control , perhaps with irreversible consequences .
A group , including Yossi Beilin , the former Minister for Justice and one of the architects of the Oslo process , and Yasser Abed Rabbo , the Minister of Information and Culture in Palestine , argued that ending the current crisis entails the immediate abandonment of violence as a political tool and the unconditional implementation of the Tenet work plan and Mitchell report .
This requires immediate steps , including prevention and punishment of terrorist acts , the lifting of the closure on and withdrawal from the Palestinian areas and putting a stop to the policy of assassinations .
Settlement activity - they argued - is not compatible with an honest move to de-escalation and the pursuit of peace .
It must be halted .
Incitement in all its forms , both official and unofficial , cannot coexist with rebuilding a climate of trust and non-violence .
It must be ended .
We clearly state that under no circumstances should the Palestinian Authority or its presidency be harmed or targeted if a way out of this crisis is to be found .
I will tell you what I believe the European Union should be doing .
As long as there are any moderates on the two sides - in Israel and the Palestinian Authority - we should be there supporting them , supporting their courage , toleration and decency .
That is a balanced European Union policy .
I would say " Hosanna " , in suitably biblical form , to all the sentiments expressed in that joint statement .
I pray to God that in three , six or nine months ' time there are still some moderates left with the bravery and courage to offer a better prospect for the future of the region .
Many thanks , Commissioner , for your very moving appeal in this difficult situation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Mr President , I would like to send my greetings to a group of young people , who have not only the modest merit of coming from a town - Pontremoli , in the Lunigiana region - which is particularly dear to my heart and of which I am Mayor , but who I see as representative of the many young people who are looking to Europe .
They have had their eighteenth birthdays this year , 2001 , which is the year which has seen the most extreme world violence , but it is also the year in which many of the world ' s young people have gained the ability to exercise their full rights and responsibilities in coming of age .
I hope that this mediation operation , this firm moral message from Europe , will be a constructive witness for peace in the future for the young people of Europe and all the young people of the world .
Mr Mayor , that may well not have been quite on the agenda , but there is a saying from the Bible , to the effect that the mouth speaks out of the abundance of the heart .
In that sense , I too can to some extent understand your intervention .
Access to documents as implemented by Council and Commission
The next items on the agenda are the declarations by the Council and the Commission on access to documents as implemented by Council and Commission .
Whereas Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , the Minister , had earlier spoken at the end of a debate , she now has the opportunity and the pleasure of speaking on this subject at the beginning of this one , and we have the honour of hearing her .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the presidency of the Council gave you a commitment , through my good offices , to take the necessary provisions to keep to the deadline of 3 December 2001 for the implementation of the European Parliament and Council regulation of 30 May 2001 concerning public access to the documents of the European Parliament , Council and the Commission .
I am pleased to announce that the Council has kept to this deadline . It took the decision to modify its own internal regulations on 29 November this year .
This decision was published in the Official Journal of 30 November and came into force on 3 December , that is to say the same day when the regulation I referred to came into effect . It brings the provisions of the internal acts of the Council on access to documents together into a single instrument .
It also contains new provisions on the implementation of the regulation . In accordance with Article 2 of the decision , certain other acts have been repealed .
These are as follows . Firstly , the Council decision of 20 December 1993 on public access to Council documents , last modified by a decision of 14 August 2000 .
Secondly , a Council decision of 6 December 1999 concerning improving information on Council work and the public register of Council documents . Lastly , the Council decision of 9 April this year on the public communication of certain categories of Council documents .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the process concerning the right to access to documents that started with the Treaty of Amsterdam is being cast in a legal framework in this way .
However , a number of further provisions still need to be established .
The discussions amongst the institutions about the establishment of an interinstitutional committee that will examine what the best practices are , handle any disputes and discuss future developments relating to public access to documents in accordance with Article 15 of the regulation , are still ongoing .
The Council is of the opinion that this committee must be put together at the level of the secretaries-general of the three institutions concerned , and it must be able to submit questions of a general or political nature or relating to matters of principle to the chairmen of the three institutions .
As a result of the recent informal political trialogue between the Presidents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission of 28 November , the Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs de Palacio , formulated an interesting proposal as a solution to the problem of the level of representation within this interinstitutional committee .
Her proposal was to allow this committee to meet at secretary-general level by way of an authorisation - par délégation in French - from their political bosses .
I find this concept very interesting , and I told my fellow Presidents of Parliament and the Commission at the time that I would put this idea to the Council bodies for evaluation .
May I just explain what it is about , because this discussion between the Council and Parliament on the matter of the level at which discussions should take place seems rather parochial .
The Council is worried that the presidents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission would have to act as a kind of appeal court , as it were , if it were to be decided at Secretary-General level that access to a document cannot be granted .
We believe that this is not the kind of role that these presidents should play .
They must not become a kind of appeal court ; on the contrary , they must focus on broad issues , general questions , principles and the like .
And that is what concerns us .
It is not about the fact that the Council does not want this interinstitutional committee ; it is about making sure that we do not create a court of appeal that is approached quasi-systematically , because we do not think that that will be to anyone ' s benefit .
There are other bodies that can be enlisted for this purpose , and this is therefore at the heart of the discussion .
I thought that the suggestion by Mrs de Palacio , Vice-President of the Commission , offered a way out . For if the secretaries-general of the three institutions meet on the basis of an authority from their presidents , they will then have a mandate and in specific cases will then have to take decisions themselves concerning access to a document .
I am telling you this to clearly explain where the problem lies as far as the Council is concerned .
I hope that my fellow Council members will also find Mrs de Palacio ' s procedure positive and that we will be able to solve the problem in this way and get the interinstitutional committee off the ground .
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that Article 11 , Paragraph 2 of the Regulation gives 3 June 2002 as the last date by which the document registers must be operational .
How far have we got in this regard ?
As you know , the Council ' s document register has been available to the public since 1 January 1999 .
This register contains all the documents that have been put before the Council or the preparatory bodies and which either serve as the basis for consultations , or have a definite influence on the decision-making process , or give an indication of the situation in certain files .
In November of this year , this register contained references to more than 250 000 Council documents in all our official languages , and it provides access to the contents of more than 50 000 documents .
The register therefore seems to be an effective and reliable instrument with which the institutions ' documents can be identified and queried .
Since the register has been operational , there has understandably been a significant increase in the demand for documents , most of which have in fact been available in the register .
The number of consultations of the register is continuing to increase .
In 1999 , more than 70 000 hits resulting in about 600 000 requests were registered - and by this we mean screens consulted or clicked on .
In 2000 the number of hits and requests increased to 160 000 and 1 260 000 respectively .
This trend is continuing , and we have already had 130 000 visits and more than 1 million screens consulted in the first six months of 2001 .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as regards measures to ensure the public is made aware of the rights they have under the regulation , the three institutions concerned are at present examining the various , specific measures to be taken , such as jointly drawing up a practical guide for citizens .
In accordance with Article 9 ( 7 ) of the regulation , the Commission and the Council must inform Parliament of sensitive documents .
In this regard , the Council remains ready to conclude negotiations with Parliament on an inter-institutional agreement on common security and defence policy . This could be followed by other agreements , particularly on justice and home affairs .
However , given this situation , Parliament should re-examine its position on its application to annul the Council security regulation . It should also adopt measures on the protection of documents classified as sensitive , in compliance with its own Rules of Procedure as recently modified .
This would provide some assurance that these sensitive documents would be kept confidential within Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last month I came here to witness Parliament ' s adoption of the report by Mrs Maij-Weggen on amending Parliament ' s Rules of Procedure regarding public access to the documents of the three institutions .
This brought to an end some quite considerable work by Mrs Maij-Weggen , and also , if I may say so , by Mr Cashman .
A week ago , and a few days after the Council , the Commission adopted a decision amending its own Rules of Procedure .
Prior to this , on 28 November , we held a discussion to ensure the regulation is applied with the greatest transparency . It is true that we needed a few extra days for this .
This is why the definitive decision of the Commission was only taken on 5 December . This prompted a number of questions , and your President raised the issue with us .
I would like to reassure you in no uncertain terms that , in practice , these few days of delay had no repercussions for citizens .
The Commission has in fact been implementing the regulation of 30 May since 3 December .
Accordingly , we have a central point of access to the Secretariat-General of the Commission .
We have a postal address , an e-mail address and a fax number available for people to use . It is also possible to consult the Commission ' s website .
In addition , there is the new access guide produced by ourselves , which you have discussed , Minister . This will be available on the website from next week .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , as far as we are concerned , all the practical measures necessary for the implementation of the regulation are in place . In fact , the Commission services have already started processing applications to access the new database established in accordance with the regulation .
Article 18 of the regulation provides not only for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure , but also for the amendment of other existing provisions .
Therefore , the appropriate services of the Commission have checked whether the 1983 regulation on opening historical archives to the public was in accordance with the regulation on access to documents .
Some changes were needed . The Commission will shortly put to the Council and Parliament a proposal to change the regulation on historical archives .
The third consideration also concerns Article 18 of the regulation of 30 May . The Commission ' s services have drawn up a list of the rules which are to be found throughout Community law which concern access to documents or information within existing Community legislation .
This work has allowed us to identify almost fifty provisions that the Commission will examine in the light of the new regulation .
All provisions that do not comply with the new rules on access to documents will either be modified or repealed .
The fourth point I wanted to make today concerns how the regulation can be applied to agencies .
Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman , I understand that this is one of your concerns , which you have rightly raised .
The matter is included in the joint declaration adopted along with the regulation .
Work is under way on this issue too .
Since adopting the new regulation , the Commission has provided the agencies with information on it and had invited them to re-examine their own rules on access in the light of the regulation .
The existing instruments of incorporation of the agencies will be modified .
An additional clause will be included in the instruments of incorporation of new agencies .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission ' s services have drawn up a guide to inform citizens of their rights under the regulation . In the first instance , this guide will be available on the Commission ' s website in a few days ' time .
However , in the near future , we plan to develop a common citizens ' guide on all three institutions . I hope this will happen soon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have outlined all the work that the Commission has undertaken to implement this regulation on access to documents .
This work will of course be followed up by an interinstitutional committee . The committee will be set up shortly and will establish a firm foundation for our cooperation in implementing this new regulation .
Minister , I was pleased to hear you refer to the compromise proposal made by my colleague Mrs Loyola de Palacio on 28 November in the three-way discussion .
She put it forward because a solution has to be found .
I would like to thank you Minister for having noted that Mrs de Palacio put forward this compromise proposal with due regard for Parliament ' s concern that political authority should play its full part in the interinstitutional committee .
In order to apply the regulation , each institution has worked independently to modify their own Rules of Procedure when they judged it appropriate .
For its part , the Commission will continue to respect this independence .
The Commission hopes to respect the spirit and the letter of this new regulation , which , we believe , represents a real step forward in terms of transparency and democracy within the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , Minister , the public access to documents regulation , better known as the Act on the public nature of Government , was approved in May this year after protracted negotiations .

My colleague Mr Cashman , the President Mr Watson and myself were very closely involved in this .
It was agreed at the time that the practical implementation had to be ready by 3 December , and that applied to all three institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
The registers were to be ready by 3 June 2002 , and today is 12 December .
Where are we now , one week on from 3 December ?
Parliament approved its revised Rules of Procedure on 13 November , and Parliament ' s Bureau saw to its implementation on 28 November .
So as far as we are concerned , everything is in order .
However , as Parliament we feel partly responsible for what the Commission and the Council do , and that is why we have opened this debate .
First the Council : the Council adapted its Rules of Procedure to the regulation on 29 November and published them on 3 December - just in time , in other words .
Two comments : firstly an earlier comment about the Solana decisions .
It is not entirely clear from the Rules of Procedure whether or not the Solana decisions have been overruled by the regulation .
Can Mrs Neyts please once again give us a very clear answer on this ?
And then a comment about Article 12 , Paragraph 5 , of the Council Decision , which states that notes , letters and suchlike relating to legislation and addressed to the Coreper , for example , are indeed covered by the regulation .
However , Article 6 states that if Member States make comments about European legislation with regard to the Council or the Coreper in individual notes or letters , these do not have to be published .
It seems to me that this is not acceptable .
In the Netherlands , letters from a municipality to the national government always have to be published , and it seems to me that this should also be the case for Member States in respect of the Council .
And then the Commission ; the Commission implemented an amendment to the Rules of Procedure on 28 November and approved it on 5 December .
Now , I am not quibbling over the two days ' delay , but I do have a few comments to make .
The first is that the Commission has decentralised the implementation of the regulation .
Is that wise ?
However , I have now heard Mr Barnier say that there will be one PO box and one e-mail address after all .
So why is that not spelled out clearly in the Rules of Procedure ? I cannot find it .
My second comment is about the following problem : why hasn ' t the Commission produced a clear definition of the term ' document ' , as Parliament and the Council have done ?
My third point is Article 8 of the Commission Decision .
Why is it so vague about the author of the document ? Is his name not allowed to be known if he is an official ?
After all , he puts his signature to it in this position , so I believe that this should fall under openness .
It is also not entirely clear what will happen with the agencies .
The Commissioner has said something about that , but has the Commission initiated anything in this area ?
And then the security rules . Nothing has been published about these either .
Why have the Council ' s security rules been published and not the Commission ' s ?
And now to my last comment , and I would like to pick up on Mrs Neyts ' point .
I do not know whether it is wise to have an interinstitutional committee on a non-political level .
Do you have to do this on an official level ?
I am very hesitant about that . I think that more consultation is needed on this point ; at least we have stated in our Rules of Procedure that one of our Vice-Presidents would have to be responsible for it and Parliament would have to back this pronouncement .
Mr President , first of all let me remind both the Council and Commission that the purpose of the regulation is : " to give the fullest possible effect to the right of public access to documents and to lay down the general principles and limits on such access " .
When looking at the Council and Commission decisions , I see an attempt to rewrite the regulation , in particular references to it in Article 9 of the Commission decision - documents which do not reflect opinions or individual opinions will not be made available .
The same applies to Article 11 of the Council decision .
I should like to remind both the Council and Commission that a restriction on access to documents can only refer to the exemptions listed in Article 4 and Article 9 , which in turn relate back to Article 4 .
Equally , in the Commission 's proposals , third country nationals are denied the right of complaint to the European Ombudsman - again , a violation of the spirit of the regulation .
Under delegated powers the Commission believes it will not make legislative papers available until adoption of the final text .
I would remind the House and the Commission that 90 % of some 5 000 legislative acts adopted every year in the Union are under delegated powers .
The Council has widened access to some of its internal documents , but maintains confidentiality on Member State demands on national delegations and national positions .
Why is it that six months after the regulation entered into force , no information campaign has been launched by the institutions ?
Why ?
When are we going to have the Commission 's proposals on amending secondary legislation ?
Has the Commission adopted security rules ? If so , can it publish them according to the regulations ?
When will Parliament adopt its own security rules ? I am extremely worried that if someone were now to approach and gain access via either the Commission 's decision or the Council 's decision we would see a violation of the regulation .
Furthermore , I should like to echo Mrs Maij-Weggen 's very important point .
It is not acceptable that we should have secretaries-general representing politicians in this interinstitutional committee .
Politicians must be accountable and responsible for their decisions .
' May we see the telephone directory ? '
' Sorry , this has certainly not been classified information for two years , but you cannot be given it . '
' How many laws are there ? '
' Sorry , we are not counting . '
' How many projects are you running ? '
' We stopped counting when we reached 100 000 . '
' How many committees are there ? '
' Sorry , that is a secret . '
' Who takes part in the preparative meetings ? '
' That is unfortunately something we do not know . '
' But you pay travel expenses , do you not ? '
' Sorry , we do not know whom we pay these to . '
' May I see which laws are being negotiated with the twelve applicant countries , together with the screening reports ? '
' Sorry . '
Those are the types of answer which we , who have been elected to monitor the Commission and the Council , have received .
Like the Ombudsman , the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control , we are unable to obtain what ought to be available to elected representatives in all parliaments .
On 3 December , the regulation on public access to documents came into force .
We were right there with a renewed request to scrutinise the documentation , but the officials discovered that there was nothing to be made available on the basis of the new rules , either .
We have asked for a complete list of committees and working parties and the members of these .
We have asked for details of the enlargement negotiations and to see the declarations and statements associated with current laws .
When we debated the regulation on public access to documents , Parliament ' s rapporteurs expected us to be able to obtain that type of information in the future .
I should therefore like to ask our rapporteurs if they will be involved in taking proceedings against the Commission if our renewed request for access to documents also fails in the end to produce a satisfactory answer .
Mr President , most people say they believe in open and transparent government .
I am quite sure the Commission and the Council are genuine in what they say .
I congratulate them on the progress made so far but none of us should deceive ourselves into thinking that we do not need a lot more work before Europe is truly open and transparent .
I want to use my time to cite just one example - a petition to the European Parliament from various names at Lloyds of London .
The petition claims that the United Kingdom Government has not properly applied the EU insurance directives .
As a result of the petition the Commission very properly submitted , over a year ago , questions to the United Kingdom Government .
That is when secrecy and cover-up begin .
The Commission has allowed members of the Committee on Petitions - but only members - to see the actual questionnaire , and then only under extremely stringent conditions .
Why not reveal the questions to the public , why not to the petitioners ?
The Commission would show it is doing its job .
As for the answers , they are top secret .
Nobody is allowed to know them - neither the Members of Parliament nor the petitioners - nobody .
The UK Government says it is an informal communication and that it does not reveal informal communications .
The Commission says that under the Framework Agreement it is not allowed to reveal the answers because there may be legal proceedings .
The British Government does not have a leg to stand on .
If this is not a formal communication , I would like to know what is .
The Commission may have some argument , but I would remind the Commissioner of the Zwartveld judgement .
In 1990 the Commission refused access to documents because it claimed there might be legal proceedings .
The ECJ insisted that the documents were presented .
So I would say to the Commissioner this afternoon - you have made some progress but I can give you this example to show that a great deal of progress is still needed in this respect .
Mr President , we are talking today about the implementation of the regulation on public access to documents : the famous Act on the public nature of Government .
We had a nice compromise , the best result we could have achieved this spring , a reasonable improvement on the Commission ' s original proposals and the existing Rules of Procedure .
We have essentially brought together the best practices of our Member States to form a new European standard .
What we now have to do is to implement it , of course , and we must do all we can to really make it a success .
As the European Parliament , we naturally want to keep a very close eye on how this will be done in practice , and my colleagues Mr Cashman and Mrs Maij-Weggen have put forward a series of in-depth questions and comments which I wholeheartedly support .
We attach a great deal of importance to the annual report which will be issued about the implementation of the public access regulation and it is very significant for us that we have heard the Council ' s and the Commission ' s explanation here today .
When I hear the comments about the institutional tale of the Secretaries-General , I am of the same opinion as my colleagues ; namely that it sounds as if we are putting it on an official institutional level instead of on a political one .
If you say general and policy criteria , then I would rather speak on a political level .
The 3 December deadline came around very quickly , of course , and we ourselves were only ready in November .
We now have to put our money where our mouth is . But then I look at the Council and I notice that the documents relating to the Justice and Home Affairs Council have not yet been released , or that not all documents have been included in the register .
Then things start getting tricky again , because then I think : let ' s make giving access to our citizens our number one priority , otherwise it sounds as if we are being contemptuous .
I have two specific questions for the Commission and the Council in addition to my colleagues ' questions .
How many sensitive documents have been included in the register so far ?
How are the Commission and the Council informing citizens about the possibilities offered by the Act on the public nature of Government , apart from the guide which Commissioner Barnier announced ?
The Act on the public nature of Government is to be evaluated in 2004 .
If it then turns out that the regulation does not guarantee sufficient public access , it will be our duty as Parliament to make sure that it does , because we must never lose sight of the fact that the picture that our citizens have of us sitting working in little closed rooms must never be accurate .
This regulation is a fantastic way of doing this differently , but we will have to ensure that it is not just a series of fine words and that it can actually be implemented in practice .
I am greatly looking forward to hearing the answers , particularly to my colleagues ' critical questions .
Mr President , I am sorry that my comments have to be directed at Commissioner Barnier , whom I hold in the highest regard , because my complaint applies to a different Commissioner .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , and to follow on from what Mr Perry has already said , I should point out that this is not the first time the Commission has refused to divulge the contents of documents and other records which we need to see if we are to draw the right conclusions and make the right decisions in cases where European citizens have taken recourse to the European Parliament .
This refusal on the part of the Commission infringes , in my view , the principle of transparency and hampers the Committee on Petitions in its work .
The main excuse for the Commission 's refusal is that the information and documents requested would disclose sensitive personal data .
The merits of this contention are contested both by the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman .
To give you an example , the Commission refuses to give us the names of the representatives of a professional organisation whom it consulted and who , it appeared , influenced its decision .
We deny that this is how personal data is protected and are worried that a possibly less than transparent deal is being hushed up .
Mr Perry also referred to the Lloyd ´ s affair .
I have to tell you that this hush-up conceals bankrupt companies , a great deal of human misery and several suicides , which is why the report by the chairman of the Committee on Petitions , Mr Gemelli , which Plenary adopted today , calls for the powers and efficiency of the Committee on Petitions to be enhanced so that petitioners can obtain justice promptly and avert irreparable damage , for example to the environment or cultural monuments .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will limit myself to answering the questions that have been asked , the question from the rapporteur , Mrs Maij-Weggen , as to whether the new decisions overrule the so-called Solana decisions ; the answer is yes , they do .
As far as the committee on an institutional level is concerned , I would reiterate that the Council has no objections at all to this committee starting work ; the only question is whether it will be beneficial for the presidents to meet and take the decisions ?
If it is a question of general principles , I do in fact believe that it will have to be the presidents who do this , although this is only my personal point of view .
The solution I have outlined does in fact provide for this .
The only thing that I personally do not regard as a favourable development is the situation where the presidents would become a kind of court of appeal , as it were , if a common decision not to permit access to a certain document or a certain type of document has been taken at the highest official level .
I think that the result will be like a game of ping-pong right up to the highest official level .
I would , however , like to emphasise that the political level is of course always accessible and politically responsible for what the official level decides , including what the highest official level decides .
I do not understand the distinction that some of you are making , as if the official level should by definition not be responsible and the political level should be to the greatest possible degree .
This is not the case ; this is not my philosophy ; it may be yours , but I do not share it .
I think that we must take another clear look at these things .
It has been pointed out that there are a number of Council documents relating to justice and home affairs that have not yet been included in the Register .
That is right .
We are waiting for the Rules of Procedure on guaranteeing the security of documents , which your Parliament has yet to vote on .
Until such time as this has been done , we find it particularly difficult to make highly sensitive documents accessible , even to your worthy institution .
Mr President , I would now like to respond in as much detail as possible to those who have contributed to the debate .
In general , I am not surprised at the expressions of impatience and vigilance , and at the calls for further action directed at the Commission .
Mrs Maij-Weggen , you reminded us , although I had already done so , that the Commission arrived at its decision after several days extra delay , which we really needed . As you can imagine , I took part in all these debates within the College to assess the implications of this new system , this new instrument for the internal organisation of the Commission .
However , I have assured you , very candidly , that these extra days we required in no way prevented the system from coming into operation on 3 December .
Ladies and gentlemen , there have indeed been results since 3 December , as I said to Mr Bonde , who asked me about this . Since then , we have already received quite a number of inquiries .
These have been processed by the Commission ' s services , according to the new procedures . Mrs Maij-Weggen , the register you mentioned will come into operation in June , on 3 June next year .
You also remarked that there is some uncertainty over the author of the report , as did Mr Cashman .
We refer to the author of the document in Article 8 of our text . We have not gone into further details on this as , naturally , the author ' s description depends on the nature of the document .
Documents may be written by an institution , another public authority , a natural person , a civil servant or a private company . I would therefore like to explain that the precise description of the author depends of course on the nature of the document .
However , this register will indeed come into operation on 3 June next year , we are working to meet this deadline .
Mrs Maij-Weggen , I would also like to say that the Secretariat-General has a centralised management structure .
As I said a few minutes ago , we have , for instance , an e-mail address , a postal address and a fax number that can be used .
We can therefore reply to people if they write to any specific Directorate-General .
If a problem arises , the Secretariat-General acts as arbitrator . However , we have a central main address and the Directorates-General can reply .
Of course , the decision is taken in the first instance by the Directorate-General which produced the document .
I would now like to address the definition of the document , a subject you are all concerned with . Mrs Maij-Weggen , as I said when I spoke a few minutes ago , we did indeed restrict ourselves to reading the text of the regulation which gives a broad and neutral definition .
This was the wish of the Community legislator and we did not want to limit the scope of our own Rules of Procedure .
As regards the security rules , which you and Mr Cashman also mentioned , I can confirm that these rules , adopted at the end of November , will be published very shortly .
Publication is only being delayed by legal and language issues . I would like to ask for your understanding on this matter .
However , the security rules will be published very shortly . In any case , in the light of what you both said on this matter , we will further increase the speed of work towards publication .
Mr Cashman , you also referred to the need for a publicity campaign .
I promise you we will ensure that information on this new regulation , the arrangements entailed and the new provisions available to citizens is disseminated as widely as possible .
Unless I am very much mistaken , the three European institutions decided not to hold a publicity campaign on this regulation at the forum of the inter-institutional technical working party . However , we will publicise the existence of this citizens ' guide thorough our website and all our documents .
The citizens ' guide will be available online in the near future .
We will henceforth promote this transparency and openness as endorsed or extended by this regulation .

Mrs Hautala , you mentioned the issue of the inter-institutional committee , as did Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cashman , I cannot elaborate further on what I have already said , though I do appreciate Parliament ' s concern over a sense of political responsibility .
Mrs de Palacio ' s compromise proposal endeavours to go as far as possible towards meeting Parliament ' s wishes .
I think you understand this .
To sum up , I told Mr Bonde that we have had results . We are receiving our first inquiries and we are processing them according to the new regulation .
Mr Perry and Mr van den Berg bear out this concern for vigilance .
I believe that this regulation can bring about real progress . Maybe other regulations will go further .
We will see the effects of change as we go along . I promise that the Commission is wholeheartedly committed to implementing this regulation .
I would now like to address the need for transparency and democracy as far as citizens are concerned . The regulation is an initial response to this .
We must also respond in other ways .
This is also one of the issues of institutional reform and the Laeken Declaration . It is also the subject of the open debate that will be possible within the framework of the convention and the forthcoming reform in 2004 .
In my opinion there is still much to be done to increase transparency and democracy and to ensure citizens are more closely involved in the decisions we take .
Then , Mr Marinos asked me a question on the ability of the Committee on Petitions to access documents .
Access is of course possible , though we must respect the protection of personal data . The documents of third parties can be accessed but they remain protected by Article 4 of the regulation , which must be adhered to .

Lastly , Mr Cashman asked me a question on the significant issue of the Ombudsman . I would like to respond to this .
Although I know that you are aware of this , I would like to confirm that the Treaty and the very statute of the Ombudsman means that complaints from third-country citizens living outside the Union cannot be dealt with . This is all I wanted to say to you .
Thank you again for your contributions and your vigilance .
Your reactions came as no surprise to me . We shall henceforth take them into account when implementing this regulation in a specific and operational manner .
Mr President , I would like to put a question to the Commissioner .
Is this the way in which the principle of transparency is to be applied , for two days ago it was impossible to discover which regulations you had adopted on access to documents .
It is reminiscent of Orwell ' s Animal Farm , where some are more equal than others .
Despite searching , I have been unable to obtain access to your decision .
This is not the way that transparency should function , with its taking more than a week to obtain information .
Secondly , your reaction to the special report of the Ombudsman which was approved ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the Commissioner intimates that we have been given an answer .
We have not .
We tried to renew our old request to Mr Prodi .
That was agreed .
The same day , officials told us that nothing at all new could be made available under the new regulation .
So there is nothing new .
We had raised another question with Mr Prodi in the Conference of Presidents .
We were given promises from both ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , this debate has been quite unsatisfactory and , under the pertinent rule in our Rules of Procedure , I wish to propose to my committee and to the House that we have a resolution to close this debate , to vote on it at our January part-session , and to look at what further action we need to take , given the quite unsatisfactory nature of the responses from the Council and Commission .
Yes , that is a suggestion we will take up .
Mr President , on a point of order , I made quite a serious allegation that there was an attempt to rewrite the regulation .
That has not been addressed .
I maintain that allegation in that both the Council and Commission have introduced a new mandatory and blanket exception on the basis of opinions or individual opinions .
This is not contained in the regulation .
I direct honourable Members to Article 4 ( 3 ) - public interest disclosure .
It has to be proven that such disclosure would undermine the institution 's ability to function .
Mr President , I understand that the debate is closed , but I am here and I am ready to continue .
I am trying to understand why the Chairman , Mr Watson , has said that we have failed to answer the questions .
I have tried to take note of all contributions as quickly as possible . I have also tried to respond in as much detail as possible to at least the main questions , which I was naturally able to answer immediately .
I am willing to appear again before your committee , Mr Watson , and to continue this dialogue .
I have explained the spirit in which the Commission took this decision a few days ago .
The communication to which you refer , Mrs Thors , is certainly possible . I shall endeavour to let you have a copy of our decision , if you have been unable to obtain a copy through any other means .
I have informed you that since 3 December citizens have been able to access Commission documents within the terms of this regulation . We will provide concrete confirmation of this trend , and we remain wholeheartedly committed to applying the spirit and letter of this regulation .
I have tried to respond as fully and as sincerely as possible to the questions put to me . I feel that I had to reiterate this point , Mr President , with your permission .
Question Time ( Council )
As they deal with the same subject , Question Nos 1 to 4 will be taken together .
Question No 1 by ( H-0861 / 01 ) :
Subject : Informal European Council meeting in Ghent on the Laeken declaration On Wednesday , 4 July a representative of the Belgian Presidency of the EU spoke in positive terms of the role of constitutional regions in the process of European integration . You can count on it , and I am speaking on my own behalf and on behalf of Belgium , that we will do our utmost to broach this subject .
But there are also 14 other Member States , and it will therefore be important that the constitutional regions ensure they themselves work closely in harmony , Ms Neyts stated . In a joint declaration issued at the end of May , seven constitutional regions expressed a clear , united position in favour of greater Treaty-based involvement in the European project .
At the informal European Council meeting in Ghent on 19 October , EU Member States promoted the Convention procedure to prepare for further reform of the EU / EC Treaties .
Does the Council endorse the request by Catalonia , Salzburg , Scotland , Flanders , Wallonia , Bavaria and North Rhine-Westphalia to be directly involved in the Convention to prepare for further reform of the EU / EC Treaties ?
If not , why is it opposed to greater Treaty-based involvement of constitutional regions in mapping out the future of Europe ?
Question No 2 by ( H-0862 / 01 ) :
Subject : Regions ' powers in a globalised world In Nice an additional Declaration on the future of the Union was annexed to the Treaty .
It offered , inter alia , the prospect of a more precise delimitation of powers between the EU and the Member States , reflecting the principle of subsidiarity .
I am not alone in thinking that regions with greater powers within the European Union are a precondition for a more workable , democratic and transparent Europe .
Furthermore , such European regions are closer to citizens and form a new framework with which the latter can identify , preventing movements such as that of the ' democratic globalists ' becoming a movement feeding off anti-European sentiment .
The Council , the European Commission and the European Parliament have a duty , at this key point in the process of European integration , to be resolute and united in opting for a clear division of powers between the EU , the Member States and the regions .
Does the Council intend to give concrete shape to the concept of the delimitation of powers between the Union , the Member States and the regions at Laeken ?
If so , how precise is this delimitation to be , and will adequate account be taken of the subsidiarity principle ?
If not , does the Council consider itself to be sufficiently armed in the face of the growing gap between European citizens and institutions and in the face of growing antipathy within certain movements to all forms of expansion in scale whether at European or world level ?
Question No 3 by , which has been taken over by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0863 / 01 ) :
Subject : Informal European Council meeting in Ghent on the Laeken declaration On Wednesday , 4 July a representative of the Belgian Presidency-in-Office of the EU spoke in positive terms of the role of different nationalities and constitutional regions in the process of European integration . You can count on it , and I am speaking on my own behalf and on behalf of Belgium , that we will do our utmost to broach this subject .
But there are also 14 other Member States , and it will therefore be important that the constitutional regions ensure they themselves work closely in harmony , Ms Neyts stated . At the informal European Council meeting in Ghent on 19 October , the Laeken declaration and the future of the European Union were discussed .
In connection with the process of establishing a constitution for the European Union , which , for some , goes hand in hand with simplification of the Treaties , does the Council intend to ensure that the principle of constitutional pluralism is enshrined in the Laeken declaration , so that the constitutions of the Member States and their nationalities and states exist independently of , and do not depend for their validity on , a possible EU constitution ?
Question No 4 by ( H-0864 / 01 ) :
Subject : Informal European Council meeting in Ghent on the Laeken declaration On Wednesday , 4 July a representative of the Belgian Presidency-in-Office of the EU spoke in positive terms of the role of constitutional regions in the process of European integration . You can count on it , and I am speaking on my own behalf and on behalf of Belgium , that we will do our utmost to broach this subject .
But there are also 14 other Member States , and it will therefore be important that the constitutional regions ensure they themselves work closely in harmony , Ms Neyts stated . At the informal European Council meeting in Ghent on 19 October , the Laeken declaration was discussed .
Are the powers and position of internal political entities in the Member States in respect of their relations with the EU institutions in an executive , legislative and legal connection to be enshrined in the Laeken declaration ?
If not , why does the Council oppose recognition in the Laeken declaration of the powers and position of internal political entities in the Member States in respect of their relations with the EU institutions in an executive , legislative and legal connection ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to the questions by Mr Bart Staes , Mr Camilo Nogueira Román , Mr Miquel Mayol i Raynal and Mrs Nelly Maes concerning the content of the future Laeken Declaration , the Council can only in the first instance refer to future discussions of the European Council which are yet to take place .
It is indeed up to the European Council to adopt the practical rules and the framework of ideas for the Convention which has to prepare the forthcoming IGC .
This framework should encompass , inter alia , the list of the issues to be discussed , as well as give indications as to how these issues could be tackled most effectively .
The Council will not confine itself to the description of the above-mentioned elements , but will also remind us that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference must find concrete answers to the questions raised .
However , in the light of the Declaration of Nice regarding the Union ' s future , it is obvious that one of the topics that will need to be discussed in the next few months is a more clearly defined demarcation of powers between the European Union and the Member States pursuant to the subsidiarity principle .
Back in July , a number of you already asked the Council - through myself as its personal representative - various questions about these constitutional aspects , and I responded to you at the time . In my response , not only did I officially refer to the preparation of the future IGC , but also to the presidency ' s report to the European Council of Gothenburg , in which numerous initiatives are mentioned that are taking place in the Member States in which various regional entities were involved , as well as events that are organised within the framework of the debate in the Committee of the Regions on this issue .
The presidency has now read the resolution on the strengthening of the roles of the regions within the European Union with great interest . The resolution was adopted in Liège on 15 November by the Conference of Presidents of the regions with legislative powers , as they will be referred to henceforth .
The Committee of the Regions ' opinion which pertains to the participation of that Committee to the future Convention is now also known .
However , no decision has been taken on the issues regarding the organisation of the debate and the topics which need to be discussed .
As I have already said , these are matters to be dealt with by the European Council of Laeken .
Speaking for myself , I should like to add that I am very keen to find out when the debate within the Committee of the Regions will be opened , for this is an issue that is being avoided at all costs by those involved .
Outside the Committee , a number of its members complain about the fact that surely , a distinction should be drawn between those who have this legislative power and those who have not .
The Committee itself is keeping tight-lipped . I have to say , I have some qualms on the matter .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , you will understand , of course , that those posing questions have scheduled this Question Time at a very strategic moment , namely a few hours , a few days away from the Council of Laeken .
We would be delighted if you were to give us an idea of what will be discussed at that Council .
Prime Minister Verhofstadt has toured the capital cities and paid a visit to Madrid yesterday .
Madrid is a difficult customer in this regional issue .
The Spanish Government has more or less made the fight against terrorism its number one priority .
In Spain , defending the rights , the real rights of nations and regions is often considered as terrorism or part of terrorism , and this is of course unacceptable .
This is not a European stance that we can accept .
I would very specifically like to ask you whether the difficulties which the Spanish very often cause with regard to the representation in the Committee of the Regions have meanwhile been resolved and secondly , and whether they will indeed not be opposed to the concept of ' constitutional region ' being mentioned in the Declaration of Laeken .
I would be very obliged if you would look into this .
Honourable Members , I cannot answer that question for the very simple reason that I do not know the answer .
Since I did not have the opportunity of accompanying the Prime Minister to Madrid , I do not know exactly what was discussed . Consequently , I am unable to answer your question in the light of this lack of knowledge .
I am sorry , I do not know .
I am certain that the topic has been discussed , but I am ignorant of the content of the discussion .
I was not there and I have not had the time to find out .
I apologise .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would lend you my mobile , but unfortunately , it is broken .
I wanted to ask you what place the regions will occupy within the framework of the Convention .
I know there are certain things to which you do not know the answer , but we would be very interested to find out whether the regions will actually have the role that was assigned for them by the Belgian Presidency .
We hope that you have been able to adhere to that position after that tour of the various capital cities .
With regard to your own challenging question about your opinion on the Committee of the Regions , I would like to state that , as you know , the constitutional regions are very much in the minority in the Committee of the Regions , and it is of course unnecessary to stage one ' s own defeats .
The Committee of the Regions was composed in such a way as to ensure that the constitutional regions would form a minority , and I would want them to be considered as federal states that , in the course of history , have never been given the chance to develop into Member States .
If you allow me , I would also point out that there will be a number of small states that will soon be joining , including Malta , Cyprus , Slovakia , etc .
You will understand that the constitutional regions would feel cheated if they were not to have any rights at all in this company .
I should like to say to Mrs Maes that she is fully aware of the dangers of swapping mobiles and subsequently leaving them switched on , but this is a Belgian inside joke , Mr President , which all fellow countrymen will be able to enjoy to the full , and this is why it is best if we did not .
This was the first point I wanted to make .
Secondly , I have never been aware of the fact that being in a minority is a reason not to engage in a certain fight which is deemed justified .
The times may have changed , but we used to think differently about this .
It is , of course , true that the regions with legislative powers are in the minority in the Committee of the Regions , but I would question whether this was done on purpose .
I do not believe so , but this is a matter of opinion .
I can only note that the discussion on this point is far more heated outside the Committee than it is inside .
This is my observation , and maybe this may change one day , but not in the foreseeable future .
I have my own thoughts about a fight which is not even fought at the right forum , but this is my personal opinion .
Mrs Maes , I have read the text , the appeal to the Belgian Presidency which was published either yesterday or the day before .
I cannot share the opinion that regions are a kind of Member State , as it were , but which , by a stroke of really bad luck , ended up not being Member States .
This is a reasoning which could , of course , be taken to extremes , bordering the absurd .
The reply I received from a State Minister of the Indian State of Andarpradesh to my question how many people lived in that province , will always stay with me .
He said 79 million .
79 million for Andarpradesh , just imagine .
This compares to a large Member State in Europe .
But this is not how things work , evidently .
It is the statute according to public and international law of an entity that determines the position of this entity in the hierarchy .
Belgium has found a solution with which you are familiar .
I also believe that we are perfectly entitled to propagate this solution or to publicise it to the others , which is what Belgium did .
It is therefore also the other Member States which , if necessary , should do this for their own delegations and should not expect the Union to solve the problem which they have , as yet , been unable to solve within their own borders , but , honourable Members , this is a strictly personal opinion .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , today , we want to strengthen the new , not only economic , but political and social , identity of Europe .
I think that in order to do this we need to find a new internal structure that is suited to the reality of our diversity .
Our present reality is not , however , simply shaped by the Member States alone , but there is a greater diversity and richness , represented culturally and socially by the historic peoples and nations of Europe and , politically , by the federated States , constitutional regions and autonomous communities , in particular , and also , of course , on another level , by the purely administrative regions , the provinces and the local authorities .
Do you not think , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that , by virtue of the mandate laid down in the Treaty of Nice , that in the Laeken Declaration , this question of European diversity , of the different cultural , social and political realities , should be specifically included as an important part of the debate to take place during the years 2002 and 2003 on the future of the Union and the division of competences between the institutions , in order to seek and find the best possible structure , which will allow us to share , without tension or conflict , the various , necessary levels of competence and sovereignty in existence in Europe ?
Mr President , in response to the remarks that have just been made , I think it is important to bear the nature of the issue in mind .
On the one hand , we have the cultural , linguistic and other diversities which constitute one of the greatest resources of the European Union and of Europe in general .
I am aware that these diversities are presented as one of the European Union ' s most important assets in the present version of the text .
This poses no problem .
On the other hand , we have the question of whether we should depart from what , to date , has been current European Union practice . The various institutions of the European Union do not concern themselves in assessing the constitutional arrangements of Member States , providing of course that these arrangements are compatible with fundamental principles , such as human rights and the protection of minorities and so on .
This is our ongoing policy .
I think that we should not confuse respect for diversities with a departure of this nature .
In essence , this would involve breaking a long tradition . I regard this as a wise tradition , although this is merely my personal opinion .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , it does seem that Belgium has found an institutional solution to its diversity .
It is a solution that you are pleased with and I welcome this .
For those who are not directly involved , Belgium ' s constitutional structure is of a complexity that pays tribute to the ingenuity of your public law specialists , but it is a solution which I would describe as bespoke .
As you know , I support independence for Catalonia and I do not think this is a viable solution for Catalonia , for instance , within the Spanish State .
The question I have , therefore , is very simple .
Constitutional regions aside , although I recognise that these present some difficulties , could we not include , in the future European constitution , a right that , in my view , is elementary , which is the right to self-determination .
Do the Catalan people not have the right to self-determination , will they not have the right , one day , to their own State within the European Union ?
Given that Slovenia will soon be a member of the EU , why should Catalonia not be a member as well ?
I repeat , that is not the question .
The Member States belong at a specific level in the hierarchy of political entities of public administrative law and international law .
This is a factual reality that you can - and that is another debate - desire to change , you are entitled to do this .
I think that it is too early to say what the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will do .
The IGC , as you know , will work on the basis of a mandate which is due to be drawn up and approved by all the European institutions .
In any case , it will certainly not turn out to be a repeat of the Congress of Vienna or the Congress of Versailles , but I could of course be mistaken .
Without giving my personal opinion which , as President , I should not do , I would like to support the President-in-Office of the Council in her opinion that the questions are not following any kind of logical order .
The questions we are dealing with are on the subject of the Laeken European Council and the current European Union , however interesting the proposals made by some Members of this House may be .
I now give the floor to Mr MacCormick for a supplementary question .
I wonder whether I might say with real sincerity what a pleasure it is to take part in Question Time when Mrs Neyts is with us because she really does make an effort to answer the question fully and faithfully .
That is genuinely appreciated .
I hope you will pass this message to your Prime Minister and try to ensure , when the Council meets next week , that it really does address itself to the issue of democracy in Europe .
We face a crisis of democracy in the Union and it will become in some ways yet more acute as the Union enlarges .
If people in the regions and localities of Europe feel that their democracy means nothing , because all decisions are taken in remote places ; if they are always merely told ' look to the constitution of your Member State if you are not happy with things ' , that will damage democracy in Europe , not help it .
I therefore ask you most sincerely to try to ensure that the type of issue which my colleagues and I have been putting to you this evening is really thought about at Laeken .
I would like to thank Mr MacCormick for his kind words .
As this is my last Question Time , you must forgive me if my answers to your various questions are slightly too long .
The Belgian Prime Minister is familiar with the issue and he has his own views on the matter .
But in his capacity as President of the European Council he also knows that he will need unanimity in order to have the declaration approved .
Whatever his personal feelings might or will be , he will need a consensus .
We will have to see how far we can go .
That is all I can commit him and myself to .
I just wanted to point out , Mr President , that my surname was misspelled .
It has now disappeared from the board and I hope it will not be misspelled in the Minutes of the sitting as well .
Mr President , on a point of order , it does not seem fair to me that , if any Member is entitled to ask a supplementary question after his initial question , the four of us are only allowed to ask one joint supplementary question .
I do not think that this is what is laid down in the Rules of Procedure .
No , I allowed supplementary questions to be asked by Members other than those who had originally asked questions , as stated in the Rules of Procedure .
We can read it together afterwards . Then we will see that we are in agreement on this matter .
This is a joint answer .
As you already know , if we were to allow four questions with small differences between them , it would take up the whole of question time .
Mr President , I have a supplementary question along the same lines and I would ask the Minister if she would be prepared to reply to it .
It follows on from some of the comments and questions that have been asked already .
I come from Wales , a nation with four times the population of Luxembourg , which is of course a EU Member State .
Now in its November resolution on governance , Parliament stated categorically that it will welcome proposals from the Convention to redraft Article 5 of the EC Treaty to include a specific reference to the function of constitutional regions within Member States .
This repeated a resolution of the previous October which stated that the Treaties should be amended specifically to recognise and respect the political and legislative powers of the internal nations and regions .
Is the Council aware of these resolutions and if not , will it seek to ensure that attention is drawn to them during its deliberations at Laeken ?
I have answered your various questions at length as much as I can .
The degree of awareness of Parliament resolutions , which are many and manifold as you know , is directly related to people 's interest in the issue concerned .
Therefore , those who are very interested in federalism , in the internal organisation of states , in the most effective and the most equitable distribution of powers , certainly are aware of these views .
Those who are less interested in the issues are probably less aware of the existence of these resolutions .
It seems to me that it is Parliament 's task and responsibility to make other people aware of the resolutions it has voted , so I invite you to do just that .
Question No 5 by ( H-0865 / 01 ) :
Subject : Demand for drugs to fight anthrax The anthrax crisis in the USA has produced a rise in demand for Cipro , a patented drug manufactured by Bayer .
The Canadian Government 's response was simply to ask the country 's industry to produce ' copies ' of the drug .
The US Administration appears to be pondering the same course of action as US legislation apparently allows the Administration , when there is a need for a patented drug , to ignore the restrictions imposed by the patent and authorise its manufacture .
Evidently double standards are operating in regard to the developing countries ' request for a reduction in the price of patented drugs and a relaxation of the legislation protecting patents in order to treat AIDS and other diseases .
Has the Council considered what action it would take in the event of a rise in demand for a particular drug , as has occurred in the USA ?
Is it consistent with Community law for a Member State to have US-type legislation which allows it to ignore the restrictions imposed by patents ?
Will it respond positively to the developing countries ' request for a price reduction and a relaxation of patent rights , which would clearly be beneficial not only for the developing countries but also for European and American consumers ?
In response to Mr Alavanos , I would say that the Council is perfectly aware of the importance of the issue that he raised .
I would also reiterate that Article 152 - formerly article 129 of the Treaty establishing the European Community - specifies , in general terms , that Community action in the area of health shall supplement national policies .
The Community shall encourage cooperation between the Member States in the areas mentioned in the Treaty and , if necessary , shall lend support to their action .
In this context , the Community shall also ensure a high level of human health protection by defining and implementing all the policies and actions .
As you know , the Fourth WTO Ministerial Conference , which took place in Doha between 9 to 14 November this year , adopted a Declaration on the TRIPS agreement and public health .
In the Declaration , the ministerial conference acknowledged , on the one hand , the gravity of public health problems , particularly afflicting many developing countries and least-developed countries and , on the other hand , that intellectual property protection is also important for the development of new medicines .
In this Declaration , WTO members agreed that the TRIPS agreement does not prevent Members from taking the appropriate measures to protect public health and affirmed that the Agreement can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of WTO Members ' right to protect public health , and , in particular , to promote access to medicines for all .
More specifically , the Declaration recognises that the flexibilities in the TRIPS agreement include the right of each Member to grant compulsory licences and to determine what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency , it being understood that public health crises , including those relating to HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis , malaria and other epidemics , can represent a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency .
Furthermore , the Declaration reaffirms the commitment of developed-country WTO Members to provide incentives to their enterprises and institutions to promote and encourage technology transfer to least-developed countries .
The Declaration also specifies that the least-developed country Members will not be obliged , with respect to pharmaceutical products , to apply Sections 5 ( Trademarks ) and 7 ( Protection of non-divulged information ) of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these Sections until 1 January 2016 , without prejudice to the right of the least-developed country Members to seek other extensions of the transition periods .
I would add that , in the Declaration , WTO Member States made a commitment to propose , before July 2002 , genuine solutions that could be consolidated in order to resolve the problem of those developing countries and least-developed countries that do not have manufacturing capacities for medicines .
There is the problem of possible parallel imports or other measures which must enable these countries to have access to these medicines at a price that is reasonable , and the lowest possible .
This will be done between now and next summer and I assure you that we will have to work like Trojans to achieve this .
Time is not on our side .
The problem is extremely complex , but this is a very important commitment , because it relates to an aspect of the problem which could not be dealt with by the agreement .
I thank the President-in-Office both for her detailed reply and her cooperation over the past six months .
Good cooperation is sometimes marked by a degree of tension .
Thank you very much , it is just that I need to study your reply .
I should like to ask a supplementary question , now that Nigeria has just starting producing AIDS drugs which are , however , old generation drugs of very dubious effectiveness .
You referred in your reply to the transfer of more modern technology for use in particular by the countries of Africa which have been struck by mass epidemics ; how can we achieve this ?
I have mentioned a few of the things that will make it possible to get access to cheap medicines : compulsory licensing , cooperation with the big pharmaceutical firms - you are aware that the World Health Organisation is working on that and has already devised a number of mechanisms - and cooperation with organisations such as Médecins Sans Frontières that are also active in this field .
Finally , if an agreement can be reached next summer , we will find ways of importing those medicines into countries that do not have the possibility of producing them themselves .
Question No 6 by ( H-0869 / 01 ) :
Subject : Attention paid by the Council to the resolutions adopted by the European Parliament concerning the conflict in Western Sahara and assessment of the visit by the King of Morocco to that territory On 25 October 2001 , Parliament ' s plenary tabled an amendment to its resolution on the progress achieved in the implementation of the CFSP , as a result of which paragraph 33 of that resolution now reads : ' insists , furthermore , that the European Union should cooperate actively in settling the conflict in Western Sahara in accordance with the United Nations resolutions , along the lines requested by the European Parliament in its resolution of 16 March 2000 and the Statement by the German presidency of the Council of June 1999 ' .
In what way is the Council planning to take what Parliament has called for into consideration ?
Will it finally combine forces in order to participate in the speedy , accurate implementation of the UN Peace Plan for Western Sahara ( which provides for the holding of a referendum on self-determination ) , as called for in paragraph 6 of Parliament ' s March 2000 resolution ?
Does it believe that such joint action would enable the positions of its members - particularly Spain and France - to be coordinated in support of the UN Peace Plan ?
In this connection , what view does it take of the visit by the King of Morocco to Western Sahara , which was strongly criticised by the Polisario Front ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the part-session of 19 and 20 September , the Council took note of the European Parliament resolution on the progress made on the implementation of the common foreign and security policy , and agreed to consider this resolution within the framework of the discussion of the different points it contains .
As was also stated at the time , the Council is delighted with the efforts the European Parliament has made to reach a sustainable solution which is acceptable to all parties involved in the conflict in the Western Sahara . This solution forms a crucial goal for the stability and welfare in that region .
The Council fully and actively supports the process which is now taking place within the framework of the United Nations , as formulated in the resolutions of the Security Council , particularly the efforts made by Mr James Baker .
In Resolution No 1359 of 29 June , the Security Council clearly marked the path to be followed .
In this connection , the extension of the mandate of the MINURSO was significant , because this has made it possible to continue the present consultation among the parties , under the auspices of Mr Baker .
The presidency is in contact with Mr Baker .
The leading role in this process is being played by the United Nations .
In this connection , the Council is prepared to mediate in order to create a climate of trust among the parties and hence to facilitate a sustainable solution , but it does not intend to take the place of the United Nations .
The Council is acutely aware of the great sensitivity surrounding this dossier and of the need for observing strict neutrality . This is to avoid the Council being used by one of the parties involved as an instrument , which would only have a negative impact on the search for a solution , as well as on the role of the European Union in that region .
Moreover , the Council is urging the parties to take a number of urgent , humanitarian measures , such as permitting family visits and liberating political prisoners .
Whichever solution is opted for , it will have to be founded on broad compliance with democratic principles and respect for human rights , including the disquieting issue of refugees , but also of Moroccan prisoners , notably when these people need urgent care , in general , and medical care , in particular .
In addition , I should like to emphasise that here too , the European Union is by far the largest donor of humanitarian aid to the refugees from the Western Sahara .
Since 1996 , the Commission has set aside EUR 56 million for this cause .
The visit by King Mohammed VI to the Western Sahara has not impacted on the above-mentioned approach in any way .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , what an interesting answer .
This may be the first time that this House has heard a political statement from the Council which goes much further than the usual strictly formal statements on the conflict in the Western Sahara .
This answer with real content is very welcome .
But I have to tell you the following : having listened to this response , I am under the legitimate impression that in the Council too much weight may be given to a view of the conflict in the Western Sahara that does not consider that the solution to it may only be based on compliance with the United Nations Settlement Plan , which includes holding a referendum on the self-determination of the Sahrawi people , a referendum that has been blocked for many years by one of the parties concerned , Morocco .
You talked about many things : for example , the latest Security Council resolution , but at no time did you refer to the United Nations peace plan . Neither did you refer to the referendum and , also , you have insisted too much on some aspects , whilst forgetting others , for example the violation of human rights in the occupied territories of the Western Sahara .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , in July this year , at the start of the Belgian Presidency , I submitted a question to the Council , to be answered in writing , on statements made by Mr Javier Solana , the person responsible for foreign and security policy in the European Union , in relation to the United Nations Peace Plan , the future of the Western Sahara and the referendum .
Now , in December , with the Belgian Presidency about to draw to a close , I am still waiting to receive an official answer from the Council .
Although it is public knowledge and a well-known fact , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that an official answer was circulated in the United Nations in the month of October - which was even the cause of a diplomatic incident between various representatives of the Member States - the question I am asking is this : when can I have my answer ?
Please , before you leave us , can you give me this political Christmas present .
The Honourable Member appears to be extremely well informed , which is his right , if not his duty .
The same is not true of us , as we are still trying to find your question ; I have no doubt that we received it , but we cannot find any trace of the letter .
So , if you can help us to find it , we will do our best to provide an answer for you before the end of the year .
I apologise for this oversight and for our negligence because , of course , these are the only reasons I can give to explain this .
Thank you .
We would urge the President-in-Office of the Council to look for this missing question , because the question and the answer have been widely reported in the press , at least in the Spanish press .
Mr President , we are probably addressing the question or the comment to the wrong person , but here you represent the Council as a whole .
I have a feeling that the Western Sahara issue , to which I have devoted over half my political life so far , is actually a tragedy .
How the conflict should be resolved is clear - after all , the UN peace plan was there at the beginning of the 1990s - and it is equally clear which European countries have very strong geopolitical interests in its not being adhered to .
I must of course take note of the response that what is done in the UN must be adhered to .
I believe , though , that the European Union and the Member States must , for the sake of a common foreign and security policy , choose a coordinated way of proceeding , one that is in accordance with the UN peace plan .
Following the visit of King Mohammed VI , events have followed in rapid succession .
There has also been a visit to the Western Sahara by the French President , Jacques Chirac , who , in defiance of all international legal positions , said that the Western Sahara was made up of the southern provinces of Morocco - a point we are discussing in the Council of the European Union .
Mr President , the Honourable Member must understand that it is impossible for me to answer such detailed questions .
Mrs Scheele , I have outlined to you what the Council ' s position is and what the discussions might have related to . That is the Council ' s position and the Council ' s answer .
Question No 7 by ( H-0874 / 01 ) :
Subject : Minorities in the Republika Srpska What measures have been taken to make return and reconstruction possible for repressed and exiled minorities - above all Croats and Muslims - in the Bosnian mini-state Republika Srpska ? Is the EU supporting the Catholic bishop Franjo Komarica of Banja Luka in his social work and his promotion of understanding between peoples ?
The Council has already drawn the Honourable Member ' s attention , in its answer to oral question H-0689 during the October session , to the fact that the return of displaced people was part of a whole raft of conditions imposed by the European Union as part of the stabilisation and association process , and the countries of the region subscribed to these conditions at the Zagreb Summit .
The Council 's report assessing the progress achieved by the countries of the region towards the conditions for European integration , which was approved on 11 June 2001 , stated that the process of the return of refugees and displaced persons to Bosnia-Herzegovina should be speeded up and that the measures to create the proper conditions to enable people to return under the correct circumstances , in accordance with the Dayton-Paris agreement , should be strengthened .
It is , first and foremost , the responsibility of the local and national authorities to take the necessary measures .
The European Union will certainly use the monitoring process to follow this issue and , where applicable , to assess whether , on the one hand , the progress made in respecting the conditions and , on the other hand , the level of relations established and the level of technical and economic assistance are still appropriate .
The 1995 Dayton-Paris Peace agreement , which brought an end to the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina , established the post of High Representative who is responsible for monitoring the implementation of this agreement , amongst other things .
The current post-holder , Mr Wolfgang Petric , has not previously hesitated to dismiss local leaders from their duties when it turned out that these leaders were opposed to implementing the peace agreement , including Annex VII , which provides for the return of refugees and displaced persons .
He did so in accordance with the powers granted him by the Ministerial Conference of the Council implementing the Bonn peace accord in December 1997 .
On several occasions , the Council strongly supported the efforts made by Mr Petric to fulfil his mandate .
Regarding the material support that the European Union is providing to assist the return and resettlement of these people , this question is primarily a matter for the Commission , which manages Community assistance .
However , the Council understands that , since 1998 , in line with the recommendations of the High Representative ' s Office and the Return and Reconstruction working group , increasing funds have been granted to support the return of minority groups to Republika Srpska .
This area should also continue to occupy its rightful and important position within the framework of Community assistance provided under the CARDS 2000-2006 programme , Article 2 of which explicitly mentions aid for the return of refugees and displaced persons .
I can assure you , as we near the end of six months of holding the presidency , that the Council and its various members attach extreme importance to the issue of the return and reintegration of refugees in Bosnia-Herzegovina , but also in other areas of the Balkans where this issue unfortunately persists .
The tense situation appears to be gradually easing and the number of people returning to and resettling in the area will increase . Of course , the same amount will not return to each area , but there is no escaping the fact that numbers are on the increase .
We shall continue to attach great importance to this issue and this item is on the agenda of all the meetings where it can be discussed .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for this detailed answer and also for your intensive involvement in this area .
I would just like to put two specific questions .
First : Is it possible for the Council to try and find a precise figure for the number of refugees and expellees who have to date returned to the Republika Srpska ?
There were agreements about this , which can in fact only be monitored by finding out exactly how many people have gone back .
I would ask you , if you are unable to do that today , to perhaps let me have that information in writing .
My second point relates to tangible aid for the minorities .
I have heard that , especially in the Banja Luka region , the Catholic Church is intensively engaging in care for the sick across cultural boundaries and in many activities in the spheres of social welfare and agriculture , and that funds promised for these have simply not been granted .
That is the second question I am putting , and I am keen to learn whether you know anything about this .
In response to the Honourable Member ' s first question , I can only say that I do not at the moment have the exact figures to hand ; we are finding them out and they will be communicated to you .
As far as the second question is concerned , I believe that this is more a question for the Commission , which is responsible for the specific implementation of all forms of humanitarian aid , urgent or otherwise .
As you are aware , I believe , it is the Commission that manages these very specific dossiers and I think that it is the Commission to which this question should be addressed .
Question No 8 by ( H-0876 / 01 ) :
Subject : EU and international measures providing for the return of illegally transferred assets Under the terms of the Tampere Council conclusions the Member States committed themselves to taking concrete steps to trace , freeze , seize and confiscate the proceeds of crime .
Member States were urged also to implement fully the provisions of the Money Laundering Directive ( which includes the conversion or transfer of property and the identification of the customers of credit and financial institutions ) , the 1990 Strasbourg Convention and the Financial Task Force recommendations .
They were also urged to adopt the revised directive on money laundering which is now under conciliation .
The Council called for the competences of Europol to be extended to money laundering in general and for common standards to be developed to prevent the use of corporations or entities registered outside the jurisdiction of the EU in the hiding of criminal proceeds and money laundering .
EU States have signed the UN Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime which commits governments to adopt within their domestic legal systems the measures necessary to enable the confiscation of the proceeds of crime .
Does the Council consider that the above EU , UN and Council of Europe measures and strategies confirm that the European Union does have a legitimate interest in relation to money illegally transferred by former dictators , i.e .. Nigeria , and will the Council now undertake to ensure that these monies in banks throughout the EU are returned to the democratically elected Government of Nigeria ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as is evident from the question , the European Community and the Union have already taken a number of measures and others are in the pipeline , notably within the framework of the fight against financial crime .
The specific aim of these measures is to combat the laundering of money and to seize the proceeds of crime .
Since the events of 11 September , a special effort has been made in the fight against funding terrorism .
Alongside this , there are a multitude of other instruments , including the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 1959 and the EU Convention of 2000 on the same topic .
Both treaties contain a number of general regulations in the field of cooperation among states and this package of instruments also undoubtedly contributes to the fight against financial crime .
Furthermore , reference can be made to a number of instruments in the field of substantive law , such as , for example , the framework decision on the fight against forgery .
On 16 October of this year , the Council convened in a joint formation of Ecofin and Justice and Social Affairs . On that occasion , the Council laid down the decision to adopt a protocol as part of the Convention of 29 May 2000 on mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Member States of the European Union .
This protocol considerably improves cooperation among the Member States in the fight against economic and financial crime and , in particular , the fight against money laundering , corruption and forgery , and it provides for broad agreement concerning the dissemination of information concerning financial transactions , accounts and bank details .
The Member States have committed themselves to ratifying this protocol by the end of next year at the latest .
I cannot answer the specific question concerning the repatriation of capital illegally transferred to banks of the Union by former dictators , since this question falls outside the scope of the Council , as the honourable Member was notified in the first part-session of October 2001 , in answer to an identical question he then posed to the Council .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for your comprehensive reply to the first part of my question .
Yet again , however , you fail or you are unwilling to understand the thrust of the latter part of my question .
It suggests that there are vast amounts of money removed from places such as Nigeria and the Congo and now in European banks which many people over the years have tried to find a means of returning to the people of Nigeria and the Congo without success .
What I am suggesting is that you , as President-in-Office of the Council , have a responsibility , under the various conventions I refer to , to ensure that these monies are returned to the various former colonies .
Surely you now understand fully the meaning of my question and will reply to it and ensure that these monies , which were illegally removed by dictators and terrorists , are returned to the people in the various former colonies ?
I can only repeat the same answer .
For the time being , the Council has no instrument which would enable it to do what you want it to do .
It might be that , in future , such an instrument will be developed and improved , but for now , this is not the case .
In the absence of such an instrument , action by the Council is not possible .
Mr President , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , ladies and gentlemen , corruption is an issue of significance in some countries desirous of joining the EU , and we are currently engaging in accession negotiations with them .
Funds gained by privatisation have often disappeared from these countries in a questionable manner .
Do you believe it would be possible to resolve these issues within the framework of accession negotiations , or at least to apply unambiguous legal provisions in this area ?
My response to the honourable Member is that , during the negotiations with the candidate countries , the quality of the constitutional state is an important element .
We therefore examine whether the mechanisms which ensure that a state can be considered a constitutional state are in place , or not , as the case may be , and close attention is also paid to the quality of the judiciary .
For example , individual reports on the situation in a candidate country may state that , so far , judges receive inadequate training and are not paid enough and that this inevitably encourages inadmissible practices and such like .
So in that sense , yes , Mr Rübig , in terms of achieving maximum transparency and consistent jurisdiction and ensuring that there are bodies to which one can appeal when one deems oneself to be treated badly , and so on , in that sense , yes , I do believe it is possible . However , in the sense of delving deep into individual cases , I do not believe it to be possible .
Question No 9 by ( H-0879 / 01 )
Subject : The case of Tracey Housel , a British national on death row in Georgia , USA Is the Council aware of the plight of Tracey Housel , a British national on death row in Georgia , USA ?
Is the Council concerned that Mr Housel may not have received a fair trial that accords with the standards of international human rights law ?
What steps will the Council take to assist Mr Housel ?
The European Union believes that the death penalty , which is , of course , irreversible , is a particularly inhumane punishment .
The EU is therefore opposed to the death penalty in all cases and it has agreed to work towards its universal abolition .
The EU is concerned that approximately 90 States keep this punishment , although only a minority - thirty countries or so , one of which is the United States - continues to carry out executions every year .
In 1998 , as part of its objective to universally abolish the death penalty , the European Union drew up a series of guidelines to specify the circumstances in which it should undertake specific and targeted actions .
In countries where the death penalty still exists , the Union is working to progressively limit its application and insists that the punishment be carried out whilst observing specific minimum standards .
I know that this is only partly limiting the unbearable awfulness of the act , but , even in such horrible circumstances , this is how things must be done ...
The European Union is closely monitoring the situation in the United States , where numerous executions take place .
In 2001 , steps were taken to help a number of people on death row , in line with the European Union ' s guidelines , in Georgia , Oklahoma and Texas .
In addition , in the autumn of 2000 , the Union decided , for the first time , to intervene as amicus curiae in a trial before the Supreme Federal Court involving a condemned man , in order to raise before the Court the issue of the legality in international law of the sentencing to death of a person who was a minor at the time of the events .
The Presidency-in-Office of the Union submitted another request to intervene as amicus curiae for Alexander Williams , who was condemned to death for a crime that he committed when he was under 18 years of age . The matter is still before the Supreme Court of Georgia .
In another case - Atkins v Virginia - the European Union intends to make another request to intervene as amicus curiae before the Supreme Court in order to reaffirm its position on the application of the death penalty to people suffering from mental illness .
The Council is aware of the details of the Housel affair and , in particular , of the fact that a judgement by the Supreme Court of the United States could be handed down before the end of the year .
We would like to emphasise that , for those facing the death penalty who are nationals of a Member State , the European Union acts at the request of that Member State , which is best placed to judge whether it is appropriate for the Community to intervene .
At this stage , the Council has not yet received a request from the United Kingdom to assist Mr Housel .
The Council was informed that the United Kingdom is very actively monitoring this matter , in conjunction with Mr Housel ' s lawyers .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for that very detailed reply .
I have no supplementary , but I would urge the Council to continue that attitude to the plight of EU citizens because many Members of this House may have constituents who have received what is clearly an unfair trial .
This is something that is on the increase .
I believe that , as well as the Member State intervening on behalf of these EU citizens , the Council also has a clear role .
I fully expect the UK Government to make representations to the Council in what I believe in this case is an example of an unfair trial leading to an irreversible death penalty .
On a point of order , I would like to point out that , with the exception of the last speaker , not one of our colleagues has respected their speaking time .
The result is that we have dealt with only nine questions , the first four of which had a joint answer .
I completely agree , Mr Zacharakis , but you will understand that it is not appropriate to suddenly take the microphone away from Members .
As a Member of this House you will understand why we need to call upon the solidarity and the common sense of all Members .
I pay very close attention to the comments made out loud .
I think we should all give thanks to Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck for the extraordinary degree of cooperation she has shown over these last six months .
I am sure that her former position as a Member of this House has increased her sensitivity in this regard , including her willingness to answer Members ' questions .
Thank you very much .
As the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 10 to 38 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
Conflict prevention
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0394 / 2001 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on Conflict Prevention ( COM ( 2001 ) 211 - C5-0458 / 2001 - 2001 / 2182 ( COS ) ) .
I now give the floor to Mr Lagendijk .
Mr President , over the past few years , conflict prevention has developed into a real ' feel-good ' concept , to use a traditional Dutch phrase .
Everyone is in favour of conflict prevention . Why not ?
There is always something that can be done with it , and why should it not be included in a list of measures ?
In that way , conflict prevention slowly developed from a priority of and for pacifists , via a kind of interesting subsidiary activity alongside military activities , to what I would call one the European Union ' s central ambitions , currently recognised by many .
It is no longer a plaything of one group , it has become the central pursuit of the European Union as a whole , and this is also the reason why the time has come to translate much of what has been written to date about conflict prevention - stunning reports have been published over the past few years , also by the European Commission , for which congratulations are due - into practice .
Fortunately , we do not need to start from scratch , for notably experience in the Balkans over the past ten years has taught us what the European Union is capable of , and has already done , in the field of conflict prevention .
As you may know , I am also rapporteur for the Stability Pact , which I always extol as the greatest conflict prevention project .
I am really convinced that the coherence in this programme between democracy , economic development and security is an illustration of how conflict prevention has developed from a concept on paper to a very usable instrument in practice .
In my report , I have outlined three points , and today , I should like to do this again .
Maybe the most straight-forward point , yet very tricky in practice , is the cooperation between the European Union and the OSCE .
Everyone says that this should be done , that it is positive that it happens , and it is already happening .
In a high number of locations , cooperation with the OSCE is good , but all too often , I visit places where this cooperation is faltering .
I visited Macedonia recently , with a few fellow MEPs , where the European Union has an observation mission , but so has the OSCE . Cooperation between the two is not really ideal , to put it mildly .
A week ago in Bucharest , the Commissioner made a number of sound proposals for cooperation between the EU and the OSCE , for example in the southern Caucasus and in Central Asia . In my opinion , it would be good if in future , the Commission could possibly monitor cooperation with the OSCE more effectively than it is doing now .
The OSCE often has the same mission and is often active in the same field . This applies to each campaign - including the Balkans , where , once again , things often go well but all too often they do not - in order to better implement this cooperation and this distribution of tasks .
A second point in my report is the European Civil Peace Corps .
Once again , one could state with a certain degree of self-mockery that it has developed from a fun plaything of the Greens to a crucial instrument in the EU ' s toolbox .
I would therefore call on the Commission not simply to be grateful to Parliament for the concept of the Civil Peace Corps , as it did five or six years ago , and do nothing else with the idea , but instead to seize the opportunities now , which I am convinced are presenting themselves , to develop this European Peace Corps and to turn it into a central point of EU policy .
This is possible , not only because I , or Parliament , welcome it , but also because in the meantime , experience has been gathered with civil peace observers .
The European Union has an observation corps and has observation missions in several places worldwide .
Germany and Sweden have experience of training civil observers , and I believe that the time has come for the Commission , for the European Union , to better coordinate and pool this expertise and these people , so that in future , the European Union is not only able to act rapidly at military level , but also when it comes to sending civil observers .
Finally , I have come to the third point , which may well be the most sweeping in my report .
I would positively welcome it if conflict prevention were to be removed from the remit of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
What do I mean by this ?
It is no longer acceptable for us to talk about some or other EU policy , for example in the field of agriculture or trade , of which we are of the view that it should serve , for example , to better develop Africa ' s economy , while at the same time continue to apply components of that policy - and I would cite the well-known export subsidies - of which we know that locally , in Africa for example , they do not have a stabilising effect .
If anything , they mess up the economic structure or hamper its development .
I would prefer it if in future , conflict prevention , like human rights and the environment , were to become a goal of all EU policy , not only in the external policy area , but also in the area of trade and agriculture , for example .
If that is possible , if it is possible to make conflict prevention a central point in all areas of EU policy , then I will be happy , and what I refer to as a hobbyhorse of the ' soft ' forces will then have developed into the favourite subject of the hard core of the EU ' s policy abroad and all over the world .
Mr President , I should like to concur with the observations made a moment ago by the central proponent of conflict prevention , Mr Lagendijk .
I very often share his views in areas of this kind , for indeed - and we should credit him for this - particularly the green sector has very often put forward the idea of conflict prevention by non-military means with great clarity .
One could also say that this is very topical in this day and age .
The European Union is weak as far as its military contribution to international security and national law and order in countries surrounding us are concerned .
This was clear from the difficulties in setting up this rapid reaction force .
We got off to a good start , but it is often still in doubt , maybe with good reason , whether this will lead to early results .
All the more opportunities present themselves to the Union in terms of non-military means . And it appears to me that this also falls more within the competences of the Commission .
We have competences in this area .
That is why the civil instrument is gaining in importance , notably for the European Union , in the light of the Union ' s military weakness and of the topicality of the civil means in controlling and preventing conflicts alike .
The cold war is over and the entire security context has changed .
Large-scale threats have given way to smaller , sometimes persistent , wars with ideological , Mafia-related and ethnic facets .
The flaring up of such conflicts can be prevented very effectively by civil means , certainly when these conflicts recur .
This explains the flurry of activity which is also especially being generated by the European Union at the moment in areas of tension or precisely where tension has been averted .
Situations of lawlessness require a completely different approach and involve the police , government officials , aid organisations , technicians , observers , economists and people who know how the civil society develops .
In other words , these situations require a comprehensive approach .
I therefore agree with the provoking statement " It should be removed from the remit of foreign affairs " .
As far as I am concerned , this means that it requires a comprehensive approach from society .
This is what matters in conflict control , and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy will probably continue to play an important role , but so will other sections of this Parliament .
Indeed , a country ' s development as a whole also very much relies on averting violent conflict .
And I have to say that Mr Lagendijk has listed the options very eloquently .
He is right in saying that we , for example , should not simply accept the existence of this two-pillar structure , that we should put them back on the agenda and that there should be a budget for the things we intend to do in this field .
In my view , the unity of the European Union , particularly in this field , is a direct security interest .
We must speak with one voice , even in this field of conflict prevention . We must therefore keep our own activities as governments and as industry in our countries well under control .
I appreciate the rapporteur ' s preference for a peace corps , but I would like to point out that the erratum that I received , which concerns Article 17 , is an erratum that is ineffective .
Article 17 is still an excellent article and I said with good reason that the peace corps must be developed within the framework of the rapid reaction facility .
We have this framework , and I hope that it is maintained .
Mr President , the PSE Group sets great store by the debate on the EU ' s role in the field of conflict prevention , and we greatly appreciate the efforts the European Commission has made in this connection , and also , of course , the excellent report by Mr Lagendijk .
This is an important topic , and it is certainly not only a Dutch pastime , even if we perhaps give this impression a little bit with the list of speakers , the first four of which accidentally , very accidentally , happen to hail from that country .
The European Union is the perfect organisation to play a greater role in preventing conflicts , resolving these or in the subsequent reconstruction .
The Community is the manifestation of a broad security concept based on economic and political cooperation and on shared values .
This successful model is about to be exported to Central and Eastern Europe , Cyprus , and Malta , of course .
Activities are under way in the Balkans with the same intention , and the EU is now facing the task of finding itself a useful role in the reconstruction in Afghanistan .
In my view , all these actions fall under the umbrella of conflict prevention .
Despite this , one can still claim that there is already a culture of conflict prevention within the European Union .
There is sometimes still envy with regard to NATO or the military scope of the United States , as if the European Union would need to emulate this position .
The military instrument is only one of a whole set of instruments which can be deployed to secure safety .
It is used as a last resort .
The aim of conflict prevention is to prevent violence or recurrence thereof by intervening in good time , mainly by using civil instruments .
If conflict prevention is to become an effective instrument of EU security policy , it must form an integral part of our thoughts and actions .
This will force the European Union , more often than is now the case , to anticipate and trace hotbeds of conflict in good time .
It also forces the European Union to develop new instruments , such as rapid reaction facilities , and to considerably improve the three pillars .
It is easy to think of an example where an effective operation requires instruments from all three pillars .
At the moment , this is still often a bureaucratic and institutional nightmare to contend with .
The European Union acquires its strength from the multitude of instruments either available or yet to be developed , including , in a few years ' time , the military instrument .
In order to deploy these effectively for the short or longer term , a kind of conflict prevention centre is needed .
What is happening where and what are we going to do about it ?
But ultimately it is also about political will .
The European Union is active in many , more or less , unstable areas and regions where the level of conflict is mounting , and the European Union should visibly emphasise its conflict prevention policy , more than is now the case , and report on it regularly .
Its ambition should be to play an equally visible role as NATO but then in the field of conflict prevention and the deployment of civil instruments .
I believe that most EU citizens would be very proud of such a role .
The most important exception to general human progress is the inability to prevent violent conflicts .
Science has reached unknown heights , we are undergoing a communication revolution and erstwhile impenetrable problems can now be solved , but the world is no safer for it .
In the nineties , some five and a half million people died in 100 armed conflicts and many times more people were driven out of their homes .
In many countries , the war efforts thwart any form of economic and social development .
Since 11 September , the Americans have come to realise that our responsibility does not stop at our own borders or the countries that are of strategic importance to us .
Not only economies are interconnected worldwide , but so too is human suffering .
We are gaining an increasing insight into the deeper causes of violent conflicts ; something which both the Commission and Mr Lagendijk have borne witness to .
These include the unjust distribution of welfare , religious and ethnic contrasts , a lack of democracy and bad governance .
Solving these structural problems is both crucial and difficult .
Better structures must prevent political leaders from indulging in their unbridled hunger for power and wealth undisturbed .
Time and again , it is the masses that are the victims in the struggle for power of which they themselves form no part .
For the first time , our generations experience large-scale contact between civilisations , cultures and religions , and this is bound to lead to a lack of understanding and intolerance initially .
The cause of this is that cultures and religions take their own values and standards too much for granted .
However , believers all over the world not only believe , they know for certain . And if faith becomes an element in ones own dissatisfaction , this can easily lead to disastrous extremism .
The effective management of conflict prevention and globalisation of value systems is the greatest challenge of this time , and Europe must , in tandem with the United States - that is very important - adopt a strategy which tackles these conflicts at the root .
If the European Union wishes to strengthen its conflict-preventing role , also in the light of Cotonou , it must be adequately equipped .
Resistance in many governments to reinforcing the Commission and its delegations is pernicious for the effective implementation of European policy .
Impressive speeches this morning by the Sakharov prize-winners have allowed us to share in the immense grief and also the moral strength of these victims of senseless violence .
There is little hope as long as tolerance is regarded as treason and the eye-for-an-eye principle leads to blindness , as is the case in the Middle East and Angola .
There is only hope if we actually tackle the injustices , and if tolerance , mutual understanding and intense dialogue all over the world become the leading principles .
After the economy and science , it is now the turn of moral values to make progress .
Mr President , conflict prevention cannot consist only of rapid reaction mechanisms and contingents of police .
Conflict prevention , as Jost Lagendijk has already said , means for our Group that all EU policies should be aimed at the reduction and prevention of conflict .
It means cutting agricultural export aid , opening EU markets to sensitive products , a trade policy characterised by social justice and , above all , preferential trading relationships only where respect for human rights is guaranteed .
There is no doubt in our mind that the Gothenburg Resolution marks a milestone for European foreign policy , yet , despite that , what now matters is that we should not only talk about the need for conflict prevention but also do something about it .
This means that a culture of prevention must be created in the European Union , and that it must permeate all its political dealings .
Stopping all armaments exports and supplies of small arms to potential areas of conflict will play a crucial role .
Support for human rights and sustainable development must be the core objective of European foreign policy .
Conflicts can , though , only be successfully prevented if the civil actors are involved , and so we propose the establishment of a platform for NGOs and cooperation with them .
This would mean financial support for non-governmental organisations , but that would be significantly cheaper than armed conflicts .
Mr President , I would firstly like to state that the majority of Members in our Group are in favour of this excellent report by Mr Lagendijk .
However , there is an issue which affects the very essence of this report : September 11 .
There is a ' before ' and an ' after ' September 11 , which brings to light the weaknesses in this fundamentally important approach which the EU has taken towards conflict prevention .
I think that we should make it very clear that we need more information on those secret services , which , taking as an example those of the United States , have been supporting a State , such as the Taliban in Afghanistan , which have later become a public enemy of the whole world .
There is another issue of great importance , which also appears in the Lagendijk report , which has not been mentioned until now : that either the European Union chooses to give its wholehearted support to the United Nations and the efforts of the UN to use international law to resolve conflicts , or it will continue to be the world superpower , the United States , that makes the most important decisions and we Europeans will be virtually powerless , only able to put on tiny sticking plasters to cover the wounds that have been inflicted .
This is the reason why it is important that we implement what is set out in the Lagendijk report .
Another aspect I would like to mention is the importance of the economic dimension , which , there can be no doubt , is the cause of many conflicts , and we have to see this also in a global perspective .
For this reason , we have to clarify certain statements , because sometimes wide-scale liberalisation can be a greater evil than the possibility of protection .
Mr President , I should like to use this brief contribution to say a few words of appreciation for the Lagendijk report .
The rapporteur , however , is advised to prick up his ears now , for I was the only nay in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy .
Unexpected support from an opponent ?
Indeed , when it comes to the substance of the report .
I appreciate Mr Lagendijk ' s integral approach to conflict prevention . Not only with regard to the explicit causes of conflict , but also with regard to the hidden implications of policy that has ostensibly very little to do with conflicts .
I therefore endorse the call to the Commission to carefully study the impact of European policy on local conflicts .
However , where the tasks of the European Union in conflict prevention are concerned , I do not share the rapporteur ' s view .
Recognising greater international connections , he calls for an extensive role for the EU .
I have my reservations about this .
Out of appreciation for the report and so as not the create the impression of opposing conflict prevention , I will change my vote against to an abstention .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Lagendijk on his excellent report on conflict prevention , a subject on which Parliament ' s position has always been very clear .
There can be no doubt that the best way to win a war is to prevent it from happening in the first place and in order to do this there is no better weapon than to be able to see it coming .
That is to say , to find the underlying causes of war and to work to resolve them .
In order to do this , it is essential that we do not take a solely horizontal approach - an approach quite rightly proposed by Mr Lagendijk - , that is to say , one that includes all of the European Union ' s common policies , but also a global approach , which includes the whole of society .
From this point of view non-structural methods to promote reconciliation are important , above all in those regions emerging from conflict .
Without these methods , all of the international community ' s peace efforts , or those of the very local communities which the conflict has created , could come to nothing , given that the least dispute can once again light the flames of hatred that had provoked or been the cause of the conflict in the first place .
We need - and I address this particularly to the Commission - to dedicate not only more attention but , above all , more resources to education for peace programmes , along the lines of the work carried out by Mr Mayor Zaragoza when he was the Director-General of Unesco and which Kofi Annan reminded us of a few days ago .
On the other hand , if control of the arms trade is very important , then so is the traffic in diamonds and raw materials .
In this respect , I would also ask the Commission to tell us which methods it intends to adopt in order to improve , and make more efficient , the code of conduct with regard to the control of the trafficking in diamonds , in particular , given that , as the European institutions and the United Nations themselves have reported , on many occasions the fight for raw materials is behind many of the world ' s conflicts , especially in Africa .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , Europe is continuing to pay for a well-established failing in its conflict prevention policies : we are slow , predictable and not sufficiently authoritative .

I therefore feel that one of the strong points of Mr Lagendijk ' s report is that it sees the point at which a political institution such as Europe acquires legitimacy in terms of conflict prevention rather than military force , and it gains legitimacy in the knowledge , not least , that sustainable , equitable peace must be pursued through politics , certainly not through military force .
We particularly welcome the way Mr Lagendijk ' s report sees conflict prevention as a result of Europe ' s social policies rather than just the effect of good judicial cooperation , although we must never renounce that .
Social policies mean that prevention , the ability to predict , to prevent and to resolve conflicts before they happen must be part of all European Union policies , as has already been pointed out by other Members , and these policies must provide for an investment in terms of both financing and human resources .
In this sense , we feel that the number of European Union delegations to other countries is completely inadequate to meet the requirements of the prevention policy .
As Mr Lagendijk said , we must avoid development cooperation becoming conflict cooperation , and we must therefore be particularly careful , rigorous and rational in developing all our economic policies .
Lastly , I share your criticism of the Council and the Commission for not having accepted in the last six years - and six years is an extremely long time in which countless conflicts occur - the proposal put forward by Parliament at that time to institute a European civil peace corps .
We must prevent conflict , and in order to prevent conflict it is often necessary to take risks , and that is what we are asking the Council , the Commission and Parliament to do .
Mr President , it is good to remind ourselves that at the moment there are many people listening other than those in this House .
I should like to congratulate Mr Lagendijk , precisely on this symbolic day when we awarded the Sakharov Prize to peace activists from Israel , Palestine and Angola .
In my opinion , by broadening our horizons , we retain a sense of realism .
We must assess our present actions in the Middle East and Africa , with three million victims in the Democratic Republic of Congo , and we will need to evaluate what we need to do in Afghanistan .
We must avoid conflicts , conflicts that become militarised or that flare up again .
This requires an integral approach , as has already been underlined by many fellow MEPs .
In my one and a half minutes , I should particularly like to draw your attention to one aspect in the report , namely the Civil Peace Corps .
Commissioner Patten , I really expect you to come up with an initiative .
I am amazed at how much money and how many people can be mobilised over the course of a few months to start a war .
Could we not work in an equally focused manner , deploy as many resources , people , when it comes to keeping the peace and preventing war ?
And that is why I applaud this Civil Peace Corps .
The funding and the framework are in place . If the political will is there , then what are we waiting for !
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his sterling work and focus on three paragraphs towards the end of the report .
Paragraph 24 addresses the need for increased cooperation between the EU and the UN , as well as between the EU and the OSCE .
In this context , I should like to take this opportunity to ask the Commissioner responsible for external relations , Mr Patten , about his view on the methods for strengthening co-operation specifically between the UN and the OSCE .
I would also like to draw attention to paragraph 27 on the proliferation of light weapons and small arms and the need for a joint code of conduct for arms exports .
Last but not least , I would like to focus on paragraph 28 on the significance of education as a key element in conflict prevention .
It is a real shame that we cannot have a debate here between the rapporteur and us Members of the European Parliament , as I wonder what view of humanity and what ethic and morals are to form the basis for this work on conflict prevention .
Is it not the case that conflict prevention and democracy ultimately rely on reconciliation , compromise and the ability of each and every one of us to tolerate a defeat ?
Finally , on a slightly more personal note , as a member of this Parliament I was dismayed when around 200 Members filed out as Kim Dae Jung was about to speak .
One of Asia ' s very greatest advocates of democracy and human rights , Kim Dae Jung has paid a very high personal price for his fight for democracy .
Two hundred Members walked out when he was due to speak .
This is no way to maintain the dignity of Parliament .
Rather , it brought shame on this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , a few hours ago we heard three personalities whom we have awarded the Sakharov Prize .
We were moved by the speeches and inspired by their example , but we were also left with an uncomfortable feeling .
Uncomfortable because , while there is no doubt that in the European Parliament we have succeeded in identifying the ways to prevent and resolve conflicts and recognise , even before others do , who can promote them , we have lacked the effective capacity to influence such processes .
I remember having attended a meeting chaired by President Nicole Fontaine at the beginning of this year , with Commander Massoud .
At the time , few people were interested in the visit and we were unable to mobilise sufficient support to bolster Commander Massoud ' s position and , perhaps , prevent some of the great tragedies that followed .
We therefore welcome the Commission ' s communication and acknowledge its work and merit .
We fully agree with the strategic principle set out by the Commission , and I quote , " the development policy and other cooperation programmes constitute the most powerful instruments the Community has to deal with the causes of conflicts " .
We support the aims of the document generally ; however , we also feel , as does the rapporteur , that there are a few vague aspects , possibly prejudiced by the rigidity of the current system of support .
We believe priority should be given to a strong and serious effort in terms of interinstitutional cooperation .
The specific aspects of this are listed very thoroughly by the rapporteur , whom we congratulate .
But I would like to emphasise one aspect : the role of the Commission ' s delegations should be reinforced , which also leads us to the issue of the external representation of the Union .
The document of the Commission , referring to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , mentions joint training of diplomats . And my question is : when will there be programmes for joint training of diplomats within the European Union itself ?
Mr President , there were enough warnings before the crisis in Kosovo really got under way .
Before 11 September , Afghanistan was on the EU ' s list of forgotten crisis regions .
I think these are two examples of the way in which we are all too often all too wise all too late .
Unfortunately , when it is too late there is every willingness to employ quite fabulous sums on military action .
This is in stark contrast to the willingness to employ resources on civil crisis prevention and on peacekeeping .
Now , the EU has decided to play an active role in conflict prevention in Africa .
That is something I view in positive terms .
However , we should also play a more active and independent role in relation to the conflict in the Middle East .
That role has unfortunately fallen somewhat by the wayside since 11 September .
The Sakharov Prize is not enough .
We must make pro-active use of the tariff agreement in this crisis .
Mr President , what concerns us is that conflict prevention using military means is just the other side of the same coin , by which I mean of the intervention policy of the European Union , which has nominated itself international peacemaker , especially in crises and conflicts which it itself foments , so that it can then intervene and save the day .
Of course , the objective is always the same : to suppress the progressive grass-roots movement and advance the interests of big business in Europe .
The report by the member of the Group of the Greens , Mr Lagendijk , is not , unfortunately , free of the political , economic and military interventionist spirit .
Without doubt , as the rapporteur himself acknowledged today , the right hand of the proposed non-military rapid reaction unit and European police force will be the European army , which the Laeken Summit will be busy preparing in a few day 's time .
Anyway , an official source in the European Union has already stated that military solutions will be imposed wherever political proposals are rejected .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece cannot vote in favour of the report ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lagendijk for another excellent report .
I would also like to welcome his challenging remarks today about , for example , the civil peace corps which I suspect will continue to be a subject of lively debate .
Above all I would like to thank him for what he said about the external aspects of sustainable development .
That is a subject on which we should all focus our attention in the run-up to the Johannesburg Conference next year .
I hope in particular that Parliament will take a special interest in some of the issues he raised , which are of fundamental importance if we are to be credible on sustainable development .
This is a topical debate .
Mr Wiersma suggested it was a Dutch hobby .
I am bound to say that , if it is , it is an extremely good Dutch hobby and I recommend it to every one of the Member States .
There is a growing appreciation of the need to reinforce our efforts to tackle the factors that make conflict and violence arise in the first place .
In the last century , conflict tended to be between states ; I do not argue that sort conflict is over and done with .
But in today ' s world we face a new type of danger - the failed state , the state that is a danger to its own people and a menace to the rest of the world .
Let me be crystal clear .
Nothing excuses or mitigates terrorism .
But in rooting out terrorism , we have to work to make sure that the world is hostile terrain - not fertile ground - for terrorists and those who back them .
That can mean taking tough military action , as we do from time to time .
But it also means exporting and entrenching democracy , the rule of law and good government ; it means liberalising world trade , and using that and our development assistance to shrink the gap between the richest and the poorest , in a world in which the planet 's three richest men own the equivalent of the GDP of the 48 poorest countries .
Earlier this year , the Commission published the communication setting out our new strategy of conflict prevention .
It is based on four main objectives .
First , we want to make a more systematic and coordinated use of the European Union 's instruments to address the root causes of conflict .
Simply put , we want to get better leverage from our position as the world ' s largest donor and as the top trading bloc .
We are starting by integrating conflict prevention into our strategies towards partner countries , taking account of conflict indicators , for example , in our country strategy papers .
The second objective of our communication is to raise the effectiveness of our actions in tackling ' cross-cutting issues ' such as trafficking in drugs or arms , the trading of illicit goods , environmental degradation and so on .
On all these fronts , the challenge is immense .
Let me just take , for example , the issue raised by Mrs Ferrer .
The Commission has played , over the last few months , an active role in the Kimberley process , dealing with conflict diamonds .
That is aimed at establishing an international control regime for the import and export of rough diamonds .
After the political agreement reached at Gaborone , two weeks ago , between the participants in this process , the Commission is now launching the preparatory work for the full implementation by the Community of the control regime in the course of next year .
The third objective is to develop our ability to respond rapidly to emerging crises .
Concrete recommendations have been put forward , notably to improve the CFSP instruments , such as political dialogue or the use of special representatives .
I can only agree with Mr Lagendijk that ' conflict prevention implies stronger commitment and political direction on the part of the Member States , as the Community instruments alone are not enough to resolve all possible sources of conflict ' .
What is required is a bit more of that old-fashioned commodity - political will .
At Community level , we have set up , at my initiative , a special rapid reaction mechanism to equip us to respond with the speed that events in the real world demand , but which the Commission ' s procedures are not always brilliantly designed to cope with .
It is now fully operational , and is proving invaluable in current crises , for example in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and in Afghanistan where I hope to use the mechanism first of all to provide support for Ambassador Brahimi 's team , secondly to provide support for the interim administration and , thirdly , to begin the work of demining .
The fourth message is to promote international cooperation with governments , international organisations and civil society .
The honourable Member raised this .
Mr Sacrédeus raised this as well .
The UN is a key partner here .
We have a new framework , agreed by the General Affairs Council in June , for EU-UN enhanced cooperation on conflict prevention and crisis management .
As recommended by Mr Lagendijk , I am ready to work together with the Council on an enhanced framework for cooperation with the OSCE .
Let me finish by giving you one example of what we have we done and what we are doing concretely in a key zone of conflict .
I am just back from the Great Lakes region where we had a useful troika mission .
Last month , we committed funds under the rapid reaction mechanism to support the inter-Congolese dialogue , to launch preparatory actions for the reintegration of child soldiers and to support independent media or other confidence-building initiatives .
In November , we also committed money under the CFSP budget to finance the South African Guard Support Unit for the protection of the recently returned political leaders in Burundi .
I was pleased to be able to meet them and have a briefing from them .
In the region , we continue to carry out rehabilitation , to deliver humanitarian aid and to contribute to poverty alleviation .
We stand ready to finance demilitarisation and demobilisation programmes as soon as they get started .
So we are , I hope and believe , raising our game .
We were starting to do so before the horrific events of three months ago which the honourable Member referred to .
But we know now how much is at stake ; we know how preventing conflict abroad is vital to our own security here at home .
We know that we cannot slacken our efforts , but rather , as Mr Lagendijk has argued , we need to redouble those efforts .
That is the very least we should be doing in response to the atrocities of 11 September .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
EU Relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran
The next item is the debate on report ( A5-0418 / 2001 ) by Mr Gahler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on EU relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran [ COM ( 2001 ) 71 - C5-0338 / 2001 - 2001 / 2138 ( COS ) ] .
Before we move on to the debate , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that there is going to be a slight alteration to the timetable : with a great deal of effort , we are going to exceed the time limit of 7 p.m.
With the cooperation of the interpretation service , I think that we can work until 7.15 p.m. , which means that , from 7.15 p.m. there will be no interpretation service , no Commissioner and no President , because we all have other commitments .
I am sorry to have to tell you this , but this is the truth of the matter .
However , I think that the best way to deal with this situation is to let the rapporteur speak , then the Commissioner , and then the Members of this House , depending on how much time we have left .
Therefore , the more concise we can be , the more possibility there will be of ending the debate before 7.15 p.m.
For those of you who will not be able to speak , you will have the chance to do so once again when we resume at 9 p.m. tonight .
Mr Gahler has the floor .
, rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , I think we will get the last speakers just before the break .
On 7 February this year , the Commission published a communication on relations between the EU and Iran , in which it notes that dialogue , which began in 1995 , has from 1998 onwards been in the form of half-yearly consultations between the troika and the Iranian Government and has taken on a comprehensive character , including global issues such as terrorism , human rights and the proliferation of nuclear weapons , as well as regional issues and cooperation in the areas of drugs , refugees , energy , trade and investment .
According to this communication , the EU , with about 40 % of Iranian imports , is Iran 's biggest trading partner , but at the same time bilateral relations are impeded by the absence of the framework that a treaty could provide .
The Commission recommends development of closer relations building on the progress made in the following areas : the rule of law , minority rights , freedom of the press , legislative and economic framework conditions and Iran 's role in foreign relations and its position on security issues .
Since the communication was published , President Khatami has been confirmed in office by a seventy-five per cent majority , and the world 's attention has been focused on Iran 's immediate neighbours by the terrorist attacks in the USA , which Iran has unambiguously condemned .
The draft Council decision on negotiation guidelines for a trade and cooperation agreement with Iran , drafted by the Commission , was delivered to the Council on 20 November .
In this report , I have especially tried to shed light on Iran 's internal developments in the political , economic and social spheres and to draw from them political conclusions for our attitude towards Iran .
My concern was to explore the EU 's interests in enhanced commercial exchanges in view of the country 's wealth of raw materials , but also in political dialogue on the fight against terrorism and the trade in drugs , and our respective contributions and potential contributions to resolving the Middle East conflict .
In addition , I would particularly like to make it clear that we in this Parliament take the Commission and the Council at their word , when they take progress in the rule of law , minority rights and press freedom as their benchmark when assessing to what extent relations should be stepped up .
We welcome on principle the planned trade and cooperation agreement and do not make its conclusion conditional on the prior attainment of a specified standard when it comes to the rule of law and respect for human rights .
I wish to highlight two reasons why that requirement can be dispensed with .
One is that we expect the agreement to include a human rights clause comparable to the Cotonou Agreement , which will help us at any time to effectively demand adherence to the international agreements Iran has signed on this subject .
The formularies on this subject in the preamble to the draft mandate , and the general reference to the final provisions on the possibility of suspension in the event of grave offences against significant elements of the treaty do not strike me as adequate .
I am , moreover , convinced that Iranian civil society is capable of implementing under its own steam the reforms appropriate to a modern and developing Islamic society .
Its intellectual potential , shown by its students , press and cultural life , is clear to outsiders .
Looked at as a whole , this country , with its culture and natural raw materials combined with human resources has in essence every chance of opening up to a better future .
However , the fact that elements in the judiciary and the clergy find it necessary to repeatedly ban newspapers , which then often re-establish themselves under new names , shows something of its dualism and contradictions and , in the final analysis , of the still-open question of who should wield power - a question which dominates in almost every area of this society .
The most recent example of this is the disappearance of the journalist and film critic Siamak Pourzand , to which the PEN Club drew attention on 5 December .
We have seen appalling photos in magazines of death sentences being carried out , as they have been to an increasing extent . There have been repeated reports of stoning being used as a method of execution , and there have been many public floggings this year , all of which indicate that ever greater effort is required to keep civil society in check .
The most recent reports by the United Nations also , and also the report of 12 November by Maurice Copithorne , the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights , are noticeably more critical than their equivalents in previous years , in terms of their estimate of the situation and the language they use .
All this makes it , in my view , a matter of urgent necessity that we should for our part build up our contacts and thereby strengthen the forces that the majority of the population know to be behind them .
By that I mean the forces that are in Parliament demanding greater freedom for the press and more rights for women ; and the economic sector , which wants to demolish the encrusted structures and to promote a constructive role for Iran in the Middle East peace process .
It is our desire that these forces be encouraged by parliamentary dialogue , so that they may better do justice to the task committed to them by the electorate and to the hopes and expectations of society .
The contradictoriness I have mentioned runs like a thread through other areas .
I gather that Iran , although not actually at the table of the Afghanistan conference in Bonn , played a very constructive role behind the scenes .
I think that should definitely be mentioned to Iran 's credit .
Iran could , on the other hand , exert a more moderating influence on certain groups tending to seek confrontation in the Middle East .
The European Parliament will not , though , do a deal on human rights in exchange for participation in the anti-terror coalition .
I expect the Council and the Commission to take a similar line .
Women have struggled to gain a number of positions in parliament , government , administration and culture , more so , perhaps , than in other neighbouring states .
On the other hand , regulations on clothing are imposed on them by male exegetes of the Koran , along with much else besides .
Nor are they adequately represented in many areas of society .
They are quite explicitly not on an equal footing as regards many aspects of the law , for example in family law .
We must - and will - treat all this as a central theme , just as we will acknowledge any progress made .
I would like , in this context , to thank all my colleagues whose amendments have further improved this report .
What mattered to me was that none of the facts should be passed over in silence , but also that the words used should not unnecessarily make the commencement of dialogue more difficult .
It is important in the economic sphere that it be made clear to the Iranians that fundamental reforms are needed , such as , in external terms , conformity with the standards set by the WTO and the opening-up of the market to overseas investors and their products ; collaboration in combating drugs is in the interests of both parties , and changes in Afghanistan mean that we must play our part in putting an end to their transit via Iran .
There is an extensive agenda for this dialogue .
We in Parliament want to make contact with our colleagues in the Iranian parliament .
I hope I can count on your support .
I very much welcome this report and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , on his excellent work .
I hope the House will understand if I am not able to be here until the end of the debate , but the Commission will be represented .
As a regional power , Iran has an important influence on developments in its area that has sometimes been called the arc of crisis .
We in the European Union have every interest in encouraging the authorities in Teheran to use this influence constructively , to promote stability , cooperation and development in the region .
And as the process of reform and liberalisation goes forward in Iran , we also have every interest to develop our bilateral relations as we tried to do with our troika visit a few weeks ago .
Over the past few years , and especially since the first election of President Khatami in 1997 , the European Union has engaged in a broad dialogue with Iran .
It has been useful but now we should go much further .
That is why we recently presented draft directives for the negotiation of a trade and cooperation agreement .
Once we have a contractual basis for our relationship , we will be in a much better position to develop exchanges not just in the economic area , but also on matters such as migration , drugs , energy and the environment .
That will also give us a sounder basis , with real shared interests , for continuing and deepening our political dialogue with Iran on regional and international issues .
We have welcomed Iran 's constructive and measured response to the atrocities of 11 September , to which the honourable Member referred .
Even before those terrible events President Khatami launched a very useful initiative in the UN for a Dialogue between Civilisations .
I was interested myself to have an exchange with the president about the works of Nicolo Machiavelli .
I have the impression that Iran fully understands the importance of implementing UN Security Resolution 1373 in the financial fight against terrorism , the need to ratify the twelve existing anti-terrorist conventions , and the need for a comprehensive convention .
In the aftermath of 11 September and in line with the efforts of the global coalition against terrorism , there will be increased scrutiny and less tolerance of states attempting to build arsenals of weapons of mass destruction .
In this regard Iran has adhered to the relevant treaties and conventions , but we want to see additional steps and increased transparency .
Full compliance with these agreements is essential .
We will also welcome co-operation to ensure a better future for Afghanistan under a new , broadly based administration .
We wholeheartedly support and encourage the process of reform in Iran .
But unfortunately things have slipped in the last year .
We share the concerns expressed by the UN Special Rapporteur , Mr Copithorne , in his recent report on human rights in Iran .
So we still have to adopt UN resolutions on this subject .
I believe we should explore other ways of conducting a more effective human rights dialogue with Iran , and I have begun this dialogue with the Iranian Foreign Ministry .
I have repeatedly told my Iranian interlocutors that we are keen to do that , if they also show a real commitment to reform .
The growing contacts of the Iranian authorities with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , Mrs Robinson , is a promising sign , as is the recent agreement between the UNDP and the Islamic Human Rights Commission on human rights covering monitoring and capacity building .
A lot more can and should be done , and the Commission will watch these developments closely and contribute in whatever way we can .
The potential for EU / Iran cooperation in trade , energy and economic matters is enormous .
That is recognised in our draft mandate for a trade and cooperation agreement .
The discussion among Member States in the Council has already got under way and I hope it will soon lead to a decision allowing us to start negotiations .
As always , there will be some difficulties on detail , but I am confident that everyone accepts that we have a strategic opportunity to develop our relationship with Iran .
In reply to some of the queries in the report , I can confirm that there will of course be a clause on human rights in the agreement , as there is in all our agreements with third countries .
Equally , we will include provisions on readmission of illegal immigrants , while also developing our cooperation with the Iranian authorities on the broader issues of migration .
Finally , I share the honourable Member 's pre-occupation with the drugs control issue .
I know that our Iranian counterparts do as well .
So I expect that the agreement will also help us extend and deepen cooperation in this area .
And in terms of the structure of our dialogue with Iran , I wholeheartedly support the suggestion of closer parliamentary contacts .
To conclude , let me thank Mr Gahler again for a very well-argued and balanced report on EU-Iran relations .
I take note of the constructive comments , and am pleased to see that the report encourages the line pursued by the Commission , including the establishment of contractual relations with Iran .
I will report back to Parliament on the progress that is made .
Thank you , Commissioner .
If the debate continues after 9 p.m. , then the Commission will of course be represented and will be willing to answer your questions .
However , I thought it would be more appropriate for the competent Commissioner to speak at this time .
Mr President , Iran is particularly noteworthy since it is an area that is surrounded by all manner of countries undergoing turbulence : Afghanistan , the southern Caucasus , Iraq and further away , Palestine .
That in itself is reason enough for expressly concerning ourselves with that country and especially because what we see happening there is not only negative , for there are also some positive developments .

This is why it makes sense to call for a dual-track policy : on the one hand , to maintain effective cooperation in the field of trade , the fight against drugs , against terrorism and such like , and possible cooperation in the reception of refugees , which is a full-scale problem in Iran at the moment , and on the other hand to level tough , clear and honest criticism on everything that contravenes the rule of law , democracy and human rights .
In my view , backed by the underlying attitude that we would like to see more democracy in Iran and the introduction of the rule of law - this can be encouraged in all kinds of ways - we could break through the deadlock which has come about in Iran in the wake of its conflict with the United States .
The EU ' s own attitude could possibly break this deadlock , and this is why I warmly welcome what the rapporteur has stated .
We should bear in mind that Shiite Iran , of course , represents , in fact , a modern version of Islam , although there are all kinds of things which we do not like , particularly the fact that a clericracy has declared itself a theocracy , which has always sounded rather blasphemous to me , and which means that the normal , human wishes of young people and women are suppressed .
On the other hand , we should note that the career opportunities of women too can indeed withstand the test of modernity .
With regard to the introduction of democratic wishes , we hear of quite a few positive developments .
In any case , I should like to subscribe to the rapporteur ' s conclusion that it is a logical step for us to contact the parliament in Iran , and offer my congratulations to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I feel that this is a balanced report on a complex subject . Its merit is that it lists the signals of progressive opening-up coming from Iran , particularly from its people , who , in the last elections , quite clearly expressed their desire for a policy of economic , social and political reform .
However , at the same time , the ultimate point of reference for us , for the European Union and for Parliament must be respect for human rights .
In this sense , I think we can say to the rapporteur that we do not support some of the amendments he has submitted for the perusal of this plenary in that they seem to be inspired by excessive indulgence in the area of human rights , an area in which we must never make any concessions .
Of course , the Iranian Government has condemned the violence of the destruction which took place on 11 September in New York ; of course , it declared its willingness to discuss human rights issues - we welcome that just as we welcome the way that women too have been able to resume their role in the course of recent years in institutions and in schools and university education , and also the Iranian Government ' s responsible endeavours to help stabilise the region .
However , certain facts remain , such as the unfulfilled expectations of Iranian society and the international community regarding the abolition of torture , the abolition of the death penalty , the abolition of the special religious courts and press courts and the abolition of particularly degrading and humiliating punishments .
I believe our task is to encourage the democratic forces , civil society and the many women and students who feel that , in the struggle between theocracy and democracy , it is possible for democracy to prevail .
We need to urge the Iranian Government to fully respect the mandate it has received from its people .
Lastly , we must promote political dialogue between the European Union and Iran .
In this sense , we are in favour of sending an ad hoc delegation to Iran and we hope , in particular , that the European Union will be able to play a full , useful political role to help Iran find its own path to democracy as soon as possible .
I feel , Mr President , that it is never our place to judge .
Encouragement and persuasion are part of the spirit of this report and must also characterise the way the European Union reinvigorates its relationship with Iran in the future .
Mr President , we in the Group of the Greens have absolutely nothing against improving economic , cultural and other relations with Iran .
As Commissioner Patten and Mr Gahler have said , positive moves are being made , but there is also much that is negative .
Improved relations should not lead to criticism being weakened .
This report raises the issue of whether criticism of a country with which general cooperation is improving needs to be toned down .
I believe this is a wholly incorrect view but , unfortunately , it appears to be the view of those on the right in this House , who wish to water down Mr Gahler ' s report .
In contrast , we believe that the Gahler report has its merits , but that it is too weak and must be made bolder on a number of points .
We have therefore submitted no fewer than ten amendments , of which I will mention only two .
Amendment No 13 is based on the proposal submitted by the EU to the UN , in which the Council is stronger in its criticism than Mr Gahler is in his report .
The amendment mentions issues such as stoning , which continues to occur .
I heard Mr Gahler mention it orally just now , but it is not included in the resolution .
I see this as watering down .
It is an omission not to clearly state that we utterly condemn such a terrible form of punishment .
There are a number of other matters which we believe should be included and which we have addressed in our Amendment No 13 .
Amendment No. 19 states that Iran is not a safe country for refugees .
It is very important to point out , in these times of strong sentiment in favour of expelling people from within the EU in a quite haphazard manner , that Iran is a highly unsafe destination for refugees .
Mr President , what I want to say is that the events of 11 September have , I think , made us all much wiser .
The human cost was tremendous but they made us all much wiser , both us and Iran , I think , and we understand the need for new bridges , dialogue , discussion and cooperation between the European Union and Iran to get under way in such an extended , important and dangerous area of instability .
I think that both the troika and Commissioner Patten have done interesting work and I think that the report and the motion for a resolution are generally on the right tack .
However , I must say that there is a little schizophrenia going on .
I am worried that the report contains a double message .
It is like saying to a neighbour with whom you are on bad terms , for whom you have little respect left , " Let us sit at the same table , but just remember that I think you a vulgar , good-for-nothing thief " .
That is more or less what our report says .
In paragraph 19 , for example , we are , I think , directly intervening in Iran 's internal affairs , given the past pattern , the lack of faith in even in the most straightforward people in Iran , who look at the United States , Great Britain and the European Union and suspect that they are about to come and impose their control again .
This being so , I think that we should tread very carefully .
We need to be in favour of the reforms .
Not for the reformists or against the conservatives .
As with any other country , we only have the right to insist on our own terms , based on the principles of the European Union and European culture , as the basis for meetings and discussion , but not for intervention if Khatami behaves or the clerics do not .
Because we shall be the ones opening up an opposition front in the European Union .
I think that the logic behind our past and present approach to Turkey , which is now a candidate for integration into the European Union , should also inform our relations with Iran .
This does not mean , I repeat , that we should underestimate the importance either of basic questions of human democratic rights , women 's rights , prisoners ' rights or the rights of religious minorities .
If we are careful , I think that these steps , which are important to both sides , can be taken .
Mr President , as an historian and ex-journalist , I have been quite fascinated by the emergence of , and developments within , the Islamic Republic of Iran over the years .
This particularly applies to the country ' s internal power struggle which flared up recently .
An interesting phenomenon in this connection is that quite a few current reform-minded people were once advocates of the power system they now denounce .
It is only natural that the conservative forces in Iran consider this sense of reform as an erosion of the political system .
They control the essential positions of power and neutralise reformist initiatives at their discretion .
They do not eschew highly repressive means .
With this , we have , in fact , outlined the duality in Iranian society .
The very detailed report by Mr Gahler analyses this in more detail .
We are on the side of the Iranian reformists .
They pursue a more open society and openly denounce coercion in religious matters .
Their fervent opponents , on the other hand , create an uncertain internal climate .
Our hesitation about endorsing a formal trade and cooperation agreement between the EU and Iran is epitomised by two concerns .
These are the violations of constitutional rights - think of the beleaguered position of religious minorities in that country - and the material support to terrorist Lebanese and Palestinian organisations .
On the other hand , an agreement would give us a formal foundation for addressing Tehran on a permanent basis with regard to the social abuses cited by Mr Gahler .
It is of crucial importance , however , that we do not wish to isolate the forces of change internationally in ancient Persia .
In fact , this course of action corresponds to the wishes of the majority of the population .
Like the reform-minded forces in the Islamic Republic , Iranian citizens are reaching out to the west , to Europe for help . We must lend a truly helping hand .
Thank you , Mr Belder .
This presidency would like to sincerely thank Mr Souladakis for his cooperation this session .
He will obviously be able to speak tomorrow as an extraordinary explanation of vote .
If he wants to repeat his whole speech as an explanation of vote , he will have the opportunity to do so tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.22 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Maritime safety
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A5-0440 / 2001 ) by Mr Watts , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95 / 21 / EC concerning the enforcement , in respect of shipping using Community ports and sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States , of international standards for ship safety , pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions ( port State control ) ( PE-CONS 3657 / 2001 - C5-0525 / 2001 - 2000 / 0065 ( COD ) ) ;
the report ( A5-0441 / 2001 ) by Mr Ortuondo Larrea , on behalf of European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 94 / 57 / EC on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( PE-CONS 3656 / 2001 - C5-0526 / 2001 - 2000 / 0066 ( COD ) ) ;
the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0344 / 2001 ) , by Mr Hatzidakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the accelerated phasing-in of double hull or equivalent design standards for single hull oil tankers and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2978 / 94 ( 10221 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0389 / 2001 - 2000 / 0067 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I should like to begin , perhaps unusually for me , by thanking the various people who have made this evening possible , in particular the Commissioner and all her staff within the maritime unit of her DG , and the maritime safety unit in particular .
Also the Council , who are not represented this evening , but it should go on record how helpful the Belgian Presidency has been . I should also like to say how helpful the French presidency was in making sure that we made rapid progress .
I should also like to thank my colleagues in the European Parliament who stood together through this process , with the difficult challenges we faced , but which we overcame together .
Because of that we are able tonight to celebrate a historic victory for the European institutions in the field of maritime safety .
Together we have achieved a great deal .
I will not dwell on the other reports .
My fellow rapporteurs will do that .
I should like to focus on my report on port state control , which is an essential part of our regime to make sure that events such as that involving the Erika never happen again .
Two years ago today the Erika was a symptom of a failed system of maritime safety .
It was not the first of its kind , nor , sadly , was it the last maritime disaster of its kind .
It symbolised to me and my colleagues in the European Parliament the fact that the flag state controls had failed .
The classification society controls had failed .
The port state controls had failed and the IMO itself had failed .
It is only because of the collective action of the European Union and its institutions that we have stimulated in the last two years unparalleled levels of activity in the field of maritime safety .
Without the European Union , we would not be as advanced today as we are .
We should all be very pleased that we have the European Union to spearhead action in this area .
What do we have to be so pleased and proud about ?
I want to list some of the achievements that we have secured in respect of port state control .
Firstly , there is going to be mandatory inspection for certain ships .
That is an innovation and I welcome it .
It means that the most dangerous ships will be inspected in future .
Secondly , enhanced inspection for other categories of ships and , thirdly , the guidelines on inspections themselves will become mandatory .
In other words port state control authorities will have to inspect certain types of ships in certain ways .
Fourthly , we want the Member States that have been a weak link in the system to train and recruit adequate numbers of port state control inspectors .
They will have until 2003 to do that , but it is a challenge for them and it is a challenge , I hope , that they can rise to .
Fifthly - and this is absolutely critical to the success of this new regime - we want public access to the information .
Again that is in the amended directive and will be made available via the Equasis database .
Sixthly , we want the Member States and the port state control authorities in particular , to convey the information to the Commission so that the Commission can do its job in making sure the amended directive is uniformly implemented across the European Union .
The seventh point , which I mention with a certain pleasure , concerns the ability to ban and detain certain ships - banning the most dangerous ships , particularly those that fly the flags of blacklisted flag states .
I welcome the strong controls we have to ban certain ships from European Union waters if they have a poor detention record .
That effectively will be a warning shot across the bows of these blacklisted flag states : over a period of time their ships will be banned one by one if they do not improve .
A very important message will be going out from this Parliament .
But also there will be the power to detain , in particular the power to detain ships which , by 2008 , do not have a fully functioning voice data recorder , a black box .
Again the message can go out tonight that by 2008 all categories of ships , if they want to come to a European port , must have a black box voice data recorder .
If they do not have one , we will detain the ship until one is secured .
Once more , I welcome the fact that we have all worked together to secure that particular achievement .
The black box will change the culture of shipping .
It will not just be a tool whereby we can learn lessons from disasters and apply them in the future .
A ship with a black box is a safe ship .
Our common aim tonight is to make sure the Erika and disasters like it never occur again .
I do not believe that we will achieve that simply by adopting these reports tomorrow but we will have gone a long way to securing our goal to protect lives at sea and to protect the marine environment .
But we must remain vigilant .
Our duty now must be to make sure that the laws we pass tomorrow are implemented by everyone - the Commission , Member States and port state control authorities .
That is our duty and responsibility .
I hope we can live up to that .
Mr President , Commissioner , after the sinking of the oil tanker Erika on 12 December 1999 , this Parliament and the Council requested a significant strengthening of the Community rules on maritime safety and the prevention of pollution .
The Commission responded quickly to these demands by presenting the three proposals known as the Erika I package , which we are still debating two years after that disaster , although we have finally reached agreements on each of them in Council , which are definitive in the case of the first two .
In the case of the modification of the Directive on the common rules and standards for organisations which classify , inspect and examine ships on behalf of the maritime administration , from the outset , the parliamentary amendments to Commission ' s original proposal focussed , above all , on the practical aspects of the application of the classification system , on improving the transparency of the information relating to the quality of inspections , on the periodic auditing of those organisations and the withdrawal of their Community recognition in the event of serious accidents , as well as the financial liability of those organisations for damages and accidents where is has been proved that that there has been negligence in inspections .
After the Council ' s adoption of its common position , we moved on to second parliamentary reading , where we insisted on issues relating to resolving the conflicts of interest which may arise between classification societies or organisations and the owners and / or charterers of ships , as well as on financial liability in cases of negligence or omission in judgements .
When the Council communicated that it could not accept all Parliament ' s amendments , we moved on to the stage of conciliation between the representatives of the two Community institutions .
The discussion focussed firstly on the issue of the conflict of interests , where the Council finally accepted that a classification organisation must not be controlled by owners or builders of ships or by other persons or entities which are commercially involved in the construction , equipping , repair or operation of ships .
It also focussed on the idea that , at the point of requesting recognition , the classification society and its inspectors should commit themselves in writing , on an individual basis , to not accepting regulatory duties where there is a risk of a conflict of interests and , in particular , where those societies are the owners of the ship which is to be inspected , or have commercial , personal or family connections with those owners .
For its part , the parliamentary delegation , while considering that much of the work of the inspectors should be done by the maritime administration and that the latter should have subsidiary responsibility , accepted that it should not be obligatory for the Member States to establish a maximum limit for the financial liability of classification societies in the event of damages due to slight negligence in inspections , although in the event that those Member States wish to establish that maximum limit , that limit should not be less that EUR 2 million and EUR 4 million respectively , depending on whether the damage only affects material objects or also people .
However , the delegations of the two institutions considered that this issue should be examined within the framework of the evaluation report , which the Commission will present within three years , on the economic impact of the liability regime and , in particular , its consequences for the financial equilibrium of recognised organisations .
If necessary , the Commission will present , in the light of the said evaluation , a proposal for a modification of this directive which deals specifically with the principle of liability and the maximum limit for the financial contribution .
In conclusion , I believe that the European Parliament should be satisfied with the final result of the conciliation , since the majority of our amendments have been incorporated , either fully , in a revised form or in spirit , into the joint text , and we therefore propose that this latter text be approved by the House at third reading .
Finally , I would like to draw the attention of the relevant legal authorities to the fact that certain people harmed by the Erika accident are yet to receive any compensation for the damage suffered , despite the fact that two years have passed since this tragic event took place .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President and dear fellow-believers - I can call you that , because all of those sitting here are those who have moved this project forward over the years and who are committed to making ships safe .
Speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats , I would like to observe - it being two years since the Erika disaster - that we may be a little late with the adoption of this legislative package , but we have not done at all badly in terms of keeping to the timetable if you consider the difficulties that have been involved .
Even then , two areas of the legislation have involved us having to go through a second reading and the conciliation procedure .
Today , we can see that , on the basis of the Commission 's initial proposals submitted two years ago now after the tanker crashed , our joint efforts have brought progress , and I again wish to thank you , Commissioner de Palacio , for the committed support you and your colleagues gave us in the conciliation process .
By means both of these two results from the conciliation process and the common position , we have significantly increased not only the safety of ships , but also that of their crews , the environment and of people who live in coastal regions .
I believe that enhanced port state control , more stringent regulations for classification societies and the progressive introduction of double hull tankers mean that we really have moved ahead in preventing accidents like that of the Erika , or at least alleviating their consequences .
Commissioner , I would like to say this about port state control .
I believe it was a good thing that , in the conciliation process , we - and especially Mark Watts - insisted on sorting out the ' black box ' issue now .
You will see that the ' Erika II ' package does not quite go that far .
I hope it soon will do , but you will be aware that it is still causing a few difficulties .
That being so , we were right to insist on the requirement for a ' black box ' being incorporated into the ' Erika I ' package .
My colleagues are aware that I am less happy about the result of the ship classification issue .
We may well not have an upper limit , but we do have an appeal clause .
I trust that the Commission will , after three years , produce a report submitting new proposals to us on how damage can be compensated for .
This affects shipping companies , shipping agents , and classification societies - how about a fair compromise on who should shoulder the damage ?
We were , I think , very wise when it came to the common position on double hull tankers .
We should let the whole world know that .
We are always being accused of drafting European norms and disregarding worldwide conventions .
No !
We have accepted that the IMO sets the ground rules and have only made minor changes affecting implementation and time limits .
What we have insisted on as regards implementation looks quite harmless in comparison with what the Americans forced through !
I hope we will be able to adopt the second package next year .
So , Commissioner , bring some pressure to bear on the Council !
As far as the ' cope fund ' compensation rule is concerned , we do not want to be kept waiting for the next five years .
I am relying on you to push for this .
rapporteur .
( EL ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , this report on the accelerated phasing-out of single hull tankers seemed at first to be an extremely complicated matter and we have been down a long hard road in order to reach today 's result .
Nonetheless , I think that we have finally done so in a most satisfactory manner , which has gone beyond all our expectations .
On the one hand , we have managed to find an effective response to the concerns of the citizens of Europe , especially in France following the shipwreck of the Erika , as regards environmental protection .
At the same time , we have taken fundamental measures in maritime safety because , as all sides agree , double-hull tankers may not be a panacea but they are at least proven to be safer than single-hull tankers .
However , we also achieved another objective : the objective of protecting the competitiveness of the shipping industry .
We must not forget that this is a vital sector of our economy , a sector which employs tens of thousands of workers throughout Europe and one of our priorities must be to protect it .
We also achieved something else which I think I should highlight : we managed to find an international solution to a problem which goes beyond national borders .
We have before us a solution which has now been adopted by all the countries in the International Maritime Organisation .
I think that credit for this has to go to the European Commission , the Member States and the European Parliament because , thanks to our initiative , thanks to our - how shall I put it ? - our threat that we would proceed unilaterally if the International Maritime Organisation failed to act , the International Maritime Organisation which , we must admit , has not always acted quite as fast as we would all like it to act , has pushed ahead and adopted a number of measures which mirror the initial proposals submitted by the Commission and the Member States .
So clear , efficient measures are being taken for all the classes of tanker which have concerned us and I am happy to say that today we have achieved something which did in fact appear to be beyond reach just a short time ago .
On the one hand , I think that people in France are relatively satisfied with the measures we are adopting and that every European with an environmental conscience is satisfied with the significant progress made while , on the other hand , industrial factors , people engaged in shipping , seamen and shipowners , feel that we have not gone too far and undermined the interests of this important sector of the economy .
So I should like to thank all the honourable members with whom we cooperated so efficiently that we now have this text before us and , of course , to thank and congratulate the Vice-President of the European Commission , Mrs de Palacio , for the way in which she has handled this issue and for her decisiveness and excellent disposition towards the European Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to join those who have spoken before me in expressing thanks to you , to the Commissioner , to your colleagues and also to our rapporteurs , for I do think it was a good thing that we , as Parliament and Commission , worked together so closely on this issue .
That today is , of all days , the anniversary of the sinking of the Erika , is not something that should fill us entirely with pride , for two years have passed before today 's debate and tomorrow 's vote .
Then it will take a bit longer for it all to be implemented .
It should be done more quickly next time !
The results are actually quite respectable .
We are getting the safe double hull tankers more quickly .
The old single hull tankers will be phased out with effect from 2003 , and port state control will at last live up to its name .
Stricter controls mean for me that blacklists will be used rigorously and , in consequence , black sheep , or black ships , will no longer be welcome in European ports .
Classification societies for ship types will be subject to stricter conditions .
Although we know that the majority of these societies do sound work , they must no longer be permitted to be slipshod in what they do .
The Member States now have 18 months in which to transpose all this .
The legal framework is in place .
Yet laws that only exist on paper are , in the final analysis , ridiculous .
What use is port state control without controllers ?
I therefore believe - and here we are putting our trust in you , Commissioner - that you will have to check very punctiliously how the Member States transpose the things we have just brought into being .
It will cost the Member States money , but safety at sea must be worth the expense .
So here are two more points .
One is something I have already mentioned .
Erika II must not be allowed to last as long as Erika I did .
Accidents involving oil are one thing , but damage to people , nature , fisheries and tourism are something else , and result not only from accidents involving oil , but also from those involving chemicals and other hazardous substances .
So we should implement more quickly the proposals Parliament has made .
My final point is that enlargement of the EU is almost upon us , involving as it does two candidate states , Malta and Cyprus , which have cropped up in discussions again and again .
So I would again implore the Commissioner to apply the so-called acquis communautaire very stringently to these states too in the event of their becoming members of the EU , so that there may be no black sheep , only white ones .
I have said already that we have a saying to the effect that one is in the hand of God at sea and in court !
As far as the sea is concerned , we can give the Almighty a bit of a helping hand , so that everything will be safer , and that is what we should be doing with the Erika package .
Mr President , my colleagues , on behalf of my group I thank the rapporteurs for the preparation of their fine reports , and also for the good outcomes in conciliation .
These statutory proposals belonging to the " Erika I " package contain essential measures for the increasing of marine safety .
These matters have also made reasonably rapid progress , and in conciliation the essential changes to the texts demanded by Parliament have been incorporated .
In the case of the classification societies , the Community 's authority needs to be increased with regard to the approval and control of these societies .
As the rapporteur stated , the classification society must not be under the authority of the owners or builders of the vessels , or of others engaged in commercial activity in the sector .
Inspections of vessels must also be increased .
Extended inspections must be directed specifically at vessels which represent a risk .
In the case of vessels on the " black list " which are associated with a high risk , the criteria for entry of the vessel to a port must be stricter .
In order that accidents can be prevented in advance as effectively as possible , we need an advance notification obligation for vessels and mandatory inspections of high-risk vessels .
The port control directive will improve the uniformity and effectiveness of the inspection procedure of port States .
It is appropriate that vessels be furnished with Voyage Data Recorders in future , and that access to EU ports can be denied to vessels which are clearly in a poor condition .
An accelerated phasing-in of double hull vessels must be managed in such a way as to avoid generating insurmountable problems with the scrapping of ships and the building of new ones .
At the same time , the flexibility of oil transportations must be safeguarded .
The safety of shipping and the prevention of marine pollution may be promoted by the flag States enforcing the currently valid conventions so as to make them obligatory .
Along with the further tightening of regulations , care must be taken that the decisions to be made are realistic and feasible .
One of the points of emphasis of the EU 's White Paper on transport is the favouring of water traffic in transportation .
Because of its environmental friendliness , water traffic is indeed very suitable for heavy goods transportation .
In the event of accidents , however , water routes are highly vulnerable , and environmental damage recognises no borders .
For this reason , decisions made only within the Union are not sufficient ; instead , questions of responsibility for marine safety must be dealt with on a worldwide basis .
We need international agreements which also involve ( for example ) Russia , whose vessels will in future be sailing more and more in the world 's seas via the Gulf of Finland and the Baltic .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should at any rate like to thank everyone , including the team behind the Commissioner , for example , for the quality and volume of work they have all done .
However , I regularly suffer nightmares .
When I wake up , I just hope and pray that another oil tanker has not run aground . I hope that will not be the case in the next three years either , for - everyone has already said it - it has been long enough , it is actually taking too long before we can lay down legislation , and we are only halfway .
Speeding up processes of this kind can do no harm at all .
A disaster such as the one involving the Erika is simply a real disaster , not only environmentally , but also economically and socially , and it can be entirely traced back to 80 000 ships , some ten percent of which , 8 000 ships , are absolutely sub-standard .
This is to a certain extent where the problem lies , or in large part at any rate .
Despite the fact that classification bureaux were involved and despite what has happened with , and is suggested about , double hulls , I should briefly like to focus on the port state control , for in the final analysis , what matters is that inspections should become effective .
Mr Piecyk , but also others , have already drawn attention to this .
Actually , we want 25 % of inspections by way of a yardstick . But what mainly matters is that these inspections are carried out by well-trained people , and that they are carried out in the first place .
We should , for example , call the French Transport Minister to account for the fact that his country scores exceptionally low in the percentage of inspections that are carried out .
Although we now have a perfect and itemised list , enforcement still appears to be a problem .
This is often the case when we draft legislation , but particularly so now .
I therefore intend to monitor annual surveys of the Paris memorandum of understanding and other matters in the next few months with the help of others , and check whether inspection of this kind is , in fact , on the increase .
I would also ask the Commissioner to ensure that we receive an annual overview , so that we can be active and pro-active to ensure that what we want to achieve actually happens .
Secondly , I would mainly call for a prompt completion of the Erika II , and for accelerating the process in the light of the tiresome pace on the part of industry with regard to separate funding and such like .
I would like to finish off with one point .
Malta and Cyprus have been mentioned in connection with enlargement .
There are still two that , let us say , are on the waiting list , including Romania .
Romania is another country with an exceptionally bad track record on this black list , and I would call for extra attention to be paid to it .
Mr President , it is by sheer coincidence that today we are sadly commemorating the second anniversary of the sinking of the Erika oil tanker .
On the stormy night of 12 December 1999 , this oil tanker , which was flying a Maltese flag , certified by an Italian classification society , manned by an Indian crew , insured by a company registered in the Bermudas , financed by a Scottish bank , chartered by a Shell company that sub-chartered it to a foreign subsidiary of the Total Group , which was transporting extremely polluting hydrocarbon belonging to another subsidiary of Total , sank off the French coast , thus polluting 400 kilometres of coastline and causing considerable damage estimated to cost more than FFR 5 billion .
So , what progress has been made , two years after this tragedy ?
Hardly any of the victims have received compensation .
The IOPC Fund will only cover FFR 1.2 billion out of the FFR 5.5 billion of damages caused , and procedures are turning out to be lengthy , complicated and inefficient .
The remainder will be borne by the victims , the local authorities and the French Government , pursuant to the application , not of the polluter pays principle , but of the perverse principle dictating that the victim pays .
The various measures that we are currently debating in the three reports by Mr Watts , Mr Ortuondo Larrea and Mr Hatzidakis have taken too long .





Yes , we must strengthen State port controls , Mr Watts ; yes , we must ensure the work of classification societies is more efficient , more reliable and more transparent , Mr Ortuondo Larrea ; yes , Mr Hatzidakis , we must take concerted action at international level to phase out single hull oil tankers , whilst bearing in mind that double hull tankers cannot guarantee that ships will not sink or run aground .
But why will we have had to wait more than two years after the disaster for such basic measures to be taken in these three areas ?
And , more importantly , there are two fundamental questions that remain unanswered , and it has also not yet been established whether it is appropriate to take these decisions at European level .
The first question relates to compensation .
All the victims must be fully compensated .
Today , however , there are considerable differences of opinion at European level .
Some people are in favour of setting up a specific European fund , whilst others prefer to increase the IOPC Fund .
The differences of opinion persist and we cannot move ahead with this issue , whereas the United States , on the other hand , has unilaterally set up a very efficient and comprehensive compensation system , which is effectively funded by consumers of oil products , which is perfectly logical and legitimate .
In Europe , Member States have different ideas about the risks of maritime pollution and it would therefore be perfectly legitimate for the countries that are at the forefront of this risk to take the necessary measures themselves .
I urge them to do so .
The second fundamental question that is yet to be resolved relates to the issue of responsibility .
We cannot allow events , such as that involving the Erika , to ever happen again , where the front company was based in a tax haven , the flag of convenience was sub-chartered , the sub-contractor was an off-shore subsidiary and no less than 11 different companies had an interest in the ship and its cargo , thus creating a real labyrinth , in which the real decision-makers and those bearing the actual responsibility could hide .
This situation is particularly hazardous .
The Member States that are most concerned must ensure , as a matter of urgency , that there is clarification and transparency in the area of responsibility . This must also be done at a global level , as , Mr President , only the threat of very heavy and very severe penalties will be enough to deter the potential polluters of the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am optimistic .
We are going down the right track as regards the safety of ships .
We have already clearly defined the first measures that may lead to substantial improvements in safety at sea .
One considerable contribution to this is the introduction of the black box , with which we are familiar from aircraft , as well as of the double hull tanker .
Parliament has emphasised certain features - where necessary in the Conciliation Committee , as Mr Ortuondo Larrea mentioned .
Does this , though , also apply to the settlement of liabilities ?
You are all familiar with the regular technical examination of private cars .
It is a similar position that the classification societies take with regard to safety at sea .
The extent of liability in the event of accidents at sea is based on inspectors ' evaluations of the condition ships are in .
This brings us at once to the core of the discussion , for the issue of the classification societies ' standard upper limits for liability , particularly in cases of minor negligence , needs to be resolved finally and coherently .
The decartelisation of the interests of the classification societies , the shipowners and the other actors means that we are now already achieving a high degree of transparency and independence for the inspectors .
Decartelisation of interests must not , though , be allowed to go so far that the actors are played off against each other and end up eventually outdoing each other .
The liability issue becomes of fundamental importance at this point .
It is in the final analysis the classification societies that occupy the most vulnerable position in the liability chain .
Their assessment is admittedly decisive in determining the extent of liability , but , for example , they have no police powers , so that they could not , for example , confine a ship to port if that were to prove necessary .
In the end , responsibility for the condition of the ship and for its handling remains with the owners .
The classification societies and the shipping companies must act jointly with the other parties involved in this , and we must create the conditions for this to happen .
There are at present different upper limits for liability in each Member State , but it would be fair to limit liability to one standard across the board .
In three years ' time we will be re-examining this regulation on a varying upper limit .
The knowledge and experience we will have gained by then will influence our further action and leave their mark on it .
I see this as our task for the immediate future .
We want to end up with a balanced chain of liability and responsibility .
We need this binding regulation in order to enhance competition and limit risks , both indispensable to a functioning market and safety at sea .
It is true that we are subjecting the classification societies to tighter control , but , at the same time , we should make it possible for them to calculate their risks .
I consider this regulation to be a fair one , which takes all sides into account in an appropriate way .
Having chosen our road ahead , we must now go down it and pursue it to the end .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Conciliation Committee , I am delighted that we have achieved a positive result and can now press on and apply effective measures to protect our seas and our shipping industry .
We have taken a moderate line and brokered a series of realistic measures , seeing shipping not as an ' enemy ' but as a friend who could do better , given that , may I remind you , shipping is only responsible for 12 % of total maritime pollution .
So , ships which seriously endanger our seas will be denied entry to Community ports and voyage data recorders will be fitted to all ships , so that their course can be checked following an accident , God forbid .
Compulsory double hulls will be phased in and the rules governing ship survey and control organisations will be improved .
Clearly , the catalyst behind this successful outcome , or at least one part of it , was the International Maritime Organisation , which took the right stand thanks to the initiative taken by the Member States of the Union .
So now we need to concentrate on fast implementation , and here we are putting our faith in fast reaction on the part of the Commission , not forgetting that five Member States which , I may add , do not include Greece , have been charged by the Commission with not applying a previous , more lenient directive .
May I also remind you and highlight the fact that Greece , whose economy , as you know , is far more dependent on shipping than that of any of our partners , is leading the way and is at the vanguard in the fight for maritime safety and efforts to protect human life and the environment .
We must also give special thanks to everyone who helped to bring this endeavour to a successful conclusion , especially the Commissioner , and I trust that we shall not forget that the seas of Europe are not a separate entity from the other seas on our planet .
Mr President , Commissioner , today being the anniversary of the sinking of the Erika on 12 December 1999 , my group and I are pleased to see that conciliation on three sets of proposals has been successful .
Concerning the Watts report , we are particularly pleased that the European Parliament ' s delegation succeeded in making black boxes compulsory , which was not the easiest thing to do .
This means that , from now on , a ship will be detained if it is not fitted with a functioning VDR system .
With regard to Mr Ortuondo Larrea ' s report , the question of the conflict of interests has been resolved in such a way that classification societies can no longer have any links with shipbuilders , shipowners , operators or charterers .
Likewise , there is the question of the limits of the financial liability of these companies with regard to the financial balance of recognised organisations .
There is also the problem that Mr Souchet mentioned of providing compensation payments from the IOPC Fund or from a European fund in a more efficient manner .
It is also a matter of urgency , as Mr Hatzidakis said , to settle , at third reading , the problem of single hull ships , mainly in view of the 2015 deadline , as maritime safety issues cannot wait any longer - it is already two years to the day since the sinking of the Erika .
Intermittent spills and substandard ' dustbin ships ' , such as the one that recently sunk off the coast of Brest , are still all too topical and it is a test of the EU ' s credibility to resolve this situation once and for all .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , following the Erika accident , the profound , and totally legitimate , concern of the European citizens and the urgent need to consolidate the Community legislation in the field of maritime safety became clear .
This concern led to the Commission ' s proposals and I would therefore now like to congratulate the Commission and its Vice-President , Mrs de Palacio , since we have all witnessed the tenacity with which she has personally dealt with these issues .
I also congratulate the rapporteurs on the wonderful work they have done , completing this package of measures .
Ladies and gentlemen , during my intervention in the May part-session , I said that we could be relatively satisfied with the way we have responded to the expectations of our citizens , in trying to approve these initiatives as quickly as possible - in inverted commas - by Community standards .
The Erika I package and future approval of the Erika II package will make it possible to create a genuine European area of maritime safety and must guarantee an optimum level of protection for the maritime environment and the European coastal regions .
Today I simply wish to repeat part of what I said then , since the circumstances have not changed .
This Parliament has shown its great interest throughout the negotiation process .
We must now continue to work in this direction and promote the measures which are yet to be approved .
We must not rest on our laurels and we must call on the Council so that progress can be made on the Erika II package and , in this respect , Commissioner , your role and your tenacity will be very important if we are to try to convince the Council once again , so that we may have the Erika II package more quickly .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate all of my fellow Members , who , in my view , have done some excellent work .
The European Parliament will have had a great influence on these documents .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner , Mrs Loyola de Palacio who , I believe , has worked as quickly as possible within the procedures laid down .
Mr Souchet thought that the progress made was slow .
I think that he is right .
On the other hand , we had reached the end of a parliamentary procedure , which is very difficult to cut down when we embark on conciliation .
I therefore believe that we have worked as quickly as possible and yet , it will take a total of three and a half years to draw up a text on Erika I after the law has been transposed by the national governments . All this leads me to make some comments on governance .
We discuss this elsewhere , outside the context of transport , and I think that these subjects require the codification of urgent parliamentary procedures that will allow us to proceed legally .
I think that this is a proposal which is expected from bodies such as ourselves or which could be drawn up by them .
We see that we have the same problem with the tunnels and the revision of the Seveso Directives .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that we must spend time considering the urgent procedures which will be included in the Treaties .
I also think that we must ensure that these directives are transposed into national law .
We now have a body of texts and of maritime law without equal at European level , and also the Erika II package which is currently under discussion .
The Member States will no longer be able to play hide and seek with the European Commission , as they could at the beginning of the Erika I crisis .
Furthermore , we have no guarantee - as President Prodi recently said - that the directives are being transposed into national law within the time allowed .
And , at the end of the day , if we can be satisfied that we have produced some good European legislation today , we still do not know whether all these measures will be implemented , and within what time scale . The victims of the oil spills and accidents have been waiting for these measures for a long time .
Lastly , I think that the controls do not give enough reassurance , and this is true of all the operating provisions .
These usually involve self-regulation at national level , and I think that , in terms of governance as well , and if we truly wish to move forward , we must ask ourselves the question of how we are to monitor the monitoring systems .
Mr President , the running aground of the oil tanker Erika triggered a large number of activities on the part of the Commission , which were truly welcome .
However , I stand by my earlier reflection that it is better to act before an accident occurs than to react after it .
Both the rapporteur and the Conciliation Committee have done an excellent job with regard to the Commission ' s proposal to further improve various measures , and Parliament has improved the proposal even further .
We have now pushed through our view with regard to conflicts of interest .
We have , moreover , succeeded in getting the lower limit for classification societies ' liability for damages to the level at which we always wanted it .
This must be seen as clear progress .
The report on port State control also looks significantly better now .
In conciliation , Parliament managed to push through the requirement for black boxes , which I believe is a particularly positive move .
The solution regarding the third issue of introducing double hulls or such like for single-hull oil tankers has also been considerably more positive than it long appeared would be the case .
In this case too , Parliament has had almost all its amendments included in the Council ' s common position .
In summary , I would like to say that , on these issues , Parliament has clearly shown its capacity to act .
Each of the proposals alone would not have sufficed , but together they constitute a significant step in the right direction .
In a tangible way , we have taken developments in the right direction towards safer and better seafaring and a better marine environment .
Hopefully , this will ensure that accidents such as those involving the Erika or the Levoli Sun will not occur in the future .
Mr President , two days ago , we Finns received tragic news - the beautiful beaches around Runsala near Turku had been affected by an oil slick from an unknown source .
Unfortunately , the proposals being debated today will not help in this type of case .
This is a classic example of a discharge from an unknown source , and despite the restructuring of port and pilotage fees which we have adopted at EU level , these small discharges have increased in the Baltic Sea .
The risk of being prosecuted is also very small .
At the same time , we are now , unfortunately , seeing the opening of the port in Primorsk .
This port has severely icy conditions , and we know that the package which we are approving today may not perhaps lead to vessels having double hulls until 2017 .
However , double hulls are no help now , as the ice has already formed in Primorsk port .
Only through compulsory pilotage , effective strengthening of the hull against ice , efficient traffic monitoring and good teamwork between the rescue services can we do anything for this port and this unique part of the world .
I would ask you , Commissioner , in your continued contacts with Russia , to focus attention on the safety of traffic to Primorsk .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sinking of the Erika reminded the world of the general risks involved in the sea transport of certain types of pollutants , especially oil and oil-based products .
It also highlighted the inadequacy of safety controls and the lack of transparency in sea transport practices , as well as the profound discontent of the populations affected , owing to the slowness of compensation .
As the rapporteur , Mr Ortuondo , has quite rightly pointed out , the victims of this accident have yet to receive their money .
It was also a test of the European Union ' s capacity to react quickly and to offer its citizens a suitable response to their concerns .
I must say that , despite the fact that all has not gone perfectly , that perhaps we could have adopted it on first reading - as I would have liked - , that perhaps both Parliament and the Council could have shown greater flexibility , the reality is that , despite everything , within one and a half years of the Commission presenting its initiative , today , two years after the accident , we are finally approving the Erika I package .
In this respect , we must remember that there was a serious disaster off the same coast ten years ago and initiatives were presented by the Commission , but they did not overcome the hurdle of the Council .
I would therefore like to point out that the considerable success of approving this Erika I package today would certainly not have been achieved had it not been for the insistence and firmness of this Parliament , which has maintained systematic pressure on the Council throughout the negotiation process .


I would like to expressly thank Mr Watts , Mr Hatzidakis and Mr Ortuondo Larrea for their work and tenacity over these two years .
Their determination , which I welcome , has allowed us to persuade the Council to approve texts which initially enjoyed only a very small majority yet have been able , at the end of the day , to overcome any reservations .
We have considerably strengthened the European Union ' s legislative arsenal .
Furthermore , the texts approved will have significant specific consequences , whose effects will be immediately noticeable .
The Member States must recruit a large number of inspectors in order to deal with greater obligations in controlling ships in ports .
Furthermore , shipowners , charterers , flag States and classification societies who are complacent or negligent in their operation or monitoring of ships will henceforth be liable to severe penalties such as the prohibition of ships not meeting minimum requirements from entering European ports , the publication of the names of negligent charterers or the withdrawal of the authorisation of classification societies in the event of poor performance .
Finally , I believe it is important to highlight another point of fundamental importance : Europe has once and for all made its mark as an indispensable partner in the international arena in the field of safety and all aspects relating to the maritime sector .
In this regard , on the delicate issue of double hull ships , the States of the Union have not only reached an agreement so that , from 2015 , no single hull oil tanker will be able to stop in any Community port , but also , and above all , the Union has persuaded the International Maritime Organisation to approve these requirements for all the oil tankers in the world .
I believe it is also important to point out that the Erika II package which completes the whole initiative has made considerable progress recently .
Last Friday the Transport Council approved a common position , pending final and formal approval next week , with regard to the Community system for monitoring traffic and the European Maritime Safety Agency .
With regard to the proposed regulation on the Community fund for compensating damages resulting from accidental pollution , it is true that we are once again waiting for things to move ahead within the International Maritime Organisation .
But I would like to say that it is already a great success that the Community initiative has led the current international debate - specifically within the IMO - towards the creation of an international fund which takes up the principles of the Commission ' s proposal .
Of course , we must ensure that the final result in the IMO conforms to our demands and ambitions .
We are working on this and , just as we have ensured that things move ahead in the Union - thanks to Mr Watts ' insistence - in relation to black boxes , we also hope that the same will happen on this issue within the IMO .
I would like to clarify certain matters .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say publicly that Malta and Cyprus are making a considerable effort to update their ship ' s registers and to exclude and expel those that do not conform to the requirements of the Union .
I would like to end my speech by thanking Parliament and the three rapporteurs , who have worked brilliantly , for their support to the Commission .
I would also like to ask them to cooperate with the other parliamentarians so that the Erika II package may pass through this House as soon as possible and that it may enter into force without delay .
I would also like to publicly thank the services of the Commission , whose efforts have been wonderful .
For your information , I am going to give you a piece of information on the subject of governance : the services relating to the maritime sector in the Directorate-General for Transport - including secretaries - comprise no more than 40 people , and they are the human team behind all these initiatives , as well as a series of other tasks and functions relating to the maritime , port and other sectors .
This may give you an idea of the workload and the efforts made throughout this time .
This time the European Union has demonstrated that we have taken the fight against marine pollution seriously .
I would like to end by saying that , two years after the Erika tragedy , the satisfaction and success represented by the approval of the Erika I package today really must be a homage to all the citizens whose lives have been affected as a result of the sinking of the Erika two years ago .
It must be a homage to all Europeans , who , over recent years , have seen the systematic repetition of huge disasters involving pollutants without any suitable or tangible measures , with sufficient rigour and sufficient demands , being taken , and also those of us who are genuine lovers of the sea and of the environment , who are thinking not just of today but of future generations .
Thank you very much to all of you for your cooperation .
Thank you so much , Commissioner , for your important statement .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Cross-border provision of occupational pensions
The next item is the report ( A5-0388 / 2001 ) by Mrs van den Burg , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on the elimination of tax obstacles to the cross-border provision of occupational pensions ( COM ( 2001 ) 214 - C5-0533 / 2001 - 2001 / 2212 ( COS ) ) .
It is a pleasure for me to present here today a virtually unanimous draft opinion of the European Parliament on two often very controversial topics : tax policy and pensions .
This illustrates the urgency of this dossier .
Two aspects that are very topical at the moment in the European Union are the ageing population and labour mobility . It also illustrates that the report is broad-based .
I was appointed rapporteur for this topic more than a year ago .
The Commission notification had not been published at the time .
We were waiting for a directive proposal and were initially very critical because you , Commissioner Bolkestein , presented nothing but a notification .
Moreover , it took a very long time , until April of this year , before it was published .
As it happens , we as Parliament are now late ourselves with the plenary discussion of my report , also late in the day , but that is purely for reasons of scheduling .
Meanwhile , the report has already had its effect in part .
The ECOFIN Council of 16 October decided to take a pro-active approach based on my recommendations . This has culminated in the automatic exchange of data and support in the collection thereof .
The first success has therefore been achieved .
It is , in fact , rather apt for the report not to feature on the agenda until now . Indeed , it can enjoy the benefits of being discussed immediately prior to the Laeken Summit , to take place next Friday and Saturday .
For this Summit also has the topic of pensions on the agenda .
A joint report is scheduled for this Summit which has recently been adopted in the Social Council and the ECOFIN Council by order of the European Councils of Stockholm and Gothenburg and which concerns the social quality , the modernisation and financial sustainability of pensions .
The Ministers have committed to starting a process of open coordination ; Member States will be presenting reports before September of next year , and at the spring summit in 2003 , more detailed policy on this subject matter will be outlined in the European Union .
As you can see , in my report on the fiscal treatment of pensions , I too have called for the introduction of open coordination process of this kind .
The fiscal policy of Member States is closely intertwined with Member State policy on the content and qualitative aspects of pension schemes .
Indeed , the fiscal incentive to accumulating a pension and fiscal levies on pension payments are conditioned by requirements based on the view of Member States of what a sound pension scheme is , and the conclusion in my report is not by any means that we should simply put these requirements to one side to make way for opening the pensions market within the European Union , as some may be inclined to do .
No , I would clearly draw a distinction between two different situations .
The first situation concerns migrant workers who are allowed to take their pension schemes with them to another Member State on the basis of earlier directives .
The Member State is to give these schemes the same fiscal treatment unconditionally , and the Commission is to be active in bringing matters before the European Court , and that receives my full support .
The alternative situation is that all workers , including those who simply remain in their own countries to live and work , should be eligible for tax deductions in respect of contributions to a foreign pension scheme .
This should not be unlimited in my view .
In this case , the national requirements and conditions still apply for now .
However , precisely in order to grow towards an integrated pensions market , I would call for this process of open coordination .
Since the criteria for fiscal incentives have everything to do with these quality requirements in terms of content , it seems right to link this process with what is about to be launched in Laeken .
I would therefore like to give this thought to Mr Bolkestein and the Belgian Presidency to take with them to this Summit in Laeken .
As far as I am concerned , you can also plug into the time schedule that was chosen there and take the 2003 spring summit as a point of reference instead of that of Barcelona , because the topic will not feature on the agenda there .
Finally , I think I can make a brief reference to the recommendations of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment and the Committee on Petitions .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs in these committees for their contributions , and I hope that this report can help stem the flow of complaints and petitions , to which the Committee on Petitions , in fact , makes explicit reference , for that is , after all , the reason why we do all this , of course , namely the EU citizens who look forward to a truly border-free and obstacle-free Europe in terms of the movement of capital and labour , and in terms of encouraging the effective accumulation of pensions and fair taxation at retirement age .
I should like to thank the rapporteur warmly , not only in general , but also because she has indeed adopted significant sections of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Member States apply different fiscal systems to occupational pensions in terms of taxation or tax exemption from contributions , investment income and capital gains of the pension institution and from pension payments .
Eleven Member States use the EET system , three Member States an ETT system and two Member States a TEE system .
If you read these abbreviations out in Dutch , it seems as if eleven Member States are constantly eating , two Member States are drinking tea non-stop , while three Member States are served a strange kind of intermediate course , and I have to say that , in my view , this strange intermediate course is sometimes rather underrated in the discussion .
In my opinion , this is actually the most negative of the systems we have in Europe , because the tax office eats into it during the accumulation of a pension .
This is , in fact , a true form of eating , and is possibly underestimated .
People are too fixated on the differences between the two other systems . These differences in fiscal treatment may well lead to problems in labour mobility and mobility for the retired .
Indeed , these differences could lead to the double taxation of migrant workers .
Conversely , these differences could also lead to no taxation at all .
Let it be clear that this contravenes the philosophy of the internal market .
In addition , this situation adversely affects the flexibility of the labour market and undermines an important condition for the success of the monetary union .
Something will therefore be done about this situation , and that is why we are also pleased with the communication .
The rapporteur is right in noting that , due to unanimity requirements for decisions where taxation is concerned , we wait forever before anything changes .
I would therefore urge the Commission to do something via the Court of Justice , so that Member States are forced to adapt to the realities of the internal market in one way or another and will no longer discriminate against those entitled to pensions .
Mr President , I really regret that the representatives of the presidency are not present as we discuss this very important issue .
Our ageing European society calls for clear strategies to ensure the adequacy of pension systems .
Several measures , such as increasing the retirement age of an ever healthier population and thus increasing the size of the active workforce , are a crucial step in improving the ratio between the active working population and retired persons .
But it is evident that other measures have to be implemented as well .
The importance of occupational pensions schemes will rise in many Member States .
The European citizen would benefit from single market occupational pension schemes .
The variety of occupational pension schemes and providers would be improved .
The citizen and his employer could thus choose the most successful and best suited scheme , bringing the best interest rates , while offering full security of investment .
More and more Europeans work for relatively short periods of time in another Member State .
They are still disadvantaged when it comes to their occupational pension schemes .
Tax obstacles stand in the way of a fully functioning single market .
The Commission communication sets a strategy to resolve these obstacles that are a clear disincentive to individuals who wish to contribute to pension schemes outside their home Member States , as well as pension institutions that wish to provide pensions across borders .
I welcome the Commission communication as a first step towards a solution of this issue .
Like Mr Pronk , I wholeheartedly support the so-called EET model , as outlined in the Commission communication and in our committee 's report .
The EET model means that pension inputs are exempted from taxation .
The pension scheme as well would be exempt and only the output would be taxed .
This system serves to defer taxation to the moment the pension becomes payable , thus avoiding double taxation without the need to harmonise the level of taxation and without thus interfering in the Member States ' taxation practice .
Tax issues are in the hands of the Member States .
Like our rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , who has done an excellent job with this report , I also wholeheartedly support the method of open coordination .
It is the only way we can achieve the results which our fellow European citizens need .
I strongly urge the Member States to work quickly to achieve the necessary results for the benefit of our ageing population .
Although we in the European Parliament may for the time being unfortunately not have the legislative means to decide on these issues , I can assure you that we follow them very closely and will do our best to achieve a common market for occupational pension schemes .
Mr President , I am speaking this evening as much in my capacity as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions as in my capacity as a Finn with Swedish as my mother tongue and a representative of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
I am grateful that the rapporteur referred to the opinion of the Committee on Petitions and the fact that we have taken the problems of citizens seriously .
I would like to point to the statistics published in the opinion , from which it may be noted that over 500 petitions in the past decade related to this issue , almost 100 during this term of office , and that 14 of these relate to the situation between Finland and Sweden .
The large proportion of petitions on precisely this issue of the situation between Finland and Sweden is a natural expression of the fact that a free labour market has existed among the Nordic countries since the 1950s and that the Finns who moved to Sweden at that time are now considering moving back .
According to one set of figures , several thousand of these people are living in the town of Haparanda , on the border with Finland , as they cannot afford to return to Finland .
This situation shows the problems we shall face .
The problem is so topical that it was highlighted by Professor Edward Andersson in a message in one of a collection of papers in honour of the sixtieth birthday of the Finnish Judge of the Court of Justice of the EC , Leif Sevón , as well as in the communication from the Commission .
One of the problems on which still further light could be shed is that we in Europe apply such different variants of double taxation agreements within the framework of the OECD .
The different variants of agreements in this area are a problem which I believe should also be covered by the open method of coordination .
It is fascinating that this issue has been taken up by the Commission .
I congratulate you .
When a similar enquiry was conducted in the Nordic countries , former Minister for Nordic Cooperation Ole Norrback stated that the authorities did not believe that there was a problem in this area , although citizens thought that there was .
He also found that he had learned more during the enquiry than he had in his eight years as a minister .
I therefore hope that quite a few of the measures proposed by the rapporteur will be implemented , for example access to better information on the rules which actually apply .
I offer my wholehearted support for any courageous action on the part of the Commission , i.e. also taking cases to court when interpretation is at issue , in order to establish correct interpretations with regard both to taxation and to other similar charges with which we have problems .
I also believe two of the problems to be the crediting of tax allowances and the level of tax deducted at source .
It is particularly important that we work together to ensure that citizens have good access to information in this area .
The ' Swiss Life ' sentiment , where pensions are concerned , awakens a feeling of unease in me , typified by the call for a wrong kind of solidarity and a lack of cooperation between the Member States .
The fact that there are Member States where workers accumulate pensions for themselves during their working lives requires full respect for acquired rights , and Member States where the citizens do not accumulate their own pension schemes , should therefore provide for adequate legislation in the short term in order to be able to face the anticipated problems caused by an ageing population .
The call for solidarity between generations with regard to pensions should in the first instance be accommodated in the Member States themselves .
International labour mobility should not be hampered by the different ways in which pension schemes are taxed fiscally .
It is the task of the Member States to remove the existing fiscal obstructions in the short term based on proper consultation , and to better attune the different pension schemes .
And cooperation among these Member States does not benefit from serving self-interest but from putting the interest of the citizen first .
If the European Union wants to create an internal market for its citizens in a credible manner , cooperation among Member States will need to lead to the harmonisation of fiscal measures with regard to pensions .
The EET scheme , in which premium contributions are not taxed but in which the payments are taxed , can then offer a direction for the mutual harmonisation of the fiscal rules concerning pensions .
We therefore endorse the line adopted by the Commission and the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , to reach an internal market in which the structure , management and payments of cross-border occupational pensions are no longer hampered by fiscal measures .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen and our rapporteurs , I would just like to start by warmly thanking our rapporteurs , above all Mrs van den Burg , but also Mrs Kauppi , for their cooperation on this report and also for the help they gave me with the report on cross-border provision of occupational pensions .
Today 's report on taxation expands and continues the report for which the codecision procedure was negotiated as long ago as July this year .
All of us take the view that occupational pensions - among other areas - will require greater fiscal coordination .
We propose the EET system of deferred taxation , on the grounds that it is already a reality in the great majority of Member States .
If we do not achieve this fiscal coordination , we will have distortions of competition within the financial internal market through differing tax systems , which we do not want to have within a single market of which we want to make the best possible use , including in connection with the introduction of euro notes and coins .
Amendment No 1 , proposed by Mrs Kauppi , expressly demands that the Council should make speedy progress towards a proposal for a directive on the activities of institutions providing occupational pensions , which would ensure mutual recognition of occupational pension systems and make a significant contribution to efforts towards effective tax coordination .
It is regrettable that this amendment should be needed at all , as the ECOFIN council , like the European Council meetings at Lisbon , Feira , Stockholm and wherever else , determines priorities and , despite that , has managed nothing more that the sending-out of a questionnaire .
I wish therefore to ask the Council why it stresses the urgency of this , whilst its actions do not reflect that urgency .
What are the Council 's problems with last October 's proposal from the Commission ?
What does the Council have to say in response to the van den Burg report and to Parliament 's resolution of July ?
With which individual demands is the Council having difficulty ?
We want answers . We want them because we want to carry on negotiating in order to be able at last to achieve the aims of the action plan on financial services and implement Parliament 's requirements - for the benefit of citizens and of enterprises and in the spirit of the common objectives that are so often invoked .
Mr President , I should first of all like to take the opportunity , on behalf of the European Commission , of responding to what Mrs van den Burg and her fellow MEPs have put forward here this evening .
Allow me to start by thanking Parliament for the unanimous support it has given via the van den Burg report to the Commission communication on the fiscal treatment of pensions .
I have used the word ' unanimous support ' , as was also borne out this evening , not only from the words by the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , but also from the words by Mrs Thors , Mrs Kauppi , Mr Blokland , Mr Pronk and others .
This is especially gratifying since this is a very important topic .
There are three points which I should like to elucidate further , and these points are firstly , the subject of the open coordination , secondly , the pan-European funds and thirdly , the developments in the legal field .
The resolution is asking us to develop a process of open coordination , and I would like to say that , in principle , the Commission is in favour of more coordination in tax matters .
An example of this is the working party which is being chaired by the British Minister , Mrs Primarollo .
This working party is looking into the harmful tax competition , with very active involvement by the Commission .
However , I should like to say to Mrs van den Burg that there is a subtle , yet important , difference between open coordination and coordination .
In principle , open coordination is applied to areas of policy which fall within the national scope .
However , the resolution mentions the need , inter alia , for tackling double taxation and double non-taxation , and this means , by definition , that there is a cross-border element that , by definition , is one of the aspects of the internal market .
There is , therefore , probably little scope for a formal process of open coordination which , as already mentioned , relates to topics which fall within the decision-making remit of the national states .
And this is not the case here .
Having said this , the ECOFIN Council of 16 October expressly approved the Commission proposal to take measures in order to tackle double taxation and double non-taxation .
There is therefore very much a certain degree of coordination whereby the Commission retains the right , of course , to present further initiatives .
The second point concerned the pan-European pension funds , also mentioned by Mrs van den Burg and by Mr Pronk , I believe .
In this field , the ECOFIN Council of 16 October did not subscribe to the proposal for pan-European funds .
This does not mean in any way that the proposal has lost the Commission ' s sympathy .
On the other hand , I am perhaps slightly less enthusiastic about the suggestion made in the report and mentioned a moment ago by Mrs van den Burg , namely that the Commission would prepare a proposal for a statute of international pension funds .
As I said just now , the ECOFIN Council was unable to endorse the proposal for pan-European funds , although these could function without new European legislation .
Under these circumstances , I have strong doubts at to the proposal ' s political chances of introducing pan-European funds by means of legislation .
Thirdly and finally , I should like to say a few words about the legal aspects .
Last week , 6 December , the Court of Justice heard the Danner case , and this concerns , as I believe the Members are aware , a German citizen who emigrated to Finland and who wanted to continue with his German pension scheme , but unfortunately , the Finnish tax authorities refuse to grant him tax deductions on the contributions already made to the German scheme .
During the hearing , the Commission supported Mr Danner and made reference to its communication on pensions .
The verdict in this case can be expected next year .
Last month , a second case came to light . A Swedish court referred a case concerning the deductibility of contributions paid to a foreign pension insurance company by a permanent resident of Sweden to the Court of Justice , and this means that the correctness of the Commission ' s legal analysis will be tested twice in the near future .
Mr Pronk also emphasised that the Commission should keep its promise that it will take action against Member States that infringe the Treaty freedoms , and I should like to assure Mr Pronk , as well as other Members who have mentioned this , that the Commission is in active dialogue with the Member States .
The Commission has formally asked the Member States for information about their national rules , and is currently looking into the responses it has received , and I can assure the Members of this Parliament that the Commission will start proceedings against Member States , where necessary .
As the Commission has indicated in its communication on tax policy of May of this year , a pro-active strategy for infringement procedures forms an important component of its approach aimed at making headway in the field of taxation .
In a nutshell , with the help of this Parliament and also of the Council , a certain dynamic seems to have come about in the field of tax exemption for pensions .
I should like to say by way of conclusion : let us try to hold on to this cooperation , and in that framework , I gladly accept Mrs van den Burg ' s offer of further consultation .
Once again , I should like to extend warm thanks to Members for their excellent work and for the support for the Commission , and finally , I could perhaps say to Mr Karas that the Commission too is saddened by the fact that so little progress has been made on the work on the directive proposed by the Commission on pension funds .
Precious little has happened in this area over the past six months under the presidency that is about to come to an end .
A circular letter , a questionnaire , has been distributed to the Member States .
These questions have been received . Of course , work has been done on them , but that is all , really .
I gather that the Spanish Presidency certainly intends to work on this with greater drive .
Mr Karas , and the Members too , I believe , will agree with the Commission that such progress is extremely crucial and urgent on account of the demographic time bomb on which we are sitting , and I do not need to go into this topic any further . Everyone is familiar with it .
Mr President , in this matter of the fiscal treatment of pensions , I should once again like to thank your Parliament and all the speakers for their support they have given the Commission proposal , and I hope that we will be able to continue in the manner indicated as soon as possible .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Financial collateral arrangements
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0417 / 2001 ) by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on financial collateral arrangements ( COM ( 2001 ) 168 - C5-0131 / 2001 - 2001 / 0086 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the Commission ' s proposal on financial collateral arrangements establishes the European legislative framework for this type of arrangement and is an essential proposal in terms of the functioning of the financial market on a European level .
This proposal is an essential element of the package of legislative proposals intended for this purpose .
The main objectives of the proposal , in a very summarised form , are to guarantee the existence of efficient and reasonably simple systems for the creation of collateral under either title transfer ( including repo ) or pledge structures .
To this end , it is necessary to introduce certain modifications into the legislations of various Member States , especially in the field of the regulation of pledges and also in the field of insolvency law and tendering procedures .
In summary , it is a question of creating a sound and efficient regime for limiting credit risk and thereby ensuring a reduction in its cost and , at the same time , improving the functioning and stability of the European financial markets .
From the European Parliament ' s point of view , the main problem raised by the proposal was that of the subjective scope of application of the Directive .
The initial proposal consisted basically of reducing the scope of the Directive to financial institutions and to very large companies other than financial companies , that is , large commercial , industrial or service companies , whose capital base exceeds EUR 100 million or whose gross assets exceed EUR 1000 million .
The European Parliament , or at least the rapporteur , considered that this proposal raised two problems .
Firstly , the removal from the scope of the Directive , and consequently from its benefits , of the majority of companies which are not strictly financial ; not only small and medium ones , but also large companies which do not reach those very high quantitative thresholds which I have mentioned .
Secondly , the setting of quantitative thresholds raises the problem of their revision and updating .
The proposed directive resolved this problem by means of the technique of delegating this updating within the Commission , assisted by the Securities Committee , the so-called ' Lamfalussy Committee ' .
This is a legislative delegation , a delegation of powers which is unacceptable to Parliament , or at least to part of it , as is well known , since this is not the first time we have dealt with the Lamfalussy Committee , in this field and in others , with Commissioner Bolkestein himself .
The amendment which Parliament intends to introduce in this field consists , essentially , of the following : removing the reference to quantitative limits and , instead , establishing the requirement that , in these cases of agreements with commercial or industrial companies , the other party to the agreement , normally the taker of the collateral of the creditor , should be a financial entity .
This solution has the advantage of resolving , at the same time , the two problems I mentioned , that is , the problem of the exclusion of not very large companies and the problem of the delegation of powers - or of the Lamfalussy Committee , shall we say .
Apart from this amendment , which in turn takes the form of several amendments , there are others relating to the formalisation of agreements and evidence of the provision of collateral , the regulation of the right of use for pledge collateral and to other issues which I will not expand on .
Mr President , I must end by pointing out - and this is very important - that , from the outset , I have tried to work in close contact with the Commission and with the Belgian Presidency , whose help , in both cases , I am very grateful for at this time .
The purpose was to achieve a consensus which would make it possible to approve the proposed directive on first reading or at least to reduce the second reading to a mere formality .
We based our approach on this intention , since most of the actors , both the Member States and the actors within industry , agreed on its importance and on a basic consensus , except on certain points , in relation to this proposal .
It appeared that this objective had been achieved , since it appeared that the Council ' s working group had reached an agreement which also satisfied Parliament ' s essential intentions .
At the last moment the initial agreement in the Council ' s working group has been broken and tomorrow , possibly , in Ecofin a different agreement will be approved , which includes other points which Parliament has not been able to consider in detail .
I therefore fear that the aim I referred to earlier of dispensing with the second reading , or at least reducing it to a mere formality , will not be possible , and we will have to continue working on this directive from next month .
In this event , for tomorrow ' s vote , I would ask you to vote for the amendments which were approved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs with slight modifications and to vote against an amendment which has been introduced in Parliament at the last moment , since the lack of consensus in the Council , that is to say , between the Member States , has also led to a rupture in the consensus which had been expressed in this Parliament ' s Committee on Economic Affairs .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please permit me to start by making an observation . We have here another example of how lawmaking in this House is normally dealt with just before midnight , whilst we have during the day been largely occupied with more or less pointless resolutions on one summit or another , which are generally fruitless .
I see it as desirable that we should in future deal with important legislative matters at a more appropriate time in the course of the part-session .
Apart from that , I would also like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee for his very balanced report , which one can also call a proposal by the Commission and a consequence of the directive on settlement finality that was adopted in 1998 .
At that time , I was on the Legal Affairs Committee - which then had principal responsibility for the report - and was rapporteur for this directive . I can only say that the problems we faced , and which this report goes a long way towards solving , were the same as those we are dealing with today .
We must simply take care that there is a reasonable balance between the interest in having such credit security systems and keeping them stable , and the other interests that of course exist - those , perhaps , of creditors in insolvency cases - to which consideration must also be given , and that these interests are reconciled fairly .
For there can be no doubt that what is at issue here is not just the protection of these financial systems ; there must also be guarantees that others affected by this regulation should not be put at an undue disadvantage .
I think that we have found a just reconciliation of the two , and it is this point that is decisive .
The rapporteur has also mentioned a second angle of significance to us in the Legal Affairs Committee , namely the fact that the boundaries as regards preferential creditors have - I would say - been drawn relatively generously .
We took the view that this category should either in fact be extended to include medium-sized enterprises , or , on the other hand , actually be restricted to banks and direct participants in financial markets .
I believe that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has achieved a good result , and , in view of the lateness of the hour , I would also like to come to a conclusion .
I can say on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee that we are in agreement with what the rapporteur has presented , and we will also , for our part , support it .
Mr President , this is all going more quickly than any of us thought .
I would like to start by apologising on behalf of Mrs Villiers , who has just , at the end of a vote in our Group 's Conservative delegation , been appointed deputy leader of the delegation , on which I warmly congratulate her .
As a lot has already been said , I would like to enlarge on just a few things .
Firstly , the speakers on this item and its predecessor have set themselves a great goal .
We want to do our utmost to ensure that the action plan for financial services - of which this directive is a part - is of high quality and can be adopted and implemented swiftly and in accordance with the timetable .
We hope that , unlike on other occasions , the Council will not delay in producing its own position in response to the preparatory work done at least on this issue by Parliament and the Commission .
Mr Lehne , who spoke before me , has already pointed out that it was the 1998 directive on settlement finality that set up the first milestone for Europe-wide financial policy .
This has to date been the only piece of European legislation governing cross-frontier securities in connection with financial transactions .
We need standardised regulation in this area in order to make the internal market efficient .
We need to do away with the uncertainty as regards the law applicable to transactions across borders in negotiable securities .
We need to do away with the increased administrative costs that stand in the way of an integrated EU market which is more attractive in terms of cost .
We need to do away with the legal uncertainty that comes with 15 different legal systems , because these differing legal systems lead to risks when securities are utilised abroad .
We also need to do away with the differing legislation on insolvency .
There is , then , a need for a standard minimum regulation .
This directive is the only means by which these objectives can be achieved , and so we welcome it and support the rapporteur 's report and that produced by Mr Lehne of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Many thanks !
We hope that it will be possible swiftly to implement this report by Parliament , together with the Commission 's proposals , and thus turn them into a reality .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking very much your rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , and the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the excellent work and very constructive approach on the collateral proposal .
This proposal , as was emphasised by Mr Karas just now , is a priority dossier in the Financial Services Action Plan and it is a crucial element for the timely delivery of the FSAP by 2003 for an integrated European Union securities market , and the year 2005 for the FSAP overall .
Given that the value of outstanding contracts on the European REPO market alone exceeds EUR 1.8 billion , the expected benefits are extremely large .
These contracts will , when the directive is implemented in the Member States , be governed by one legal regime , instead of 15 different ones .
Such a uniform pan-EU legal framework for the use of collateral will contribute to the greater integration and cost-efficiency of European financial markets , by encouraging cross-border business and creating a more competitive European financial market .
Now I come to the tabled amendments .
The Commission generally supports all the amendments except for Amendment Nos 16 and 21 which deal with extended protection of top-up collateral and the restriction of the scope respectively .
We fully support Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 18 and19 as they stand .
In addition , and subject to some rewording , which we do not expect will cause any difficulties for Parliament , we can also accept in principle Amendment Nos 3 to 15 , 17 and 20 .
But we may need some flexibility in finding a final agreement .
By supporting Amendment No 1 , we are not abolishing protection of credit-related top-up collateral .
But the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 16 which protects credit risk top-up collateral under the directive , and nor , we believe , can the Council .
Nonetheless , as provided by Amendment No 1 , it would be possible under national law to protect that kind of collateral .
To be more precise , Amendment No 16 is not acceptable to the Commission because it could strongly conflict with insolvency law policy which generally discourages improvement of a creditor ' s position as a result of an insolvency-related event or at least in a context of deteriorating credit-worthiness .
Amendment No 21 is not acceptable to the Commission because the Commission would like to see as many non-financial companies as possible benefiting from this directive .
Those companies are already using these techniques in the market .
In conclusion , I should like once again to thank Members of Parliament for their sterling cooperation .
I have also been apprised of what has occurred today in Coreper , as the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , mentioned .
Tomorrow , as he said , there will be an Ecofin meeting at which I myself will be present .
I do not know what the discussion will lead to tomorrow .
I regret the need for a second reading for obvious reasons , but I cannot help that .
The Commission is in the hands of Council on the one hand and Parliament on the other .
Lastly , I should like to say to Mr Lehne that I quite agree with him on the timing of this debate .
It is an extremely important debate and yet it takes place at almost 11 p.m. and the public interest is very small .
I assure you , Mr President , that if this debate could have taken place earlier today I would have been very happy .
I am sure Members present would also have been very happy .
Despite the time and the fact that Parliament is not so well represented , the debate has been of high quality and I , as President for the sitting , am very glad to have been able to take part at this hour and in this final nocturnal Strasbourg debate of 2001 .
We thank you on behalf of Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m. )
Award of Sakharov Prize 2001
Mrs Nurit Peled-Elhanan , Mr Izzat Ghazzawi , Archbishop Zacarias Kamwenho , it is with great pleasure that the European Parliament welcomes you today in this Chamber , in order to award you the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought .
Please allow me to offer a warm welcome not only to yourselves but also to the persons accompanying you , and especially to those of your relatives who are able to be present .
Since 1988 , the Sakharov Prize has been awarded every year by the European Parliament in recognition of individuals or organisations who have left their mark on the struggle for human rights and freedom in their home countries .
At the centre of their actions has lain a deep-rooted conviction : the right to live in an environment of respect for the dignity of all human beings , whatever their ethnic origins , gender or beliefs .
This year it has been decided , for the first time , that the Sakharov prize is to be shared between three recipients .
This is an exceptional decision in response to exceptional circumstances .
Mrs Nurit Peled-Elhanan , you are an Israeli who has been through profound and personal suffering .
You once wrote : ' If war is to be ended , it is necessary to realise that blood is the same colour for everyone and that when a single child dies the whole world dies with it ' .
When your thirteen-year-old daughter Smadar lost her life in a Palestinian suicide bombing , you did not allow the horror to turn your mind towards hatred . Instead , you chose to denounce - and I quote your words - ' a short-sighted policy which refuses to recognise the rights of the other and stirs up hatred and conflicts ' .
How many of us can be sure that we too would maintain the same courage and dignity in the face of the worst injustice of all , the loss of a child ?
All of us must feel affected in the depths of our soul by the strength and lucidity which have made you the symbol of all those Israelis who are campaigning for a peace which will take into account the aspirations of two peoples , the people of Israel and the people of Palestine .
In awarding you the Sakharov Prize , our aim is to show our deep attachment to supporting all those who , through their daily actions , in spite of such difficult historical circumstances and in spite of the pressure of events , are working tirelessly to improve relations between peoples .
Mr Izzat Ghazzawi , you are a Palestinian whose suffering has also been great .
In one of your letters from prison , you addressed an Israeli friend and poet , Ya ' ir Horowitz , who had recently died . In your letter , you tried to re-establish a dialogue that had been interrupted by death , outlining the dream of peace that you shared and drawing on the resources of hope to fight the despair which threatened to overwhelm you because the dream of peace was fading with time .
You have tirelessly promoted the cause of peace and encouraged dialogue between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples .
Your ardour has never slackened , despite imprisonment and censorship and , more importantly , the irreplaceable loss of your sixteen-year-old son Rami , killed by the Israeli army while trying to help a school friend who had been wounded in the school playground .
You have resolutely pursued that same dialogue , through your writings , your lecturing at Birzeit University , your leading role as chairman of the Association of Palestinian Writers , your contacts with Israeli writers and your joint publications .
You have endeavoured to make mutual understanding and tolerance prevail among the cultures , religions and peoples of the entire region .
Mrs Nurit Peled-Elhanan and Mr Izzat Ghazzawi , by honouring you both together , the European Parliament hopes to make a contribution to the advance of the cause of peace over war , to the expression of tolerance and understanding and to the preservation of hope .
Archbishop Kamwenho , your country has been at war for 25 years .
Two generations of Angolans have grown up without knowing the meaning of the word ' peace ' . The death toll of this interminable war makes frightening reading : one million dead , almost four million displaced individuals , hundreds of thousands of war orphans and war wounded , a starving population , meaning one child in five dies before the age of five , life expectancy is less than 45 years , millions of anti-personnel mines scattered throughout Angola , and extreme poverty despite the existence of natural resources which have , unfortunately , largely been used only for purposes of warfare .
The European Parliament has always been committed to the promotion of a political solution to the conflict in Angola , and we have repeatedly stressed the urgent need for all parties to embark on a global dialogue with a view to a lasting peace based on the promotion and protection of human rights .
Our Parliament has repeatedly expressed its support for the efforts made in this direction by the churches and the organisations of civil society .
As Archbishop of Lubango , as President of the Catholic Episcopal Conference of Angola and São Tomé and of the Ecumenical Committee for Peace in Angola , you have been an apostle in the service of fundamental rights and peace and a symbol of the hopes of the Angolan people , of its desire for peace , liberty and justice .
We salute your life ' s journey as an individual and pay tribute to your ecumenical spirit , your determination and your eloquence .
We also salute you as a spokesman for the aspirations of all those in Angolan civil society who are working for dialogue and reconciliation .
Today and for all these reasons , Archbishop Kamwenho , we award you the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought .
I shall conclude by expressing our wish to honour the memory of the victims of these conflicts , of all those , children , women and men , who have fallen in Israel , in Palestine and in Angola .
We declare our support for the three winners of the Sakharov Prize for 2001 , and we are profoundly moved by their tragic fate , and affirm a common stand against violence in whatever form .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Luisa , my family , Mrs Sartaoui , I wanted to dedicate this speech to the memory of my father and his Palestinian friend , Dr Issam Sartaoui , who both dreamt of peace thirty years ago .
I am , I feel , obliged , however , to dedicate this speech to the children who were killed yesterday by the Israeli army , simply because they were born Palestinians .
It is a great honour to be here today with you , as winner of the Sakharov Prize .
I am well aware that , on such occasions , one should speak of hope and of the human qualities that can lead us to the triumph of compassion and fraternity between people .
Forgive me , therefore , for not speaking of this today .
In Jerusalem , where I am from , hope and humanity are fading away .
Israel is becoming a graveyard for children , which is growing bigger day by day . It is like an underground kingdom , extending beneath our feet and destroying everything in its wake .
It is the kingdom where my daughter lives , with her Palestinian murderer , whose blood , mixed with hers , flows through Jerusalem , which became hardened to the sight of blood a long time ago .
They are there with many , many more children , and they have all been let down .
The murderer of my daughter has been let down , because his act of murder and of suicide achieved nothing .
It did not put an end to the cruel Israeli occupation , it did not lead him to paradise , and those who promised him that his action would have meaning and value go on as if he had never existed .
My young daughter was let down because she believed , just as thousands of her new brothers and sisters believed , that she lived in safety , that her parents protected her from evil and that nothing could happen to sweet little girls who cross the road to go to their dancing lesson .
And all the children who are there with them have been let down , because the world goes on , as if their blood had never been spilled .
In Jerusalem , where I am from , the men who call themselves our leaders have allowed death to hold sway .
It appears , however , that these gentlemen know how to live in peace when they have to .
On Friday 1 December , the editorial of a local newspaper in a Jerusalem in mourning told us that there had been peace in Jericho for two months .
There are no Israeli soldiers there , no Palestinian policemen , no gun shots .
Do not believe that the Americans have succeeded in convincing Ariel Sharon to stop sending young eighteen-year-old Israelis to kill innocent Palestinians , nor that they have succeeded in convincing the Palestinians to stop blowing themselves up along with their innocent Israeli victims .
Far from it .
Jericho is at peace because the Israeli and Palestinian leaders have together decided to reopen the casino ...
When I read this article , I could not stop myself from thinking that my daughter ' s life is not even worth a single roulette chip .
Almost 200 children have been killed since the beginning of the Intifada , of this incessant massacre , and they are worth nothing more than roulette chips .
And yet , I was not very surprised , since I always knew that our war was not that of the Israeli people against the Palestinian people , but that of people who destroy lives who call themselves our Heads of State against the people from both sides .
These cunning politicians use God , the wealth of the nation , freedom and democracy , and even our periods of mourning as political tools , and they use our children as if they were figurines in their games of chance .
For instance , you knock over ten of mine , and I shall knock over 300 of yours , and we will be quits until the next time .
None of this is new in the history of mankind .
Leaders have always used God and other sacred values , such as honour and courage , to justify their self-indulgent ambition .
And the only voice , throughout history , that spoke out to expose them and to oppose this was always the voice of mothers ; the voice of those who produced the Jewish people , who disobeyed the Pharaoh ' s orders to kill little boys at birth ; the voice of Rachel , our biblical mother , weeping for her children and refusing to be consoled ; the voice of the women of Troy ; the mothers of Argentina , the mothers of Ireland , Israel and Palestine .
It is the voice of those who give life and who are committed to preserving it .
It is the only voice that remains after the violence has subsided , and which truly understands the meaning of the end of everything .
Mothers are the only ones who know that the death of a child , any child , whether from Serbia or Albania , Iraq or Afghanistan , whether Jewish or Palestinian , is the death of the whole world , of its past and its future .
When Luisa told me that I had been awarded the Sakharov Prize , I told her that I did not deserve it , since I had never saved a child , not even my own .
But then I thought that the prize had not been awarded to me as a person , but to this voice that I took on through death and which transcends nationalities , religions , and even time .
This voice that politicians and generals have tried to silence since man first walked this earth and since men have been waging war .
I have often been asked whether or not I feel the need to exact revenge for the murder of my daughter , who was only killed because she was born an Israeli , by a young man , who had so little hope that he was willing to kill himself and who only killed himself because he was Palestinian .
I always quote the verse of the great Hebrew poet Bialik . ' Satan has not yet created those who would exact revenge for the death of a small child ' .
And this is not because Satan does not have the means , but because after a child has died , there is no longer vengeance , death , or life .
The only feeling that remains , the only desire , the only need , that can never be satisfied , is that of protecting the child .
The mothers who have lost their children will tell you that their arms hurt due to the constant need to hold the child and keep it from harm .
No mother would ever think of seeking consolation by killing one child for another .
If we do not wish our entire planet to become a kingdom of dead children , we must raise our voices as mothers in order to silence all the other voices .
We must once again listen to the voice of God who said ' Do not harm children ' . Otherwise , there will soon be nothing left to say , nothing left to hear , other than this incessant cry of mourning .
Ladies and gentlemen , I beg you to listen to the voices that are coming from the underground kingdom of children who have been killed .
That is where justice resides today , that is where true multiculturalism holds sway , that is where we know that there is no difference between blood , between skin , between identity cards or flags .
Listen to the cries of the dead children and help their mothers to save the children who are still alive .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Madam President , distinguished Members of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , dear friends : It is with great emotion and excitement I receive this recognition today .
This prize is an act of faith in the ability of the world to promote a sustained dialogue of tolerance and understanding .
It only made my commitment towards a nobler future for the conflict in our region stronger and more persistent than ever .
There are so many events that I would like to tell you about here , but the time I am given is limited .
From my prison , for almost three years I wrote a book called ' Letters Underway ' where I asked myself during the bleakest moment the following question : could it be possible for me to address in my book an Israeli figure who is an artist , a father , a real human soul , a man or a woman who would abolish the image of a soldier guarding my solitary cell ?
When the answer was yes , I proceeded with my writing .
As soon as I was out of prison , I took part in a writers ' meeting in Oslo where a few intellectuals from both sides met to discuss how they could contribute to peace .
During ten days of ebbs and flows , the Israelis talked much about the historic distress that befell the Jewish nation and people .
The Palestinians talked about their daily suffering under occupation .
But finally , after ten days , we were able to understand each other 's needs .
I could not forget one comment by an Israeli writer .
During this meeting , on the tenth day , he said , ' I always thought that man is evil ... now I am not sure ' .
In that same year , 1993 , my son fell dead to the bullets of the soldiers in his school .
The event changed the taste of everything in my life , but I knew that a good human being is a living one .
Suffering , if we so decide , can be used as a power to heal rather than a blind struggle for revenge and hatred .
The principle of an eye for an eye , makes the whole world blind .
I knew how to use understatement as a means of compromise in my literature .
It is true , however , that the conflict of man with his heart is the noblest sort of struggle .
It is a pity that the conflict of today is between nations and cultures .
Left to the generals of war and enmity , they will make it a bloody history of terror .
Left to them , we will accept it for a fact that our world is either bad or mad .
But those who have read history in a tolerant way , understand that what is needed is a mutual moral commitment towards the facts of existence and the human obligation towards life as the only valuable gift .
Abnormalities of all kinds do not have a race , or a religion , or a certain home .
Only civilisation has its own religion and faith and home .
That is because there has been no unique civilisation as a creation of its own : all through history civilisations borrowed from each other and excelled most when they were able to share their merits and values .
However , the recent fear of a clash between cultures is not groundless .
There is an amazing imbalance between the rich and the poor , and there are a great deal of injustices that threaten the very principle of tolerance in our globe .
Yet , our insistence on dialogue between cultures is at its highest now , because we have to search into the roots of terror .
As a writer living in an exceptionally troubled area , I must look at this issue of intercultural discourse as a story of attraction and excitement .
Whatever happens in our region is doomed to affect the whole world .
That is not because we are the centre of the world . It is only because the spiritual roots sprang from here to transmit their force among every and each one of us .
Both attraction and excitement arise from this tremendous past .
It is high time now to see that tremendous spiritual past as a part of a human culture .
It is important to see it as a part of a human culture and not a divine call for a holy land that eats up its children .
Man is holy .
Nothing else is holy if man is humiliated and deprived of his rights to live in dignity .
There will be no reason for a detailed map with the human heart being broken in our area at the edge of hope and despair .
We are fed up with the illusion of victory .
No nation can be defeated if it insists on the meaning of life as a value in itself .
Our isolation and anxiety is beyond any proportion , but our faith in the future is also great .
We will always need your support for a sustained peace process , and a support for the peace camps that lit the candles for all those who lost their lives in the ignorant battle .
Once more , with deep gratitude , I thank you for awarding me , together with my partners , this prestigious prize , but it is also with all the anxiety I have in my heart for the future of Palestine and Israel , and the admiration I express for all the men and women who are there now and who have the dream and the vision .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my dear friends , I come from a land where the sun beats down and where the horizon is as wide as can be .
I come from a country whose land is rich and whose people have little hope , where the forest is boundless but hope is not .
From that land I bring greetings to you , Mrs Fontaine , President of the European Parliament .
From that land I bring friendly greetings to you , honourable Members of this generous Parliament .
I bring brotherly greetings to Mrs Nurit Peled-Elhanan and Mr Izzat Ghazzawi , the couple with whom I share this honour .
From that country named Angola I bring greetings to the illustrious guests at this Plenary Assembly .
Nor should we forget the social , written , spoken and televised communication that makes the five continents one huge human village .
Finally , and this is where I probably should have begun , from Angola I bring greetings to this historic city of Strasbourg , home to the European Parliament , a city that I discovered when I was still young , attracted not only by its cultural climate but mainly by the memory of the many missionaries from Alsace who , together with Portuguese missionaries , brought the gospel to our land .
So , to all of you , ladies and gentlemen , I bring a warm embrace from Angola .
Mrs Fontaine , honourable Members of the European Parliament , Mr José Ribeiro e Castro , the party that has accompanied me here , amongst whom I wish to mention the Deputy Minister for Culture and the Ambassador of Angola , the President of the European Parliament , in her kind letter officially announcing the distinction that befell my unworthy person and congratulating me , wrote that peace has always been one of her main objectives and that my commitment to the ecumenical cause had raised her awareness .
In fact , the Episcopal Conference of Angola and São Tomé , which I have chaired for almost four years , wrote in its pastoral message of March 2000 " we cannot spread the gospel without promoting peace " .
The Interdenominational Committee for Peace in Angola , also formed last year , seeks to be the voice of believers on the crucial matter of peace .
In a letter dated 11 January 2001 , His Excellency the President of the Republic , José Eduardo dos Santos , in response to a Christmas message of mine , wished me every success in the pastoral action that I am undertaking in the quest for peace and for the happiness of the Angolan people .
And on the day following the announcement of the Sakharov Prize winners , the chorus of congratulations from everywhere and from all layers of society , including the President of the Republic and from Mr Jonas Savimbi , highlighted the unifying dimension of the prize ; Europe , the Middle East , Africa , and its quality of stimulating the pursuit of ideals of peace .
Unfortunately , in the land of prizewinners , particularly in mine , we have witnessed actions and behaviour which , humanly speaking , could invalidate the precepts put forward by the parliamentarians of the European Union .
But our sixth sense tells us that this will not happen .
The message of the 2001 Sakharov Prize is safe , and so I can assure you that there are many things that will not be the same as they were before .
I believed and that was why I spoke out .
It is impossible not to speak when faced with the tragedy of the Angolan situation .
Living side by side with a simple and suffering people qualifies us to speak in their name both in recognising the efforts made by the government and in the quest for improvements that the people themselves are calling for .
I said a few days ago that in the 14 years of anti-colonial war there was just one year , 1973 , that recorded an unheard of rate of financial growth , whereas in the twenty-five years of the civil war , we have only seen a decrease , that has grown worse day by day , particularly since 1998 .
Hunger , nakedness and disease have created images which , if caught and projected onto the screens of the warlords would perhaps also give these people a sleepless night and make them begin to think about Angola .
Malnutrition affects 47 % of the population in some provinces , as attested by the appeal for humanitarian aid launched recently by the United Nations .
The war in Angola has various causes .
Thinking about the Lord who brought us here , to Strasbourg today , 12 December , half way between the 10th , the day of the Declaration of Human Rights , and the 14th , the day of His death , I see that I could focus on one of the causes : intolerance .
It was not by chance that the UN declared 1995 as the United Nations Year of Tolerance .
Still echoing in our ears and in our conscience are the words spoken by Pope John Paul II on World Peace day this year and those of Federico Mayor Zaragoza , the then director of UNESCO , when he said , and I quote , ' Humanity must be able to dedicate itself to peace , safeguard it , re-establish it and rebuild it by creating a space for dialogue , consultation and reconciliation .
No more violence ! '
It has been very difficult to speak of tolerance in my country because the roots of intolerance run deep , being anchored in the political bipolarisation between the two most popular parties : the MPLA and UNITA .
In this climate , a speech on the subject of tolerance is seen either as a betrayal of these parties , which have great popular support - and are , ironically , at war with one another - or as a reactionary attitude , if expressed by an independent person .
Given this climate , to speak of change would mean sharing power with rivals ; but , for us , the church and civil society , the first change would be to accept tolerance as an issue of survival which is , therefore , necessary , from the foundations to the roof , from the political parties to the government , from civil society and the churches themselves to the national project .
Tolerance is the key word , as Locke teaches us , if we want to find a human basis for integrating conflict resolution , including our own , for a harmonious development .
In the case of Angola , tolerance would be given form in the specific aspect of national reconciliation , whose foundations can only be reached through permanent and inclusive dialogue , able to break this never-ending cycle of war .
Tolerance requires solidarity and fraternity and the lesson that we have learned from Europe is the lesson emerging from this great Assembly , which is meeting here today .
Human fraternity , pervading all facets of our relationship , also draws our attention to the economic angle and its ambiguities .
In this ' South ' where we live , wealth generates both war and signs of solidarity . Speaking of mining in particular , I would say that it is already time to increase the transparency that would make it more difficult to finance conflicts but which would also encourage social investment ...
... affecting the standard of living of Angolans , and this would be achieved by themselves , not by something that looks like charity .
To conclude , I shall refer to the thought that inspired the campaign that brings me today to this podium to receive the Sakharov Prize : help Angola to live !
This was the challenge that the Catholic Church set the Soviet Union and the United States in 1986 in its assessment of the first ten years of national independence .
After spending another 16 years at war , we launched the same message .
But to whom , this time ?
To the MPLA and to UNITA to whom we repeated with a breaking heart : twenty-six years of history have been stained with blood - the blood of brothers killed by brothers , and closing the doors to dialogue would open them to a war without a visible end .
This can be read in the pastoral message issued by the bishops .
Today , with the confidence of the European Union , whose parliamentarians have placed the prestigious Sakharov Prize in our hands , I humbly call for a bilateral and simultaneous cease-fire that will open the way to a cessation of hostilities , as we have called for so many times .
Because we can still make up for lost time .
Agostinho Neto , Angola ' s first President , left us these mysterious verses which I have written down :
' I no longer wait
I am the man for whom others wait '
Every Angolan is the man or woman for whom others wait .
Help them to live !
This is why the financial component of this Prize will be going to the Ecumenical Fund for Peace , in other words , to promote education for peace and for national reconciliation amongst the population .
So , my friends , help Angola to live !
Thank you very much !
( Loud , sustained applause )
( The President presented the Sakharov Prize to the three laureates )
( The House rose and gave sustained applause ) ( The formal sitting was closed at 12.50 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I should like to point out , with respect to yesterday 's minutes , that Dr Ganzert , the lawyer detained in Nicaragua , has now been allowed to leave , and to thank you for everything you did to bring this about .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Order of business
At yesterday ' s meeting of the Conference of Presidents , it was decided that the sitting of Monday 17 December in Brussels will be extended by one hour .
The part-session will therefore begin at 3 p.m. and end at 7.30 p.m.

Madam President , as the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , we are against the extension of the Monday sitting , which will serve only to get the anti-terrorism package approved .
This package was presented in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs this morning , but we could not proceed to the discussion because of the very tight deadlines , and no report was drawn up .
I think it is worrying that Parliament should express an opinion without first having drawn up a report on such an important subject .
We are therefore against this shortening of deadlines , because it simply does not allow us to present a reasoned report on such an important subject .
Thank you , Mr Di Lello Finuoli .
It will therefore be recorded in the Minutes that you are not in favour of the decision taken by the Conference of Presidents .
Decision on urgent procedure
I shall now give the floor to Mr Watson , the chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Watson ( ELDR ) , chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Madam President , last night two requests were referred to my committee under Rule 112 .
These relate to re-consultation on two framework decisions from the Council , one on combating terrorism , the other on a proposal for a European arrest warrant .
We were asked to treat these as a matter of urgency .
My committee met this morning and agreed to propose to the plenary that we agree to urgency for these texts as submitted without report .
Thank you , Mr Watson .
We shall therefore act in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , as usual .
Does any Member wish to speak against the request ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the six years that I have been an MEP , Parliament has constantly asked the European institutions to show it some respect .
Today , once again , Parliament is being asked not even to respect itself and we have heard the two larger groups , in the ' Citizens ' Freedoms ' Committee , decide with the Liberals that Parliament must not act with self-respect .
This is , however , incredible since we are going to vote on the European arrest warrant , which will enter into force in 2004 , namely in two years ' time , and today they are telling us that there will be a Laeken European Council .
This European Council will decide on a text on Sunday night . This text will be reviewed by lawyers on Monday morning .
No one will have seen the text before arriving in Brussels on Monday afternoon .
And Parliament is going to vote on it , and cannot wait until January .
Can you explain to me why we cannot take a vote in January on a text that will come into force in 2004 ?
It is absurd , it is ridiculous and it shows that Parliament does not take itself seriously , and I urge my fellow Members not to support the leaders of their groups , but to show some dignity and to reject this request , to have a report , to vote in January and show that this Parliament respects parliamentary rules and that we are not at anyone ' s beck and call .
Thank you .
We shall now hear a Member who is in favour of this request .
We heard the chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , one speaker in favour and one speaker against .
We shall now vote on the request for urgent procedure .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Vote
Thank you , Mr Costa Neves .
After the vote on the amendments
Mr President , I am advised that the figures that we have just voted on do not make sense unless we vote on the Wynn report which is about the financial perspective .
We need to vote on that to make sure that we have the figures before we accept that the vote we have just had is complete .
In other words , Mr Wynn , you would like to vote on your report now and then vote on the report by Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg .
If that is what you mean , I do not see any problem in doing this .
Report ( A5-0447 / 2001 ) by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument ( COM ( 2001 ) 625 - C5-0557 / 2001 - 2001 / 2227 ( ACI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0400 / 2001 ) by Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) ( 14341 / 2001 - C5-0600 / 2001 - 2324 / 2000 ( BUD ) ) and Letter of amendment No 2 / 2001 ( 14340 / 2001 - C5-0615 / 2001 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002
Section I - European Parliament
Section II - Council
Section III - Commission
Section IV - Court of Justice
Section V - Court of Auditors
Section VI - Economic and Social Committee
Section VII - Committee of the Regions
Section VIII ( A ) - European Ombudsman
Section VIII ( B ) - European Data Protection Supervisor
On Amendment No 1
Madam President , a brief parenthesis to remove the spanner from the works : we reached an agreement which , from Parliament 's point of view , was perfect as far as development policy output targets are concerned .
But we do not to spell it out again in the resolution in question , so we are withdrawing Amendment No 1 .
We believe that Parliament has made excellent progress within the budget on this point and Amendment No 1 is therefore no longer necessary .
Thank you , we shall take note of this .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you have concluded the second reading of the draft budget .
I have seen the agreement reached between our two institutions at our consultative meeting on 21 November assume concrete form in your vote today .
I take note of the fact that there remains some difference of opinion on the division of expenditure .
On that point the Council reserves all rights .
Nevertheless the Council is able to agree to the proposed maximum percentage increase that emerged from your second reading .
Thank you , Mr Vande Lanotte .
Does the Commission wish to take the floor ?
( Having invited the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vande Lanotte , the Commissioner , Mrs Schreyer , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , and the rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg to join her , the President signed the budget )


I am sorry to interrupt this august House but I rise on a very important point .
A few minutes ago the ECJ ruled in Luxembourg that the French ban on British beef was illegal .
( Cheers ) Could I have assurances from you , Madam President , that you will do everything you can to make sure that the French fully compensate the poor hard-pressed British farmers as a result of this ruling ?
Madam President , I suggest - and I hope the House will back me up here - that we add the following at the end of this sentence :
' demanding the Palestinian Authority dismantle the terrorist networks including the arrest and prosecution of all suspects ' .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment ) - Before the vote on Amendment No 7
Madam President , I propose that we insert " Israel and the Palestinian Authority " in lieu of the point " all countries in the region " .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the recommendation )
Report ( A5-0440 / 2001 ) by Mr Watts , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95 / 21 / EC concerning the enforcement , in respect of shipping using Community ports and sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States , of international standards for ship safety , pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions ( port State control ) ( PE-CONS 3657 / 2001 - C5-0525 / 2001 - 2000 / 0065 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Report ( A5-0441 / 2001 ) by Mr Ortuondo Larrea , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 94 / 57 / EC on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( PE-CONS 3656 / 2001 - C5-0526 / 2001 - 2000 / 0066 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0344 / 2001 ) , by Mr Hatzidakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the accelerated phasing-in of double hull or equivalent design standards for single hull oil tankers and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2978 / 94 ( 10221 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0389 / 2001 - 2000 / 0067 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0417 / 2001 ) by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on financial collateral arrangements ( COM ( 2001 ) 168 - C5-0131 / 2001 - 2001 / 0086 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0821 / 2001 ) , by Mr Poettering , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the PSE Group , Mr Cox and Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Mr Wurtz , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , and Mr Bonde , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the presentation of the Commission work programme
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0813 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Mrs Terrón i Cusí , on behalf of the PSE Group , Mr Watson , on behalf of the ELDR Group , Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group and Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group , on EU judicial co-operation with the United States in combating terrorism- Before the vote on paragraph 4
We have become aware since drafting this report that the last phrase in our paragraph 4 is contrary to the provisions that we cite in recital A , referring to Protocol 6 of the ECHR .
Therefore , I would like to propose that we replace the last phrase of paragraph 4 with the phrase ' extradition cannot take place where the defendant could be sentenced to capital punishment ' .
If we use those words , we are in conformity with Protocol 6 which we cite at the beginning .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a joint resolution on the WTO meeting in Qatar
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0764 / 2001 ) , by Mr Lannoye and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the WTO meeting in Qatar
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0771 / 2001 ) by Mr Nobilia , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the WTO meeting in Qatar
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0817 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the WTO meeting in Qatar
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0819 / 2001 ) by Mrs Suominen and Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Mr van den Berg , Mrs McNally and Mrs Mann , on behalf of the PSE Group , Mr Clegg , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and Mr De Clercq , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the WTO meeting in Qatar
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0394 / 2001 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on Conflict Prevention ( COM ( 2001 ) 211 - C5-0458 / 2001 - 2001 / 2182 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0418 / 2001 ) by Mr Gahler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on EU relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran ( COM ( 2001 ) 71 - C5-0338 / 2001 - 2001 / 2138 ( COS ) )
Before the vote on Paragraph 5
Madam President , I am certainly not acquainted with the vital reasons that have led to the choice of today ' s timetable .
I do not , however , understand how we can end the vote at 11 a.m. and debate a very important report on social and economic problems after 5 p.m. , when there may not be many Members present in the House .
If it is more important in this Parliament to talk about Mr Berlusconi than the social policies of the European Union , then please say so and in that way we will know that our work is completely useless .
Thank you , Mrs Muscardini .
As you know , the draft agenda has been adopted by this House .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Costa Neves and Buitenweg report ( A5-0400 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Costa Neves / Buitenweg report deals with the general budget of the European Union .
You can see , Madam President , that right now at least half of the members of the public who are watching Members leave the House when Mr Fatuzzo starts his explanations of vote are elderly and pensioners - but that is just a coincidence .
Well , I have looked at the European budget and tried to pick out the entries for initiatives that are specifically concerned with , and of interest to , the elderly and pensioners .
I had to get the magnifying glass which , as you know , on the computer lets you magnify the words written in the various documents , and I looked and looked and looked but could not find any .
That , then , Madam President , is why I had to vote against this European Parliament budget .
I hope next year , at the end of 2002 , I may instead have the satisfaction of voting for it because at last there will be some substantial , major , visible entries favouring pensioners .
- ( DA ) We have voted against Amendment No 7 to the report on the EU ' s draft general budget for 2002 , tabled by Jens-Peter Bonde on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities .
As it stands , the draft is of no use at all in securing a better arrangement for MEPs ' travel expenses .
It is also our view that MEPs ' travel expenses are a subject to be dealt with in connection with a reform of the Statute for Members .
As we reach the end of the budgetary procedure for the financial year 2002 , I think that it is important to make a number of comments about agriculture , the Community 's border regions and the European Union 's external actions , to confine myself to the essential points .
With regard to agriculture , the fact that several billion euros of the 2001 budget have not been used will mean that significant sums will be returned to the Member States , whilst a strong dollar with regard to the euro will have at least had the effect of automatically creating a favourable situation on the markets .
Nevertheless , if necessary , the Commission should not hesitate to extend the special purchase scheme for beef - a programme which was set up in the aftermath of the BSE crisis and which expires at the end of the year - by six months , either through an SAB or a transfer of appropriations , even though it is proposed in the Letter of Amendment No 2 to cancel the billion euros initially earmarked for any additional needs related to BSE .
The border regions , which were generously provided for in the Berlin agreements , will , for their part , benefit from EUR 16 billion over seven years .
The Nice and Gothenburg summits confirmed this policy , entrusting the Commission with the task of setting up an additional programme worth some EUR 191 million .
The Committee on Budgets has deemed it appropriate for its part to add a further 50 million under Interreg .
This is in spite of the fact that in many cases there is clearly no proof that these 22 border regions ( from Finland to Greece via Bavaria ) are in need of this new money , and that they already receive significant financial support and will be the first to benefit from enlargement .
In comparison , given the amounts at stake , we cannot but be taken aback by the lack of aid which was available following the devastation wreaked on French forests by the storms , the effects of the floods in Picardy and the immediate damage caused by the Erika .
Given the urgent nature of the situation , appropriations ought even to have been re-deployed .
( Intervention shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. During the budget discussions with the Commission on Category 4 , broad agreement has been reached as regards the importance of improving the reporting system on development assistance , as well as the need to develop targets and indicators for measuring impact .
Moreover , agreement has also been reached to have a benchmark that 35 % of spending should be allocated in support of social infrastructure .
It was my intention , as rapporteur for the Development Cooperation Budget , to suggest an oral amendment to the original amendment , submitted by me , emphasising " ... to the social sectors in a given country , reflects the wishes of the beneficiaries and that a degree ... the norm . Progress towards meeting the benchmark will be monitored through the Common RELEX Information System " .
Because of procedural rules and lack of time , however , this oral amendment proved impossible to submit .
The intention , however , was to emphasise that the benchmark should be seen in the context , not only of total donor spending , but also taking into account recipient country wishes .
Wynn report ( A5-0447 / 2001 )
. ( ES ) The Interinstitutional Agreement of 1999 , for which I was rapporteur , created the Flexibility Instrument , a ' light ' revision of the Financial Perspectives of less inconvenience to the Council .
In the two previous budgetary years , we rather forced the interpretation of that mechanism , since it was applied by us in order to meet the needs of Kosovo and Serbia , with regard to the fact that the Council refused to keep its word and agree to the revision of the Financial Perspectives which it promised in its Declaration of 6 May 1999 .
This year , the European Commission presented a proposal to mobilise the Flexibility Instrument which , for the first time , respected the letter and the spirit of the Agreement .
But once again it has not been possible and the responsibility for that falls to Parliament .
It was a question of providing EUR 197 million of the EUR 281 million it will cost to convert the fleet which previously fished in Moroccan waters , a fleet and an industry which provides employment in the least-favoured regions of the current EU : Galicia , Andalusia and the Algarve .
All of these are Objective 1 regions .
On the afternoon of the conciliation of 21 November , the Council and the Commission sounded out formulae which did not represent a reduction for anybody , but it seems it was not enough for some people to obtain resources which were difficult to justify , but that it had to be at the expense of everybody else .
The result is that the Objective 1 regions of Spain and Portugal will have to pay for 40 % of the conversion of their fleet by means of the reprogramming of the FIFG .
My colleague Barbara Dührkop Dührkop will continue with the explanation of vote .
. ( ES ) I will continue the explanation of vote started by my colleague Mr Colom i Naval .
There were people , however , such as Mr Stoiber , in such a prosperous region as Bavaria , who considered that it was in their electoral interest to name a price which might appear in a newspaper headline : a programme - with no legal basis , by the way - for cross-border cooperation with the candidate countries , funded with some of the money intended for fishing conversion .
Demagoguery is contagious and others followed his example and the conversion programme was taken hostage , despite the fact that there were already appropriations for cross-border cooperation , at least in B5-3003 , B5-0510 , B2-0141 , B3-1010 , B3-1021 or B3-0306 .
I would like to stress that we are in favour of the intention to prepare these regions and that they have always had our support .
What we are not satisfied with is the fact that it is done to the detriment of the regions affected by an unexpected conversion .
And , although the resolution states that in 1999 it was not envisaged that enlargement could have consequences for the bordering Community regions , this is not the case .
In Germany , for example , the border States will have Community aid of more than EUR 10.5 billion .
We have rarely seen such a miserly and nationalistic spectacle in this House !
This would be typical of the Council .
We voted in favour , but without enthusiasm .
We did so because we do not want to sacrifice those poor regions of the Iberian coast , but also out of solidarity with these regions and also with those bordering the candidate countries , a solidarity which has been sadly lacking in this negotiation .
Peijs report ( A5-0453 / 2001 )
At this , the last plenary part-session of the European Parliament of 2001 , which is also the last before the introduction of the euro notes and coins , we have to note that the European Parliament has not organised a formal sitting or even a debate of any kind to mark an event which is in principle , for all of the federalists here , who are in the majority , the greatest ever project of European ' integration ' .
Why this silence , which has moreover lasted for several part-sessions and which has been broken only by sovereigntist voices ?
The answer is simple : the final phase of introducing the single currency - which is to say the physical changeover of notes and coins as of 1 January 2002 - is based on two enormous deceptions .
First of all , the single currency is totally useless from a technical point of view and serves only to satisfy the extremist desires of certain federalists who absolutely must have uniform monetary signs throughout Europe .
In fact , we could quite easily have kept the current arrangement : the euro for international purposes , superposed on national currencies .
We are therefore going to turn people 's lives upside down , make their lives more difficult in the coming months , and doubtless further reduce the trust which they have in their national institutions , and all of this for no useful purpose except to pander to federalist passions .
The second deception is that public opinion has never been properly enlightened and has even been manipulated .
Neither at Maastricht nor in the ensuing years did the public fully understand the impact of the Treaty , that is to say , that it would bring about the end of the franc .
Subsequently , every possible effort was made to give the impression that the public supported the project , which was not true .
Today the harsh reality has dawned : 52 % of French people think that the single currency offers more disadvantages than advantages while 33 % think the opposite ( Le Figaro , 11 December ) and 62 % would like to continue using the franc compared with 32 % who are of the opposite opinion ( Wall Street Journal , 11 December ) .
Similar percentages are replicated at European level .
The deception is so huge that next year , when people 's eyes are opened , we will not only have to rethink the euro , but also consider thoroughgoing reforms of the European institutions to prevent public opinion from being manipulated in this way again .
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0747 / 2001 )
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy unanimously approved my Amendment No 22 regarding a new Paragraph 9 of the resolution with the following wording : ' Calls on the partners to ensure that the State has a monopoly on the use of force and that no parallel military structures can continue their activities ' .
If it is - ever - to be possible for peace to be achieved between Israelis and Palestinians , or between the State of Israel and the Palestinian Authority , it is crucial that the power of the State should have a monopoly on the use of force and that Islamic terrorist paramilitary groups - such as Islamic Jihad , Hamas and Hizbollah - should not be allowed to be armed and to carry out terrorist attacks against civilians as they at present do with great regularity .
My amendment was unfortunately rejected by Parliament .
However , the line of reasoning I put forward has been included in paragraph 3.3 of the resolution in the compromise demand ' for the Palestinian Authority to dismantle terrorist networks , including by arresting and prosecuting all suspects ' .
I regard this request as progress in itself and as being very clearly worded in the same spirit and along the same lines as my original amendment .
The voting session that we have just completed is yet another perfect illustration of the frequently hemiplegic behaviour of the European Parliament .
How is it possible for this House to adopt , by a broad majority , a motion for a resolution in which it declares its ' solid commitment to the common fight against terrorism ' alongside the United States whilst refusing , by a broad majority , to ask the Palestinian Authority to condemn terrorism ?
I am stunned that nearly 320 Members voted against Amendment No 6 which proposed something that seems perfectly obvious , in other words , that the support we are giving to the Palestinian Authority and its institutions must be coupled with a firm condemnation of the violence inflicted by the same Authority and the implementation of effective measures that will put an end to the terrorist attacks .
What do we gain by using such disingenuous language ?
By moving away from a balanced policy , we are putting our diplomatic credibility at risk and we make ourselves appear to be biased .
Do we want the next European mission to be turned away from Israel , just as the mission headed by the Belgian Presidency was ?
Why send such an ambiguous message to the terrorists , as if there were good and bad terrorists ?
Our condemnation of terrorism must be global and there should be no exception .
This will merely enable us to be in a better position to state our desire to see the Palestinian people in a fully-fledged , sovereign State .
All people aspire to a genuine State , which is the expression of their sovereignty , and the Palestinian people have the same right to this as everyone else .
However , we shall not assist the leaders of the Palestinian Authority to act with the responsibility of State authorities whilst being complacent towards terrorism .
Watts report ( A5-0440 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Conciliation Committee has spoken to us about the living and working conditions on board the ships that arrive in Community ports .
I voted for the motion , Madam President , because I remember life on board very well , since at a young age I sailed on board passenger liners between New York and the Bahamas .
There are some seamen who live a good life on board once their shift is finished : for instance , the pursers and deck officers dine in the restaurant with the passengers , drink whisky in the passengers ' bar , dance in the ballroom with the female passengers if they are men or male passengers if they are women .
In contrast , though , there are the cooks , cabin-boys and helmsmen , who unfortunately live in tiny cabins four metres square and enjoy living conditions that are not quite so pleasant .
I really hope that my vote in favour will be useful so that we can take a real interest in living conditions on board ship , but for all seamen and not just some .
- Madam President , I warmly welcome this report by my Socialist colleague Mark Watts , which will enable EU Member States to enforce international standards for ship safety , pollution , prevention and onboard living and working conditions .
This report has the potential positively to affect a broad number of issues : it could enhance the lives of people working on board ships and , moreover , it is in line with the EU 's attempts to take a pioneering role in protecting the environment .
The calls for " black boxes " which carry voyage data recorders , are a vital and concrete way to ensure that those ships calling at EU ports all adhere to common standards .
Ortuondo Larrea report ( A5-0441 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Ortuondo Larrea report marked the agreement of the Conciliation Committee to inspections and surveys of ships when they enter European Community ports .
I voted for it , but I would hope , Madam President , that the on-board inspections will be performed by European Union inspectors , and not inspectors from the Member States .
We know all too well , in fact , that the Member States do not want inspections in the way the European directives are implemented , so much so that , in a conciliation to have inspections on the implementation of environmental directives , all 15 Member States of the Union opposed them .
. ( NL ) I am pleased that agreement has finally been reached at arbitration on the three major measures contained in the Erika 1 package .
We have debated and negotiated at length , and it is now time for the implementation and enforcement of the legislation .
As regards the report on the classification bureaux , the most important subject for the Liberals too was liability .
In the first and second readings we argued for a ceiling on the liability of classification bureaux , since the latter organisations are only one element in the chain of liability .
Unlimited liability is in our view only justified where there is gross negligence .
In addition , a ceiling ensures that eventually the fairly closed markets for classification and statutory tasks will become more open and a more level playing field will be created .
At present , new classification bureaux can scarcely compete with the existing ( national ) organisation under a regime of unlimited liability .
In order to avoid undermining the Erika 1 package and to retain the gain for Parliament brought by the Watts report ( voyage data recorders on ships ) , at third reading , the Liberals accepted with reservations the proposal that Member States should be free in their negotiations with classification bureaux to agree higher , unlimited liability .
The result of this , however , will have to be evaluated by the European Commission .
The Liberals are pleased that extra guarantees have been built into the Regulation to prevent any entanglement of interests between a classification bureau and the owner of a vessel being monitored .
The bureau must now be completely independent , which stands to reason .
Hatzidakis report ( A5-0344 / 2001 )
We are still on the subject of ships , Madam President , in the report by Mr Hatzidakis on the results of the Conciliation Committee regarding double hulls for oil tankers .
I voted for it because it is important to have achieved this agreement .
Double-hulled tankers sail the seas of the whole world providing a better safeguard against pollution .
I should be pleased , however , if there were also better safeguards for the crews , who do not have an easy life on board oil tankers , and I should be pleased , above all , if the electronic and navigational appliances were improved .
Basically , we should try to prevent any disasters at sea by every possible means , either before doubling ships ' hulls or , at least , as well as doubling their hulls .
Surely , in the end , improvements to the electronic steering and control apparatus cost less than doubling the hull .
Pérez Royo report ( A5-0417 / 2001 )
The report by my colleague , Fernando Pérez Royo , on financial collateral arrangements is an important step towards standardising the legal regime governing financial instruments in Europe .
Like my colleague , I attach great importance to the harmonisation of these markets , within a reasonable period of time .
This is what Mr Pérez Royo 's work seeks to achieve .
Although , overall , the report is based on the same model of future European financial markets I myself have in mind , the French socialists have not supported the rapporteur on three points .
Article 2 ( 4 ) broadens the scope of application of the directive to all market participants and thus modifies the order of preferential creditors in the event of bankruptcy .
This compromises companies ' chances of recovery by transferring ownership of their assets to creditor banks , bypassing preferential creditors ( employees , tax and social security bodies ) .
Article 6 provides for the use by the collateral taker of the financial instruments ' collateral held under the security financial collateral arrangement ; these provisions give rise to difficulties related to ownership rights and traceability of securities and thus threaten the transparency of European financial markets .
Finally , Article 10 ( 2 ) , as amended by Amendment No 17 , deletes the precise localisation criteria , thus making any credible attempt to increase the transparency of our financial markets doomed to failure and pre-empting the conclusions of the Hague Conference on International Private Law .
Since the vote in the plenary confirmed the rapporteur 's choice to broaden the scope of the directive , the French socialists voted against the text as a whole .
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0821 / 2001 )
The large groups in this House have just tabled and passed a resolution deploring the Commission 's failure to submit its legislative programme for 2002 , which they criticise for being insufficiently detailed , in good time , a surprising move coming from them .
Of course , we could not but endorse this initiative , but neither can we avoid asking ourselves what has prompted this almost universal attitude of spite towards Romano Prodi .
At every turn a majority of this Parliament seems to be trying to disassociate themselves from him .
Why ?
Has he in the end become disliked because his statements are sometimes insufficiently federalist ?
Is he being reproached for not providing sufficiently vigorous opposition to the Council , which lately has appeared to be even more exasperated than usual by the Commission 's customary ' integrationism ' and by its defence of a ' Community method ' which has been torn to shreds by Europe 's evolution , and in particular by enlargement ?
We should also mention an alternative explanation , which might give us rather more cause for concern : the transitional arrangements for bringing the euro notes and coins into circulation on 1 January 2002 are not going too well , and it seems that there is a danger that the public will not enjoy the experience .
It may well be that the federalist politicians in this House are starting to distance themselves from an institution which they are readying themselves to accuse in the future of not doing enough to prepare for the changeover .
The Commission would be a perfect scapegoat - and moreover with some justification - for these politicians ' sins .
In the conclusions of the Commission communication , it is claimed that while the Commission ' is carrying out a radical reform of its working methods at the political , financial and administrative levels ... in the meantime there are growing fears that Europe may lose touch with the immediate concerns of its citizens ' .
I believe these are not just fears .
The fact that the citizens are not really interested in this radical reform of the Commission ' s working methods seems to me to be healthy .
It would be worrying if they showed much interest in such matters , which do not arouse enthusiasm even among us Members , seeing that we have not really noticed all this revisionist radical behaviour that is being pointed out to us now .
Instead , we , like the citizens , notice that Europe is getting more and more out of touch with people ' s concerns and seems more and more distant .
Perhaps the introduction of the euro , once the initial difficulties of understanding its value in terms of the old currencies have been overcome , may help more people to see Europe as a common reality , although the feeling is likely to remain , especially among the older generations , that they have been tricked out of their old currency , which will have vanished without anyone having asked them for their views .
The feeling that Europe is distant is a real feeling and one that is becoming more and more widespread among the citizens .
At crucial moments in the life of society it does not show itself as such , but emerges as the opinion of this or that government .
The opinions are legitimate , but they do not convey the idea that we all belong to a common entity whereas , in the past , this idea had always been symbolically expressed by the Commission .
It was the Commission that called the tune with statements and practical proposals .
Now , though , partly because it is not the Commission that represents foreign policy , when faced with questions of international politics Europe seems not to exist , and it is not evident in the figure of Mr CFSP .
Enlargement itself , the subject of so much praise and emphasis , is , on the contrary , seen by the citizens as a weakening rather than a strengthening of Europe .
If I do not share the enthusiasm about the ' working methods ' expressed in the communication , it is not because I consider that the topics dealt with or the declared commitments are not going in the right direction , or because there are not enough legislative initiatives .
As everyone knows , quality does not depend on numbers .
It should be understood , rather , that over-regulating gives a distorted image of Europe and makes people identify it with that bureaucratic Moloch that is so feared by industry and the citizens .
No . The intended work programme must be a political document and not an administrative list .
It must state the reasons for certain delays and the real obstacles that have prevented certain objectives from being achieved ; it must identify some priority goals through which the unification process can be pushed forward .
Europe fully developing ' an effective role in the management and solution of international crises ' will also depend on the Commission ' s political will and not just on the possibility of developing on a global scale its function as a proposer of legislation .
Rather than in the cultivation of regulation peas , the identity of Europe will express itself in foreign policy and the security and defence policy .
The Commission should aim essentially at this if it does not want to be reduced even more in 2002 to a purely bureaucratic and administrative body .
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0813 / 2001 )
. I agree in general ( while having some reservations about some of the language ) with the resolution as posed .
I believe the European Union should co-operate on an international level in combating terrorism , organised crime and individual criminals , all of whom use the differences in legal systems to avoid standing trial .
However , my main reservation with regard to this resolution is the absence of any reference to the International Criminal Court , initiated by the Rome Convention .
This court when established will enable the trial of any and every individual suspected of crime , including war crimes .
This court , which is being opposed by the USA Government would guarantee a fair trial and would apply even-handedly to everyone .
In current circumstances this court is needed more than ever .
Lagendijk report ( A5-0394 / 2001 )
How wonderful it would be , Madam President , if we could find a solution to prevent conflicts !
I voted for this document , Madam President , but I am convinced that we will be able to avoid these conflicts - 99 % of which just happen to involve poor , or rather very poor , countries in the world - if we can make these countries a little less poor .
I therefore think it is appropriate that the European Union should continue its actions of supporting the economies of Third World countries and poor countries , because I am convinced that only by improving the living standards of the citizens of our world who live in poverty - or rather in extreme poverty , not just in poverty , but in the most wretched poverty there could be - will we succeed in preventing conflicts of any kind .
Gahler report ( A5-0418 / 2001 )
The report by Mr Gahler , Madam President , concerns the relations between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran .
I have had the luck to have a town councillor for the Pensioners ' Party who was born in Tehran and lived in Iran for thirty years and who had dual Iranian and Italian citizenship .
He explained the situation in Iran to me very clearly , and so I am very pleased that people there are trying to go back to the democracy that the Shah had installed into the country , even though he was the emperor .
I shall therefore ask that these talks should continue and that we should have an exchange of members of Parliament between Iran and the European Union , and most of all I propose that you , Madam President , should invite President Khatami to address this House here in Strasbourg .
I welcome moves to improve relations with Iran .
But we must always take account of the fact that human rights in Iran are , if anything , getting worse and not better .
Iran is continuing to fund terrorist groups such as Hizbollah who are active in the Middle East . In particular , Iran funds terrorist groups that are still holding hostage a number of Israeli soldiers who are officially posted as missing in action .
If Iran is serious about developing better relationships with the West , it ought to put pressure on those groups to release those soldiers .
In particular , I would draw Parliament 's attention to the case of Ron Arad , an Israeli air force officer who , in 1986 , was captured by a Shi 'ite militia group in Lebanon .
He was then in 1987 sold to another group which was funded and run by Iran .
He has not been seen since 1987 ; his daughter was an infant when he was taken hostage .
Would it not be an appropriate message for this season of goodwill if she could at long last see her father who disappeared 15 years ago ?
Please would Iran help these soldiers be released if it is serious about developing peace with the rest of the world .
Van den Burg report ( A5-0388 / 2001 )
Madam President , the van den Burg report deals with the Commission report on the regulation of taxation of second-pillar pensions , that is , occupational pensions .
We know that there is the EET system and so on , that is , tax is paid either on the contributions or on the interest on the invested capital , on what is received for the occupational pension , or tax is paid on the pensions themselves .
Speaking on behalf of the Pensioners ' Party , I propose the EEE system , in other words : exemption from paying tax when the pension contributions are paid ; exemption from paying tax when the capital so received is invested ; and exemption from paying tax when the occupational pension is redeemed .
If we really want to improve and enhance the possibility of saving through pensions - occupational , company and voluntary - the Member States should give up levying tax on them .
When we are young and think about our future , we should think that one day we shall be old and nobody will think about us , except we ourselves with our pensions .
Occupational pensions will play an increasingly important role in ensuring that pensions provide secure , lasting and effective social protection as well as a decent standard of living for retired people .
There is an urgent need to create a genuine single market in pension funds , and this means providing for a tax system which will , regardless of the country of residence of the member or retired person , avoid contributions and benefits being taxed twice and discourage pensioners from going into tax exile to avoid taxes .
I voted against the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Commission communication on the elimination of tax obstacles to the cross-border provision of occupational pensions because the methods recommended in it run counter to the objective sought .
This is because the proposals contained in the report submitted to us will generate costly bureaucracy , because of Member States ' having to exchange information and work together to collect taxes , and do not in any way constitute a practical and efficient approach towards removing the tax obstacles to the cross-border provision of occupational pensions .
Instead of starting a process of consultation to identify which of the tax models currently in force in the Member States avoids double taxation of contributions and benefits with the greatest efficiency and the least bureaucracy , the report already comes down in favour of the EET regime , when it is obvious that the TEE tax system - which consists of taxing contributions to the plan and exempting pensions drawn from it - would guarantee uniform fiscal treatment , regardless of the country of residence of the member or retired person , that it would allow the country granting tax concessions for setting up occupational pension plans to safeguard its tax base , and that it would make the issue of sharing tax yields superfluous .
( Intervention shortened pursuant to Article 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Rights of homosexuals in EU institutions
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0533 / 01 ) , presented by 33 Members to the Commission , on the rights of homosexuals in EU Institutions .
Mr President , you promised when you were appointed , Commissioner Kinnock , that the Commission would become the world ' s best administration .
I have confidence that you are the right person to tackle that task successfully .
The issue of giving employees equal rights , irrespective of their sexual orientation , is a crucial step on the way .
In the last twelve years , there has been a very positive trend towards enabling homosexuals to be granted the same rights as heterosexuals .
In 1989 , my own country , Denmark , was the first country in the world to introduce legislation on registered partnerships for homosexuals , corresponding to marriage , and a number of other countries followed suit .
I would mention the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden , Germany and Finland .
Other EU countries have implemented legislation which approximates to marriage to rather more limited degrees .
Within the framework of the EU too , the trend is now in the right direction .
Allow me to mention four very important points .
Non-discrimination against minorities is now written into the objectives of European cooperation .
On the legal basis of Article 13 of the Treaty , discrimination in the labour market on the grounds of sexual orientation has now been tackled in practical terms .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights expressly states that there must be no discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
Finally , Parliament has recommended on several occasions that same-sex couples be guaranteed the same rights as heterosexual couples and that the Member States recognise registered partnerships .
There have been very positive developments in recent years .
Now is the time for the EU ' s own institutions to comply with the same standards .
I would therefore very much welcome your proposal .
You have the key to nudging things in the right direction , Commissioner Kinnock .
This proposal would enable homosexuals to be accorded full rights if there were partnership legislation in their own countries .
I have a couple of questions in that connection .
Since it is to varying degrees that the Member States ' partnership legislation approximates to the marriage laws , I would ask you to explain which countries ' citizens will be given full rights .
Where will the Commission draw the line ?
Moreover , the Commission is paving the way for cohabiting heterosexuals to be given certain rights , for example the right to health insurance covering their partners .
That is progress , but I should like to ask whether the arrangement also covers cohabiting homosexuals in all the Member States .
For example , are cohabiting homosexuals from Britain and Italy entitled to these limited rights ?
Finally , a question on the timetable : when do you anticipate its being possible for these new staff rules to come into force in the institutions of the EU ?
Over the years , many Commissioners have promised the earth in this area , and nothing has happened .
They have , however , set things in motion .
They deserve full recognition for having done so , and I hope you can give a positive answer to the question we have put to you in this House today .
One of the proposals the Commission is making for modernising reform will extend access to certain family and social benefits to European Union officials who are currently denied such access because they cannot or do not want to enter into conventional legal marriage under the laws of the Member States .
I am very grateful to Mr Lund and 32 other Members for initiating this plenary debate which enables me to report to Parliament on the issue of the Commission 's intentions and proposals .
Under the current Staff Regulations , social and family rights are provided only for couples who are married .
Whilst that most obviously refers to matrimony between two heterosexual people , it also relates to homosexuals if homosexual marriage is legally recognised in a Member State .
The House will know that the Kingdom of the Netherlands is at present the only European Union Member State where marriage between two people of the same gender is legally provided for .
In the Commission 's view , it is sensible to use the opportunity of current comprehensive reforms to revise the Staff Regulations in order to reflect the wide-ranging social change that has occurred in the time since the regulations were established in their present form in 1968 .
The Commission therefore proposes to ensure that staff who do not have access to marriage under the current national legislation are not discriminated against and to provide improved treatment for people who , for personal reasons , choose not to be legally married .
To achieve this , the Commission seeks to provide full statutory recognition and commensurate benefits for all EU staff who are in partnerships that are shown to be stable in nature .
I would ask the House to note that whilst we recognise that not all Member States ' legal schemes for such recognition accord equivalent rights and status , the Commission accords equal recognition to all existing national regimes which make provision for stable partnerships .
So far as we are concerned , the stable partnerships to be recognised will include homosexual partnerships which will be regarded in the same way as heterosexual partnerships and subject to the following conditions : firstly , the couple must provide a legal document of an EU Member State which acknowledges their status as non-marital partners .
Secondly , neither partner may be married or in another non-marital partnership .
Thirdly , there must no blood relationship in the first or second line between partners .
Fourthly , that the couple must not have access to legal marriage in a Member State .
People in recognised stable relationships that meet these requirements will be entitled to the family-related benefits that , under present Staff Regulations , are available only to heterosexual married couples and to officials who are homosexuals and of Dutch nationality .
Those entitlements will include household allowance , health insurance coverage , survivor 's pension and annual travel allowance .
It will be clear to the House that unlike homosexual couples in all Member States other than the Netherlands , cohabiting heterosexual partners who are not married to other people could , if they so wish , get married .
The Commission does not , however , ignore the reality that many people in modern societies wish to sustain stable partnerships but do not wish to enter into matrimony .
We consequently recognise that many partners who have not married have family obligations .
We therefore consider that those who are registered should be covered by provisions that , for instance , will enable a partner to participate in the European Union civil servant 's health insurance scheme and will enable an official to use special leave provisions when , for example , a partner is suffering from a serious illness .
The system envisaged for the staff of the European Union institutions largely replicates the system currently employed in the OECD .
To obtain access to certain basic social rights under the Staff Regulations , non-married heterosexual partners must , as indicated , have documentary proof that their partnership is recognised in a Member State , they must not be married or in a non-marital partnership with another person and they must have no blood relationship with their partner .
In addition to these two categories of partnerships , where the partners have chosen to be officially registered , there are also a limited number of cohabiting partnerships that are not recognised by any Member State since the people involved have chosen not to seek the legal recognition open to them .
In such cases , the Commission proposes that the existing purely administrative recognition of certain partnerships should be maintained .
This would , however , be of minor importance and the resulting rights would be limited .
For example , partners would continue to have access to established language courses where places are available .
In its reform package of 30 October , the Commission approved the principles outlined above .
We also decided to intensify discussions with other EU institutions and with other international public sector organisations in order to develop these proposals further .
Finally , we reserved the right to make supplementary proposals after the outcome of the interinstitutional discussions which will commence formally in the early months of next year .
The issue of recognised partnerships will be discussed at the next meeting of the heads of administration of all EU institutions .
A working group will then further develop the Commission proposal , taking into account the additional information on the situation in other international organisations which is currently being collected .
We naturally wish to pursue best practice wherever that is feasible and gains the endorsement of the legislatures , including this House .
At the end of this process , we will transmit our proposals for amendments to the Staff Regulations to the Council and to this House .
We hope to be able to do that in the spring of 2002 .
The date of implementation of these new arrangements , and indeed much else , will therefore depend to a very significant extent on the speed at which they are handled in this House and in the Council .
As for the Council , there is nothing to suggest that Member States will raise problems with this approach , particularly since it gives full recognition to the competence of Member States to regulate of marital law .
It does not introduce a separate regime for the institutions - indeed , it cannot .
This does not preclude the possibility , of course , that critical questions may be raised by Member States in the Council .
We shall simply have to wait to see what views are actually expressed .
Finally , a word on costs .
For obvious reasons we do not yet know the exact number of recognised partnerships amongst the staff of the institutions or the numbers involved .
We can , however , make a reasonable estimate , and on that basis , we can forecast that the budgetary impact of the above measures will be modest .
Two hundred and fifty fully recognised partnerships and 250 partnerships with a limited range of statutory benefits would , for instance , generate total annual costs of under EUR 3 million .
When implemented , the measures we propose will recognise and respect certain basic civil liberties .
They will foster enlightened attitudes and they will improve the morale and living conditions of many of the valued staff who work for the European Union in the different institutions .
I hope that this House will continue to support these reasonable social innovations and I look forward to further constructive discussions .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his characteristically full discourse and discussion on this subject , and also for the very comprehensive material he makes available to us on the staff reform issues .
We will have a chance to return to this subject , as he says , when we get the detailed proposal for the Staff Regulations .
The issues that he raised were covered very briefly in the report that I prepared for Parliament back in 2000 , where we indicated that we were looking for a best-practice approach .
The summary he has given us certainly indicates the amount of work that has been done on that .
Given that it is a highly sensitive issue and Member States will certainly be looking at it closely , the sort of balance he has achieved is going to be very much the right one .
It is very important that we see this in the broad framework of recognising stable partnerships as he described it in the November 2000 discussion paper .
That is really what we are discussing here .
We are not talking about any particular type of partnership - that in itself would be discrimination - but recognising stable partnerships .
One of the points I particularly want to raise with him is the question of children from partnerships .
There have been well-publicised cases recently in the United Kingdom about the British forces .
A soldier who very sadly was killed while on active service , had a stable partnership and a child from that partnership , but was not actually covered in the UK situation .
That is an important point .
The other point I want to raise is in connection with pension provisions and about the rights and abilities of staff to be able to decide to whom their pension should be paid and what flexibility they have in making that decision or in opting for whom their payment and benefit provision should be made in the event of their death .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his detailed reply . I would like to encourage him further .
He is absolutely right that we should look at the best practices available .
We in this House must remind ourselves that we cannot be selective in the application of principle .
We look towards enlargement and encourage good practice , yet here in our institutions we still continue to discriminate .
But I welcome the signs of change .
I hope that these will have the full support of this House and that we will begin to end the ' ping pong ' game that we play with the human rights and civil liberties of ordinary men and women .
For that is exactly what lesbians and gay men are . They are ordinary men and women made extraordinary by society 's preoccupation with their sex lives .
Let me also say on a personal matter that in my own Member State , my partner of 18 years , cannot possibly inherit my pension .
That is discrimination .
We must end it both within and outside the institutions .
Finally , I should like to raise one very important issue , namely recognition by an EU Member State of a legal document .
Such a legal document is certainly not available in the United Kingdom .
I look forward to Commissioner Kinnock 's replies .
Thank you , Mr President . Giving concrete form to the equal rights of homosexual employees of the European institutions appears to be turning into a never-ending story .
Nevertheless , this House wishes to see European institutions playing an exemplary role in equal treatment , with no distinction made as to the sexual orientation of staff .
The European Parliament has twice pronounced in favour of establishing the same conditions of employment in the case of lasting relationships between people of the same sex as for married couples .
Yet adequate arrangements for this have still not been made .
My group cannot help feeling that within the hierarchy of the institutions , including those of this House , barriers are still being created against the introduction of equal conditions of employment for lesbians and gay men .
We therefore eagerly await the wind of change brought by the reorganisation , now entering its final phase , which will need to clear out the old dust traps from this area too .
My group is glad that , immediately after the Dutch Homosexual Marriage Act came into force , the responsible secretariat in the Commission recognised such marriages where civil servants employed by the Commission are concerned .
Member States where Dutch officials may be posted who are married under Dutch law to a same-sex partner must not of course obstruct the issue of residence permits , not even if it involves subjects of third countries .
My fellow MEP Mrs Buitenweg has asked questions on this matter .
Your Commission should make sure that such obstruction does not occur .
As yet we have had no answer from you .
Can you , Commissioner , give us one today ?
Mr President , I want to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his extremely detailed report .
Mr Kinnock , I really did try to keep up with what was going on here .
If I understand the matter correctly , the fact is that the partners of homosexuals who are not Swedish , Finnish or Dutch citizens seeking posts within the institutions of the EU are not recognised by these institutions if , as Mr Cashman says , they do not have documentation .
Perhaps the latter could in those circumstances go on language courses at some stage .
Against that background , I personally do not , unlike certain others in this House , think that we have come a particularly long way .
I appreciate , Commissioner Kinnock , that it is very difficult indeed to make progress in this area because we have a lot of strange prejudices about people of the same sex who love each other in the same way as heterosexuals .
Nor can I quite understand why the institutions of the EU should in this case treat employees on a national basis .
If that reasoning were to be followed through , it would mean that people employed within the EU ' s institutions could have their wages set on a national basis , but that does not happen .
I understand , Commissioner Kinnock , that the situation is very difficult in view of the prejudices that exist , but I cannot agree that things are developing particularly quickly in this area .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his very clear reply to the oral question .
My point directly follows on from Mrs Eriksson 's .
It is clear that , in many Member States , homosexual couples do not have any rights and there are grave injustices within Member States .
The only light at the end of the tunnel as regards my own country , Ireland , is that our Law Reform Commission announced yesterday - and I suspect it is because they saw something coming down the line from the Commissioner - that they were going to make that part of their research programme for the next year .
Hopefully that will result in the justice that is clearly the right of stable couples , whether they be homosexual or heterosexual .
We have had situations where , because of the lack of rights for homosexual couples , people have been evicted from local authority housing on the death of the other partner who was the named tenant .
We also see that huge death duties accrue to partners who have bought houses together where , on the death of one partner , the other is faced with a massive tax bill , very often resulting in that person having to sell what was , in the truest sense of the word , a family home .
I know you will be addressing some of the anomalies that exist in this but , as Mrs Eriksson has rightly said , they exist in a significant number of Member States and it could cause serious problems in terms of discrimination when we come to implement charges .
I wish you every success and I am extremely glad that we have had an opportunity to raise the issue within this House because there is widespread support for it .
It is not all that often , Commissioner , that we hear good news and I should like to thank you for it on this occasion ; it really is very important to us for you to have answered our question both precisely and positively .
Why should this be the case ?
It is because we are at an historic turning point , one where the issue is no longer solely that of combating discrimination against homosexual people but that of asserting the rights of homosexuals .
At this pivotal point between fighting against and fighting for , I think that you have given us some very positive answers and that we need to continue in this direction .
But why should I attach so much importance to this ?
Because I think that in our question we pointed out that some private companies had , after all , resolved the problem more quickly than the public institutions .
We know how important it is for public institutions to set an example .
I well remember the huge uproar in France when the French railways ( the SNCF ) decided to offer their ' couples ' fares to homosexual couples .
I do not think that you have had such good fortune in the United Kingdom , but we in France do , and it is the exemplary conduct of the French railways that I should like to highlight today , because this gives us some idea of what the European Commission can now achieve .
That is why all of this is along the right lines , and why it is extremely important .
I would add , however , that for all this the fight against discrimination is not over , and I should like the Commission to also be aware of this struggle , in particular in the light of the fact that it has a Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia .
Why could we not enlarge this to include other forms of discrimination under Article 13 ?
We must not forget that there are candidate countries for accession , countries which will be included in the enlargement programme - I think you know the countries I am talking about - where homosexuality is still a crime .
We must therefore be very vigilant ; this is the ' fight against ' .
I am quite aware that this was not exactly the question you were asked , but nevertheless it seems to me to be important , if we are making progress on the social rights of homosexuals in the European institutions , for us to ensure that the current policies of all of the European institutions are consistent with this .
Mr President , I should like to begin with the points made by Mrs Fraisse .
She is absolutely right that we are at a turning point .
There has been extensive evidence for this over a considerable period of time .
Mrs Banotti 's speech this morning is further evidence that even in countries where there has been a deep-rooted reluctance to change the social and legal conventions , there is movement in the direction of logic , rationality and civil rights .
Things are starting to move , but everyone here is impatient for that movement to be much more positive and much more rapid .
The interesting point raised by Mrs Fraisse about the activity of SNCF permits me to underline a distinction that we still , unfortunately , have to draw about the legal nature , status and powers of the European institutions as employer organisations .
SNCF is an example of a public corporation with its own statute and considerable internal autonomy .
Therefore it could make its own decision in relation to the treatment of homosexual couples .
The same would apply to a private company that is , in this respect , literally a law unto itself .
Unfortunately , that means that company could show a severe degree of prejudice but it could also show a very positive degree of enlightenment .
We are not in either of those categories .
Nor are we in the category of a Member State which has passed a law which is positive about the treatment of stable homosexual relationships .
Consequently , we are faced with a limitation because we are a public institution .
Parliament , Council , Commission , Court of Justice , Court of Auditors - the whole panoply of European Union institutions - have a statute that does not permit us to exercise the degree of autonomy which is the basis for many of the arguments correctly put forward this morning . I include the arguments put by Mrs Erikkson for which I have a substantial degree of sympathy .
I should like to answer very quickly the other questions , starting with Mr Lund .
I would repeat the point I made earlier .
Once a partnership is recognised under a Member State 's recognition of partnership arrangements , we will give equal rights to everybody regardless of the benefit level applied under national legislation in the national context .
Once the key is turned , we will accord the best treatment within our power .
Secondly , on the timetable . Together with the rest of the proposed changes in the Staff Regulations , we will submit a proposal to this House and the Council in spring of next year .
It will then be in the hands of you legislators and the legislators in the Council to decide the speed of passage and - I hope - the early date of implementation of this and other necessary changes .
I would also like to make a point that relates to material that people in the House may want to get access to .
A positive attitude was expressed in the Council towards our undertaking to make a survey of arrangements throughout all 15 Member States .
We received answers from 13 of the Member States , so it is quite a comprehensive , if informal , survey .
If Members want , on application , to gain access to that information DG Admin. will happily respond .
The information we have collected shows that there is considerable diversity of arrangements .
But - and here is the good news - as I said earlier , there is a gradual but definite tide of change .
Mr Harbour 's question about children of stable partnerships is absolutely vital .
The only answer I can give is that if a Member State recognises that the children produced by a stable relationship qualify for the variety of benefits , we will fully recognise that .
Unfortunately , at this juncture we cannot go beyond that undertaking because of the limitations on our legal rights .
When Mr Cashman asks us to pursue best practice , he knows he is pushing at an open door .
But Member States determine the practices , and we have to try to encourage adoption of the best practices amongst them .
We will happily consider , however , any proposal that stable recognised partnerships qualify if home countries recognise or if a country of employment recognises them .
We do not have that second part of the proposal before us at the moment , but we will happily give consideration to such a proposal and investigate its feasibility .
If it is feasible to establish practices in the European institutions on the basis of practices in the country in which an EU official is employed , we will try to introduce that change which could extend certain rights of registered couples , whether homosexual or heterosexual .
I would like to say to Mr de Roo that no barrier is being put in the way of the advancement of gays and lesbians who are officials by the hierarchy of institutions .
That is not the case .
It is the Member States who must determine what our treatment of gays and lesbians in relationships must be .
So far as employment rights are concerned , rights of assessment and promotion , rights of appointment to management , there is no barrier and no hierarchy has expressed any direct or indirect desire to install such a barrier .
We will not install barriers but we cannot guarantee that existing cultural or legal inhibitions can automatically be dismantled .
We do not have the power to do it in the Commission .
I wish we could in many ways , but I would be misleading the House if I suggested that we have , or are likely to get , that kind of massive power for change .
Finally , to clarify a point that Mrs Eriksson made , the reference I made to very limited rights , such as the right to attend language courses , relates only to people who have the right to marry , or the right to have their partnership recognised but choose , for whatever reason , not to exercise that right .
The access people have to various nominal social opportunities that exist now under the Staff Regulations will simply continue in those cases .
Our action , as she was good enough to acknowledge , owes nothing to prejudice .
Our intention is to try to defeat prejudice because it is irrational and frequently brings brutal consequences .
What we cannot defeat is not the prejudice but the laws that exist and are exercised in sovereign power by Member States .
Not until we can secure changes in those laws - and this is gradually occurring - can we take substantial further steps beyond the significant steps that we are seeking to take in the course of this reform and which honourable Members have been good enough to acknowledge .
Thank you , Commissioner Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Flags of convenience in fisheries
The next item is the report ( A5-0405 / 2001 ) by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the role of flags of convenience in the fisheries sector [ 2000 / 2302 ( INI ) ] .
This report deals with a serious issue and that is fishing under flags of convenience .
Vessels that fish under flags of convenience ignore all the rules , they exploit the best fishing grounds and they wreak havoc .
In recent times , as fleets continue to increase and resource abundance plummets , flags of convenience are increasingly used as a means of avoiding measures taken by countries or regional fisheries organisations to manage fisheries and conserve stocks .
Pirate fishing can be seen as a undesirable consequence of states at last attempting to improve the management of fisheries .
The environmental impact of pirate fishing vessels is virtually impossible to evaluate as by definition data on catches are non-existent or , at the very best , unreliable .
The impact is known to be severe , even if undocumented , as pirate vessels target mainly high-value species such as tuna , shrimp , toothfish etc ..
There are also serious social problems .
Ship-owners take advantage of the lack of controls to reduce training safety standards , pay minimal wages , and lower standards of living and working conditions .
They require long working periods without proper rest and they provide completely inadequate medical attention .
They are responsible for many other offences .
Fishing is now a global industry .
Fleets from the EU cover all the oceans of the world , as do those of several other distant water-nations .
Markets are also global .
One-third of the total fish production that entered international trade in 1998 was worth over USD 50 billion .
Capital is perhaps the most global commodity of all .
EU fisheries investments can be found in many countries .
As a result , a concerted international effort is needed to eliminate fishing under flags of convenience .
This will involve the countries issuing the flags or whose citizens work on the fishing vessels , the ports into which they come for re-supply or off-loading , the markets in which the fish is consumed or the home of the capital which finances this destructive phenomenon .
As the EU has both one of the largest fishing fleets and one of the largest markets for fish , it can play a particularly important role in regard to flags of convenience fishing .
Many EU-owned vessels use flags of convenience .
Some may even have had FIFG money to transfer to those countries and I am pleased to see that the Commission has now proposed regulations to prevent public funding being used to transfer to flags-of-convenience countries .
I would call upon the Council to adopt them this week .
In contrast , I should mention Japan and Taiwan , who have recognised the extent to which their longline industries use flags of convenience and they have taken corrective measures by launching programmes to repatriate or to scrap a large number of tuna longliners .
At least 62 Japanese-built flags-of-convenience longliners will be scrapped by the end of 2002 .
A further 67 FOC longliners built in Taiwan will be repatriated to replace older vessels , with no overall increase in fleet capacity .
It is expected that this will reduce the FOC tuna longline fleet by about half .
These programmes are funded by both government and industry .
I believe these moves should be highly praised and that this is the way we should proceed as well .
Spain is proposing a law to list certain flags-of-convenience countries and we welcome that .
Regarding market state responsibility , the EU is a large market and so it must improve control measures .
For instance , currently it only wants to ensure that fish are caught according to rules of regional fisheries organisations which the EU belongs to .
This needs to be extended to ensure that fish are caught according to the rules of all regional organisations .
It must also be made illegal for EU citizens or companies to trade in fish caught by flags-of-convenience vessels .
This is called for in the FOA plan of action on illegal , unregulated and unreported fishing .
We should go in that direction also .
The campaign that must be waged against pirate fishing is a global and multifaceted one .
All countries with any involvement in the fishing industry - such as catching the fish , owning or crewing vessels , providing harbours , buying the final product - must participate .
The EU , as one of the most important regions from all these points of view , clearly has a special responsibility .
I can only hope that the Commission and the Spanish presidency acting together will begin to tackle this very important matter in the months ahead .
It is in the interests of all EU fishing industries to ensure that this is done .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should firstly acknowledge how appropriate it was for the Committee on Fisheries to produce an own-initiative report on this subject .
I believe that the European Parliament is thereby heading in the right direction in terms of unravelling an issue which is complicated but crucial to the future of fishing in the world and to fisheries resources .
Secondly , I believe it was also appropriate that it should be produced by Mrs McKenna , with whom I disagree on so many fisheries issues , but not on this report , which has been unanimously approved by our committee , despite the difficulty of this issue , and furthermore with no amendments from the House .
I therefore congratulate the Committee on Fisheries and our rapporteur .
There is still no doubt much to do , but , in this report , the European Parliament supports the condemnation and prosecution of flags of convenience in fishing and in marketing .
Certain Member States of the Union - such as my own , Spain , as the rapporteur has mentioned here and in the report - are promoting innovative legislative proposals in this field , which is no easy task , as has been said before .
We in the Committee on Fisheries are going to closely monitor the objectives and proposals in this report , aimed at dealing with the serious problem of illegal fishing .
By fighting it , and eventually eradicating it , we will have taken an enormous step towards sustainable worldwide fishing .
Some regional fisheries organisations , such as the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) , say that 50 % of catches of species such as the swordfish originate from illegal fishing under flags of convenience .
If this percentage of illegal fishing were to be controlled , it would lead to an unquestionable improvement in the fish stock and would therefore clearly benefit legal fishermen , who have so much need for these catches and who behave in a totally controlled , and therefore responsible , manner .
The marketing of these fish and landings in European Union ports - as has been said here - are key issues in this process , as is the definition of flags of convenience and clearly identifying the countries which permit them and tolerate them .
All of these issues are in the report .
I would once again like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs McKenna , and simply point out that I believe the European Parliament has today taken a very important step towards responsible fishing in the world .
Having congratulated everybody , it only remains for me to ask the Commissioner - whose presence I appreciate - for the Commission ' s support for the proposals in this report , because it is a very positive step , and that he take account , of course , of the fact that it has the unanimous approval of the Committee on Fisheries , and I hope that the vote for Mrs McKenna ' s report will also be unanimous this afternoon .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mrs McKenna on behalf of my group , the Socialist Group , on this wonderful report which has allowed us to strengthen the legislation on the practice of fishing under flags of convenience , which in particular harms the professionals in the sector and the image they project .
The Socialist Group is in total agreement with the conclusions of this report , above all with those which demonstrate the bad treatment received by the workers on these types of ships , in terms of working conditions , wages , safety and hygiene on board .
We believe that it is necessary to encourage the governments which have not yet done so to sign up to the United Nations agreement on fish stocks , which is directly aimed at combating this kind of fishing .
The control Regulation must be rigorously applied by all Member States and by the Commission , so that the landing in ports of this type of catch is not permitted .
We also agree absolutely with the rapporteur when he asks the Commission to seal off the markets of all Member States against the products of illegal fishing , by adopting effective Community commercial and customs legislation .
We believe that we will have to combat this type of fishing in ports and in terms of the marketing of products obtained from it .
We believe that we will have to adopt as many measures as possible in order to eradicate illegal fishing .
Mr President , Commissioner , if I were to ask you which is the odd word out in the following sequence - piracy , poaching , unsafe and fishing - you would no doubt answer that fishing is the word that does not belong .
Quite right : evading management measures , plundering the riches of the sea and the maltreatment of crew members have no place in fishing .
Unfortunately , this type of fishing does exist in the shape of fishing vessels sailing under flags of convenience .
I agree completely with the rapporteur , Mrs McKenna and would like to add the following comment . We must involve the countries that issue those flags of convenience in an effort to put an end to these practices .
Should these countries comply only by striking ships off their registers without tightening controls , we must consider economic sanctions against them .
The fishing agreements that the European Union enters into with third countries could also play a part .
We should exclude countries that allow fishing vessels under flags of convenience and their accompanying transport and refrigeration vessels into their harbours from fishing agreements with the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , pirate fleets - it is hard not to think of the Hollywood adventure films with piracy depicted as heroism and romance in equal measure or the exciting books one read as a child .
However , there is nothing heroic or romantic about the background to my thoughts on piracy now , as I speak to you here , and there is quite definitely nothing to get excited about .
On the contrary , all we have here is a destructive fisheries practice and flags of convenience .
We should not see these modern pirates who sail the seven seas as tough old characters with wooden legs and eye patches ; no , these pirates operate on powerful trawlers , often owned by nationals of Member States of the EU .
So exactly what havoc do these ships and flags of convenience wreak ?
This House has always battled for sustainable fisheries and tried to ensure that working conditions meet minimum standards .
The parlous state of fish stocks and the economic recession tell us that a great deal still needs to be done , and we are addressing these problems in our debate on the Green Paper .
However , regulations and stock management measures have to be complied with and this compliance can only be achieved with controls which actually work and effective sanctions - including political sanctions .
This is the huge attraction of flags of convenience to shipowners , because the countries which generously include them in their registers are not exactly known for their controls and sense of responsibility .
The consequences are catastrophic , to both fish and man .
Regional stock management measures are ignored , stocks which are already endangered are depleted without a second thought and conventions to protect employees are simply ignored .
But there is no point in lamenting what is an obvious situation any further , so my proposal is that we should keep trying to influence flag-of-convenience states and remind them of their international obligations .
Even in Europe we can and must act .
The port state controls adopted in the Erika I package must also be applied to pirate activities , and we must close our markets to the catches landed by these fleets .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen .
I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs McKenna , and the Committee on Fisheries and its chairman , Mr Varela , for having taken on such an important problem .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission is also extremely concerned about these international fishing pirates and the use of so-called flags of convenience .
One thing is clear : anyone fishing under a flag of convenience is flouting maritime law and resolutions and the resolutions of regional fisheries organisations and ruining all our efforts at sustainable stock management in the process .
Plus , it is not only unfair to honest fishermen , it is outright unfair competition and may indeed , as Mrs McKenna said , cause social problems .
The Commission has not been sitting on its hands .
We have proposed an amendment to the FIFG regulation so as to prevent ships from transferring to flag-of-convenience states .
This proposal is still before the Council , awaiting its decision .
Taking the FAO 's international plan of action to combat pirate fisheries as our starting point , we also intend to work out a Community action plan to deal with these practices during the course of our reform of the Common Fisheries Policy .
What will this entail ?
First , we need a definition of the concept of the actual link between ship and flag state and we then need to anchor this definition in international law .
Secondly , we need to draw up a list of the supervision and control duties incumbent upon each country for every ship berthed in its ports , in order to avoid so-called ports of convenience .
Thirdly , we need to strengthen the fisheries control regulation in general .
Now , if I may , I should like to comment briefly on your specific proposals .
As far as No 6 is concerned , there is already a fleet register at Community level and we therefore feel this paragraph is superfluous .
I fully share the concerns set out in No 9 .
No new Member State can accede unless it transposes the acquis communautaire into its national legislation .
We also concur on Nos 15 , 19 and 22 .
As you know , we are already in the process of drafting proposals for reforming the Common Fisheries Policy , which we shall submit to Parliament as soon as we receive your opinion on the Green Paper , taking account , needless to say , of the proposals on control policy which you have made in this context .
As for No 16 , we too subscribe to the principle that we need a list of countries which offer flags of convenience .
Finally , some of your demands on this point were met when we proposed that the FIFG rules be revised .
Parts of No 17 are already included in the control regulation .
The Member States are required to keep a tally of imports in order to ensure that the catch quotas of the regional fisheries organisations are not exceeded .
As for No 18 , as I have already said , first we need a legal definition of flag-of-convenience states .
Finally , as regards No 21 , the Commission has already submitted a proposal to the Member States suggesting that GSP status be withdrawn from Belize , Honduras and Equatorial Guinea because they have violated the UN Fish Stocks Agreement .
So you can see that we too are genuinely concerned .
I should like to close by reiterating that the guidelines which you have submitted are extremely useful to us and will give us good food for thought when we come to reform the Common Fisheries Policy .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
EC / Islamic Republic of Mauritania fisheries agreement
The next item is the report ( A5-0426 / 2001 ) by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for in the Agreement on cooperation in the sea fisheries sector between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the period 1 August 2001 to 31 July 2006 [ COM ( 2001 ) 590 - C5-0555 / 2001 - 2001 / 0246 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the fisheries protocol with the Republic of Mauritania is of vital importance for EU fisheries .
The previous protocol expired on 31 July 2001 .
This new protocol was initialled by both parties on 31 July 2001 , fixing for five years the technical and financial conditions governing the fishing activities of Community vessels in the waters of Mauritania during the period 1 August 2001 to the end of July 2006 .
The provisional application of this protocol will depend on the first payment being made before 31 December this year .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that Parliament delivers a favourable opinion this afternoon .
It is interesting to note that in 1995 , following the unilateral termination by Morocco of the fisheries agreement concluded in May 1992 for a period of four years and in view of the likely problems of negotiating a new agreement with Morocco , the Commission initiated negotiations with third countries so that vessels prevented from fishing as a result of any loss of fishing opportunities off Morocco could , if necessary , be moved elsewhere .
As a result , a supplement to the 1993-1996 protocol with Mauritania was adopted which aimed to offset the loss of fishing opportunities for the Community fleet in Morocco by allowing for 18 Spanish vessels to transfer to the waters of Mauritania , a geographical area close to where they operated previously .
In remarkably similar circumstances , the failure to renew the last agreement with Morocco , which expired at the end of November 1999 , has again led to the need to seek increased fishing opportunities elsewhere in order to offset some of the hardship caused by the loss of access to Moroccan waters .
The protocol before Parliament today reflects this need .
It allows for increased opportunities for EU vessels , while at the same time providing for greatly improved financial compensation for Mauritania - and I will deal with that later .
This new protocol with Mauritania is now the Union 's most important protocol with a third country .
Overall , the protocol offers allocated fishing rights for various species , or category of vessel , to Spain , Italy , Portugal and France .
If licence applications from these Member States do not cover all the fishing opportunities fixed by the protocol , the Commission may take into consideration licence applications from other Member States .
The table in my report compares the fishing possibilities offered by the protocol under review with those available under previous agreements .
From this table , you will see that , although there has been an overall increase over previous protocols , there has been a reduction for a number of stocks .
There will be a 30 % increase in the number of vessels , which averaged 42 under the previous protocol , to 55 .
According to the Commission , this measure was possible because opportunities had been created by the departure by a number of Far East vessels which used to target particular species .
There will be a 17 % increase in the number of tuna vessels , from 57 to 67 .
The tonnage for vessels targeting black hake will remain the same at 8 500 GRT .
For those targeting crustaceans other than crawfish ( shrimps and crabs ) , the tonnage will go up by 9 % from 5 500 to 6 000 GRT .
However , it is important to note that there has been a reduction in the number of pelagic vessels permitted from 22 to 15 .
The total Community financial contribution will be EUR 430 million , broken down into EUR 86 million per year for the period of the application of the protocol .
The EUR 86 million for the year comprises EUR 82 million in financial compensation and EUR 4 million for the financial contributions to fund the various types of fisheries-related assistance set out in Article 5 of the protocol .
The government of Mauritania has full discretion regarding the use to which the financial compensation element is put .
Following the non-renewal of the fisheries agreement with Morocco , this new protocol with Mauritania is obviously of key significance .
In this regard , it must be stressed that its principal importance does not lie in the scale of fishing possibilities that it offers or indeed in its cost .
From a Community fisheries and socio-economic point of view , its real interest is the hope which it holds out to people of the fisheries-dependent regions of Spain and Portugal , such as Andalucia , the Canary Islands , Galicia and the Portuguese south .
These regions , which had so much invested in the Moroccan agreement , must be offered real alternatives as quickly as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on the European Union fisheries agreement with Mauritania , together with yesterday ' s vote on the fisheries agreements with Cape Verde and Guinea Bissau , are a good opportunity for a political study on international fishing agreements .
I would like to make three brief observations in this respect .
The first one relates to the economic and social importance of these agreements for the European Union .
As is well known , these fishing agreements with third countries account for 25 % of the supply of the Community market and represent around 50 000 jobs .
It has been proved , as in the case of the Efremer study , that they are highly advantageous for the European economy .
The second observation concerns the importance of the agreements for the economy of the developing countries .
Clearly , the European Union cannot paternalistically and high-handedly impose a decision regarding the sectors to which compensation should be applied but , little by little and with diplomacy , we have reached a situation where part of this financial compensation is applied in the fisheries sector and in important activities .
Thirdly , it is clear that these fishing agreements are of mutual benefit for the two parties , for both the European Union and the third countries .
Lastly , I would like to refer to the Gallagher report , since the agreement with Mauritania is the most important one concluded with third countries to date .
In the light of the non-renewal of the agreement with Morocco , this agreement with Mauritania , as the rapporteur stated , is now of special importance for Portugal and Spain , but also for Italy and France , which are countries that also fish in these waters .
As you are aware , the Committee on Fisheries adopted an amendment proposing that the quotas be redistributed by the countries in the event that those for whom they are intended do not use them .
I must say that my group agrees with this principle provided that it is applied from now on , of course , to all fishing agreements and not only the agreements with ACP countries .
Lastly , I would like to thank Mr Gallagher for the excellent work he has done in this report .
Mr President , I would like to say that fishing relations between the European Union and Mauritania go back a long way , to 1987 , and it is clear that - since the disappearance of the fisheries agreement with Morocco , to whose demise we all contributed - it is now the most important of all the European Union ' s agreements in terms of volume of catches and budgetary allocations .
As previous speakers have said , it is one of the so-called Southern agreements , an agreement under which shipowners contribute to the economic costs by paying for licences .
As you know , in the Northern agreements , the shipowners do not pay .
As the rapporteur says in his report , four Southern States ( Spain , Italy , Portugal and France ) are going to be the beneficiaries of this new five-year protocol , although it is also the case that , if fishing opportunities are not utilised - as the rapporteur says - other European countries can use them , which is also something which happens in Southern agreements , but not in Northern agreements .
As always , I would like to stress to the Members of this House - and not only those of the Committee on Fisheries - the importance of fisheries agreements with third countries , the importance of continuing to sign up to them and to sign up to new ones .
I stress their importance for those third countries and for European regions which are highly dependent on fishing such as my own , Galicia , and I stress once again that this agreement is mutually beneficial .
Mr President , I would like to read a section from the April 2001 report of the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries .
I have been assured by Commission officials that negotiations for third country fisheries agreements are based on information provided by this committee .
Regarding the most recent stock assessment of octopus in Mauritania , the report says " ... the assessment conducted in 1998 indicates that the stock was over-exploited ... " and it then goes on to say that " ... the 1998 working group in Nouadhibou recommended a reduction of 25 % of the fishing effort exerted by the cephalopod fisheries ... " .
This is a far cry from a scientific endorsement of increasing European fishing of octopus even if certain other fleets have reduced their effort .
The Commission states that there was a more recent assessment by Spanish scientists .
However , despite repeated requests , Commission officials have so far failed to provide a copy of this document .
I believe there is an important principle here in relation to access to information .
Parliament , which is the budgetary authority , is being frustrated in its attempts to obtain the relevant scientific information on this major third country agreement .
I cannot understand how the Commission can go for a study by anonymous authors and ignore information provided by its own main committee .
Parliament has a right to know .
The other point I wish to make relates to the clause which appears to facilitate the Atlantic Dawn .
I am curious .
I congratulate the Commission on taking legal action against the Atlantic Dawn , but I would now like to hear from the Commission the latest on this case .
This agreement is morally bankrupt .
It is yet another example of the EU taking money from poor people in rich countries and giving it to rich people in poor countries .
The bribe of EUR 86 million per annum is taken from many pensioners and many of the lower-paid .
It is given directly to the ruling elite of Mauritania , who are ethnically different from the bulk of the ordinary people .
Very little money filters down to the ordinary people who are amongst the poorest in the world in one of the poorest regions of the world .
Furthermore , it is destroying fish stocks and destroying such infrastructure as exists .
Worst of all , however , hundreds of local fishermen are being killed each year and , if the excellent Channel 4 documentary on the Mauritanian agreement is any guide , some are being deliberately run down by trawlers engaged in illegal fishing permitted by a deliberately lax , ill-equipped monitoring and enforcement regime .
This is the reality .
For all the fine words in the Commission document , this agreement is creating a human and environmental disaster .
It is set to continue - and why ?
To satisfy the insatiable greed of the largely Spanish fishing industry , which nobody dares to oppose for fear of reprisals at the Council of Ministers .
A vote for this report is effectively a vote to subsidise murder and it creates the very conditions in which terrorism is spawned .
This serious issue needs to be investigated and therefore I challenge this House to support me in the call for a temporary committee of enquiry , the papers of which will be ready for the next Strasbourg session .
If , as we say , we care about the poor and oppressed , if we believe in the right to life , then this House should support me in attempting to shine a light on this disgraceful situation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fortunately , what we have just heard is absolutely a minority opinion in this House , and I think we are all delighted about that .
I would like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Gallagher , on the diligence and efficiency with which he has done his work .
He well understood that this was an urgent report , given the situation of the fleet affected by the non-renewal of the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
A part of that fleet can now be included in the agreement with Mauritania , which will help to relieve the difficult situation which had been created .
The European Parliament is thereby giving its opinion on the Gallagher report on this agreement , which is essential to the European Union , in record time .
I also think it is fair to congratulate the Commission on having reached this agreement , which breaks the curse of the failure of the negotiations with Morocco .
Secondly , I would like to point out - because there has been false and ill-intentioned information on this agreement - that the agreement with Mauritania is very beneficial for both parties . I insist ; for both parties , and that is why it has been reached .
Furthermore , I would like to acknowledge that there is no better defender in the world of cooperation development or of the conservation of resources than the European Union .
Therefore , neither private agreements nor public agreements with States other than the European Union , above all Asian States , can in any way be compared with the control and rigour applied by the European Union in these international agreements .
I would also like to take this opportunity , Commissioner , to condemn the recent seizure of a ship , the Lameiro Uno , which , while sailing towards Mauritanian waters , was seized by Morocco , accused of fishing , when this was not the case .
Commissioner , I hope that this intolerable practice by Morocco will not be repeated in the future , since it would jeopardise the achievements of the fisheries agreement with Mauritania .
I would ask you to take good note of this , in order to prevent any repetition of these practices , since vessels obviously have to pass through Morocco ' s economic zone in order to reach Mauritania .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen .
Thank you , Mr Gallagher , for your report on the proposal for a regulation on a new protocol to the fisheries agreement with Mauritania .
I am delighted that you are in full agreement with the terms of this proposal setting out and safeguarding the facility for our fleet to fish in Mauritanian waters until May 2006 .
As you know , we have a history of good fisheries relations with Mauritania .
Moreover , this agreement is now the Community 's most comprehensive fisheries agreement and hence an important component of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We signed the new protocol at the end of July after four rounds of intensive and tough negotiations and I think we really have brokered a fair agreement which benefits Mauritanian fishermen and the Mauritanian sector as well as our own fishermen , while guaranteeing sustainable stock management .
I really must say , Mr Farage , that you would be better advised to base your comments on fact than political posturing .
So what exactly is the truth ?
The truth is that we have included a whole series of new measures in this agreement which were absent from earlier agreements .
For example , some of the money goes directly towards improving scientific knowledge about resources .
From now on , stocks will be regularly and scientifically monitored , and we have stipulated that , if the size of the stocks changes , then fishing opportunities must be adjusted accordingly , as must the relevant financial compensation .
So it is quite untrue to say that we simply continue to fish the maximum catches , irrespective of how stocks develop .
That is the reality .
Secondly , we have based fishing rights on the data available , which Mauritania provided .
According to the data which we received , it was possible at the present time to agree on a slight increase in fishing opportunities for cephalopods .
However , I should like to point out that this is not the lion 's share of the agreement .
The lion 's share - around 40 % - of catches under this agreement is accounted for by demersal species .
And , just for the record , they do not mainly benefit Spain , as you maintain , they mainly benefit the Netherlands .
Thirdly , the agreement contains a series of terms allowing for the sustainable management of Mauritanian fish stocks and the development of the local economy .
In order to protect local inshore fishing , we have moved the fishing areas for the Community fleet further away from the coast than was previously the case .
In order to help the local economy and create jobs in the country itself , we have agreed that demersal fish trawlers must now land a larger proportion of their catches in Mauritania .
In addition , more Mauritanian seamen will be taken on board EU ships in future .
Catch monitoring and controls have been strengthened and we have also increased the amount for so-called targeted actions significantly , by a total of EUR 20 million for the term of the agreement .
These flanking measures will help alleviate the concerns expressed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
As to the proposed amendments , we have absolutely no objection to Amendment Nos 1 , 3 and 5 .
In any case , these demands are already met under the interinstitutional agreements and , more importantly , under the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission of 5 July 2000 , making these amendments superfluous .
We have a problem with Amendment Nos 2 , 4 and 6 and cannot therefore agree to them .
As far as Amendment No 2 is concerned , the principle of non-discrimination is already laid down in the founding treaty of the European Union and there is therefore no sense in including this sort of clause .
As far as Amendment No 4 is concerned , I should point out that our standard practice is that no new mandate is required for a protocol extending a fisheries agreement .
As for Amendment No 6 , mixed funding for negotiated fishing opportunities is part and parcel of our external fisheries policy .
In the case of agreements with third countries , the cost of compensation is footed by the Community budget , with shipowners paying for the licences .
May I also take this opportunity of pointing out that the sum quoted in the amendments is incorrect and that , from a purely formal point of view , the amendment should refer to the protocol .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Production and marketing of honey
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . This Parliament first raised the alarm about the threat to European beekeeping in 1985 .
The resolutions which we passed in 1992 , 1995 and 1997 - mainly unanimously - contain specific , reasonable , affordable and legally tenable proposals for direct aid to save the European beekeeping industry which , the rosy Commission statistics notwithstanding , is in a state of real crisis .
Our primary concern is not to increase the self-supply rate for quality honey from our beekeepers , which is currently just below 50 % . No .
What we are concerned with is guaranteeing that the 80 000 wild and cultivated plants across the European Union will be pollinated .
This is currently under threat as a result of the worrying decline in the number of beekeepers , more than half of whom are over 60 years old , and really has reached crisis point in certain regions .
It is truly amazing that , despite the patience and determination of the spokesmen of all the groups in this Chamber since 1985 , we have not managed to bring the Commission to its senses and make it realise that its half-hearted policy based on the wishy-washy 1997 regulation urgently needs to be improved if we are to avert the threat to the balance of the European ecosystem from the beekeeping crisis .
It is incomprehensible , nay irritating in the extreme , that the Commission persists in doing nothing , despite its report on the unsatisfactory implementation of the inadequate measures based on the half-hearted 1997 regulation and despite its acknowledgement that European beekeeping has to contend with increasing difficulties .
With all due respect , Commissioner , we can no longer accept this absurd obduracy .
The Commission needs to come to its senses .
Errare humanum est , perseverare diabolicum .
You understand that , Mr Fischler .
The bases needed in order to introduce the direct aid now which we have lobbied for since 1992 are there for us in the Treaty .
In my report we have again made specific , affordable short- and medium-term proposals , which there is too little time to go into , but the Commission can read .
So what we want to hear today is that it is prepared to get moving on the basis of our proposals , which are supported by all beekeepers in the Community , from north to south , and we mean in the right direction .
Mr Fischler saw for himself on Tuesday , when beekeepers from the majority of Member States visited the House with their produce , which attracted a great deal of interest , that some stands were cleaned out before the beekeepers had time to offer their products to the invited guests .
I should also like to thank the honourable Members who attended the meeting with over 60 beekeepers and who , like my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , fully support the demands contained in my report .
We need more generous Community cofinancing than the current 50 % , because many Member States are too mean to raise the 50 % for programmes to improve the conditions under which honey is produced and marketed on the basis of the 1997 regulation , depriving their beekeepers of even the few hungry euros earmarked for their country .
We need both the immediate measures called for in the report and medium-term direct aid pending the mid-term view of Agenda 2000 , especially premiums to compensate for loss of income because there is no Community preference in this sector .
I am almost proud of having managed , together with my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgets , to get appropriations for programmes to improve the conditions under which honey is produced and marketed raised from EUR 14 to 16.5 million for 2002 .
That is the only compulsory expense in the agricultural budget to which this has happened .
But that cannot distract us from the fact that the Commission 's bee policy is still underdeveloped .
All it needs is the political will on the part of the Commission and the Council to give us a sum which the EU takes less than five hours a year to spend , not to mention the EUR 2 billion embezzled from the budget . This political will is all that is needed to allow us , together with the beekeepers , to protect beekeeping in Europe and to prevent us from running blindly into the wall of an ecological catastrophe in the medium term .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the bee is a symbol of hard work and , in this respect , Mrs Lulling is the queen bee of the European Parliament in the truest sense of the word , because it is she who , for over a decade , has forced us not with carrots and sticks , but with honey and bee stings , by which I mean with sound arguments , to keep on debating this question , a question which many people tend to underestimate because , unlike me , they were not fortunate enough , back at the beginning of the 1980s , to meet the biggest group of visitors ever to visit this House in Strasbourg - a group of Bavarian beekeepers invited by the late Heinrich Aigner , who also fought long and hard for this cause . Several hundred Bavarian beekeepers came to the European Parliament , which just goes to show how committed these people are to their cause , which is also our cause .
Beekeepers are not a large group of voters , they are people who look after bees which , as Mrs Lulling has already said , ensure that a balance is constantly restored to our ecosystem , at least to a certain extent .
A cold winter is just beginning , but when it is over we know that spring will arrive , that the bees will again fly off to provide their pollination services and we shall again enjoy a blooming landscape .
But there is a danger that one day winter will come and no such spring will follow because there will be no bees or too few bees to provide this ecological function .
Many people believe that the EU is a country which flows with milk and honey .
With milk we have tried to get the quotas into order .
With bees , we have a self-supply rate of just below 50 % in the European Union . Anyone who really wants to see a country which flows with milk and honey should fly to Argentina , as I did this summer .
Argentina could supply the European Union with most or many of the products that we need , but in these times of global political crisis , we are aware of two new elements .
First , we are aware of the need for quality following the BSE crisis and , secondly , we are aware of the need to be able to obtain healthy food from our own soil following the crisis on 11 September .
I think that a functioning European farming industry and a functioning European ecosystem need suitable support for our beekeepers , which is why I ask the House to throw its full weight behind the Lulling report .


Mr President , on the basis of the assessment and the application of Regulation ( EC ) No 1221 / 97 , two clear conclusions should be drawn : firstly , that it is necessary to increase the amount of aid in each of the lines and the percentage of subsidy ; secondly , that we must prevent , as was the case in the period 1998-2000 , inequalities between sectors .
With regard to the corrections which should be introduced , we must achieve a reasonable balance in the cost-benefit for each of the action lines and a profound modification which transforms the current degree of co-funding , so that funding is entirely covered by the EAGGF Guarantee .
With regard to future needs , we should make two recommendations .
Firstly , we must establish a direct aid system which compensates for the loss of income suffered by European professional beekeepers .
Furthermore , we should create a COM for honey .
Secondly , we must recognise the importance of the role played by professional beekeepers by maintaining their status in the face of large bee-keeping operations , since they thereby allow the existence of a fully sustainable stock-breeding activity , which favours rural development and which , furthermore , produces healthy and high-quality products , and which is socially very beneficial , given its important contribution to environmental quality and its active role in conserving bio-diversity by means of the pollination carried out by bees .
I will end by saying , Mr President , that this task of pollination , which is safeguarded by beekeepers , must be compensated for through a line for specific aid which supplements the current Regulation .
I congratulate Mrs Lulling on her magnificent work .
Mr President , today the future of bee-keeping in Europe is in the balance .
This is about nothing less than saving a sector of production .
This is a matter of urgency because , while we are consuming more honey , production is falling to dangerously low levels .
Today we consume more than twice as much honey as we produce .
And if we are producing less it is essentially because of the devastating effect - now scientifically proven - which a certain number of systemic insecticides used to treat arable seeds have had on bee populations , which have been really decimated .
This situation is not unique or unusual ; today nearly all European bee-keepers are affected .
Faced with a situation of this nature , the Commission 's proposal , which is extremely weak , confines itself , as part of its new regulatory framework , to statistical work and a handful of promotion measures .
These proposals are obviously not sufficient to tackle the problems affecting the sector .
No one is denying that there is a need to refine the statistics , but this work is no substitute for what is most urgent , which is rebuilding bee populations so that our bee-keepers can save honey production in Europe .
Product promotion is a good thing , provided that the product concerned is available .
Furthermore , you have to be particularly careful with promotion when the products concerned are ones of which we have a considerable shortfall , which is the case with honey .
It is necessary to promote the link between the product and the land .
I do not believe that it is the European Union 's job to fund the promotion of Chinese , Argentinean or Mexican honey : these are honeys which do not guarantee traceability in any shape or form , which are not subject to quality control , which do not comply with our standards and which are often nothing but flavoured glucose syrups .
We cannot claim that we wish to encourage European agriculture to develop in a way which is more respectful of the environment while at the same time letting our bee-keepers sink into indifference , and it is true that they do not constitute a powerful lobby .
They are all the more deserving of our attention .
Any product , including honey , can , admittedly , be purchased from outside , but the pollination of our plants is not something that can be imported .
We are dealing here with an area which is essential for preserving our environment and our bio-diversity .
That is why I welcome the work done by our excellent rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , and by all of the Members of the Committee on Agriculture who unanimously adopted the amendments which we tabled together .
These open the door to the possibility of Community funding being made available to help European bee-keepers to rebuild their hive populations in response to this urgent situation ; we state this in Paragraph 10 .
Veterinary costs related to bee-keeping should also be treated in the same way as for other animals ; we state this in Paragraph 5 .
And to safeguard the future of this industry in the long term , it is essential that , in the future , procedures for the approval of plant protection products take account of their effects on bees in terms of death or alteration in behaviour ; this is our Paragraph 17 .
It is essential that the precautionary principle be applied here .
Commissioner , the Commission needs to wake up ; the Council needs to wake up .
This is a matter of great urgency .
We Members must sound the alarm .
The European Union would bear a huge responsibility if it hastened the disappearance of our bee-keepers .
I hope that all Members will support the wise , necessary and urgent proposals which we adopted unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen . First , may I congratulate you , Mrs Lulling , on being crowned queen bee of the European Parliament here today .
I should also like to congratulate you on the report which you have submitted .
However I hope , with reference to the sting which was also mentioned , that you do not share the fate of the bee which , as you know , can only sting once .
That would be a real pity .
Programmes to improve the conditions under which honey is produced and marketed are regularly submitted by all Member States for approval and , with only 80 % of available funds being taken up , the satisfactory application of Regulation 1221 / 97 would clearly appear to be guaranteed .
For the rest , the Council has approved the European Parliament 's motion for the funds earmarked for the application of the regulation to be increased by EUR 2.5 million .
The Commission would therefore be delighted if the Member States and the enterprises in question were to take up all these funds in order to implement as many measures as possible within the current legal framework , in order to help the sector and allow it to develop in line with the rapporteur 's considerations .
When the report on the first three years ' application of this regulation was submitted to the Council , the representatives of the Member States raised no objections whatsoever and approved the Commission 's conclusions unanimously .
In discussions with the Commission , the enterprises in the sector welcomed the fact that the aid regulation in favour of European beekeeping was to be maintained .
The economy in the honey sector is stable , production and imports have remained steady and the self-supply rate has fluctuated between 48 and 50 % for several years and is therefore nothing new .
Bearing these facts in mind and bearing in mind the heterogeneity of the sector and the widely differing bee economies in the European Union , we feel that neither a new common organisation of the market in the honey sector nor a direct aid regulation in the form of direct income support for beekeepers is warranted at the present time .
Other suggestions in the report , such as specific aid to improve the bee population through rearing apiaries , can already be implemented under the current regulation , without the need for any new legal provisions .
We also have all the facilities of the structural policy and the policy to promote agricultural products at our disposal . They too need to be implemented accordingly , although the initiative here lies mainly with the Member States .
Having said which , the Member States and the enterprises in question need to work more closely together in applying and implementing the programmes in order to ensure there is coherent political and financial support for this sector across the EU .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity , as Mr Fischler is still here but will surely not be able to stay for this evening 's vote , to say that I am somewhat disappointed .
You cannot say that these paltry funds of between EUR 10 and 14 million - granted , we shall get a bit more next year - are satisfactory because 80 % are being taken up .
I realise that we are making demands on the Member States and that a bit more will be done within the existing legal framework , but we also want a more flexible approach than is possible at present .
But I must say that I really am appalled to hear that not one representative in the Council - i.e. not one Member State - had any objection whatsoever ; do they really think we need do nothing at all ?
I think it is quite something that the Member States apparently feel no need to react to what the European Parliament has to say about your report .
But we and the beekeepers shall make sure that the Member States at least acknowledge what we have to say about the report , just in case they think there is no need to act .
As you know , we have not called for any all-powerful order , but we still take the view that we need direct aid regulations in the medium term .
You say they are not warranted at the present time .
You have heard the beekeepers , they take quite a different view and you must be fully aware of what is happening in this sector .
We shall also ensure that beekeepers are better informed about the facilities available under structural policy and measures to promote agricultural produce , but here too we have very limited funds for numerous quality products .
Mr President , I just wanted to say this to Mr Fischler because I already know what he has told us .
I had hoped for something more , rather than being hung out to dry !
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
My colleagues in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms have told me that at 8.57 a.m. they received an e-mail convening the Committee for 9.30 a.m ..
This way of doing things seems rather odd to me .
I should therefore like this not only noted in the minutes but also brought to your attention , Mr President , so that , since we shall be making a formal protest , the Bureau is kept informed of the fact that committees are meeting after being convened with only 33 minutes ' notice - something I find rather odd , not to say strange , not to say inappropriate .
Mr President , I do not want to prolong the debate unnecessarily .
I would , however like to say that I am the deputy chairman of this committee and I was treated in exactly the same manner .
It is a sorry state of affairs when a deputy chairman is not even given proper notice of an extraordinary meeting .
This sort of treatment is quite simply unacceptable .
Thank you for your observations .
At this point , however , I cannot do anything .
Amongst other things , as you know , this House has expressed its wish that the urgent procedure should be voted on during the next sitting of Parliament , next Monday .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Zimbabwe
The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0759 / 2001 by Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group ,
B5-0774 / 2001 by Sjöstedt , Marset Campos and Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
B5-0787 / 2001 by Maes , Lucas and Lannoye , on behalf of the Greens / European Free Alliance Group ,
B5-0788 / 2001 by Mulder , van den Bos and Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
B5-0799 / 2001 by Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group ,
B5-0801 / 2001 by Van Orden , Deva , Parish , Foster , Banotti , Corrie , Gahler , Korhola , Lehne , Maij-Weggen , Sacrédeus and Belder , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group
on Zimbabwe
Mr President , I believe that the resolution on Zimbabwe that we have formulated together is quite rightly a tough one , intended as a warning to Mr Mugabe .
At a time when democratic elections should be in preparation , Mugabe ' s only response has been to encourage and establish an atmosphere of terror in his country - everywhere , in the countryside and in the towns .
This makes it crucial that the elections are able proceed in a normal way , and that the international community continues to insist that they are .
But nothing suggests that Mr Mugabe is receptive to this justified democratic demand from within his own country , where even in the previous elections it was clear that the virtual majority wanted a change of government .
Mr Mugabe is clinging to power and to that end regards all possible legitimate and especially illegitimate means as justified .
For example , journalists must now apply for a work permit before they are allowed to write .
This of course runs counter to freedom of expression .
The printing works of the few still more or less independent papers are smashed up .
In this way opinion forming is hampered .
Today I received the manifesto of the women ' s organisations , which complain that women obliged to sell the fruits of their labour on the land to a state institution are either not paid at all or else far too late , in a country where inflation is running at 86 % .
We shall therefore vote in favour of this motion with great determination for this and many other reasons mentioned in the text .
Mr President , Zimbabwe really had all the qualifications for becoming a prosperous and successful country in southern Africa .
That is why it is so incredibly tragic to see it heading straight for the abyss .
Zimbabwe has been discussed by us many times in this House , as I know it has also been in the other institutions .
We have often thought we have seen some small glimpse of hope or gleam of light .
We have been wrong every time .
There are no such glimmers .
The situation is alarming .
Zimbabwe is a lawless , economically impoverished country governed by a dictatorial old ruler who has completely lost contact with reality and with his own people .
Robert Mugabe breaks promise after promise made to surrounding countries .
He has not succeeded in stopping the illegal land occupations or in bringing about fair land reform .
Human rights are infringed on a daily basis , and the opposition is harassed and persecuted in an unacceptable way .
The regime is thoroughly corrupt and , in terms of democracy , the impending elections , in which election workers are threatened , harassed and imprisoned , cannot be called anything other than a joke .
Freedom of expression is totally restricted .
We must immediately break off all communication with , and suspend all assistance to , the Zimbabwean regime .
All Mugabe ' s foreign assets and all those of his family should be frozen .
I really want to appeal to both the Commission and the Council to be crystal-clear in their condemnation of Mugabe ' s regime and to state that our and the world community ' s patience is at an end .
We must establish a broad , international coalition and form of cooperation with the SADC states so as to put pressure on the regime and take measures against it .
At the same time , it is of course important to find ways of supporting the opposition .
There is a small number of courageous people who , at risk to their own lives , are fighting for democracy and human dignity .
Mr President , this is the second urgent resolution on Zimbabwe that we have put forward in just over three months .
The reason for this is our enormous concern at the continued deterioration of the situation in that country with such a short time to go before the presidential elections .
At the beginning of September there were some indications that Mugabe might be prepared to respond to international pressure .
Sadly , it is now very obvious that the commitments given at Abuja were a sham .
It would seem that Mugabe thinks he can make a few promises , buy a little more time and then carry on with his repressive policies while the economy of a once prosperous Zimbabwe collapses .
Half a million Zimbabweans are now on the verge of starvation .
Opposition politicians go in fear of their lives .
Mugabe 's absolute contempt for international opinion was further demonstrated by his defiance towards the EU troika which visited Harare at the end of November .
We now have to show that we are serious in our threats to take action .
At the moment Mugabe thinks he is untouchable and even flies to Spain for medical treatment .
We are not proposing the blunt instrument of economic sanctions .
We know that this would impact on the population at large and in any case we are only too aware how such measures can be evaded .
We are calling for smart sanctions that would directly hit Mugabe , his family and his cronies .
Steps should be taken immediately to freeze their overseas assets and to impose a travel ban .
The decision to move in this direction should be taken by ministers at Laeken this weekend .
Our resolve should be made absolutely clear in the meeting scheduled to take place next week between the European Union and Zimbabwean representatives under the terms of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
If Mugabe does not take immediate and verifiable action in the way that the international community is demanding , the European Union must be ready at once to impose the smart sanctions .
Our resolution today sets out clearly what has to be done .
Let us not dilute the message in any way .
The resolution is a basis for action now .
Mr President , this is the sixth and most sharply worded motion since the crisis broke in Zimbabwe .
We have the Council to thank for finally getting Article 96 of the Cotonou agreement moving since the last resolution .
We hope that contacts with Zimbabwe in this context will bear fruit , although we do not really expect this man to show the slightest interest in our measures .
On the contrary , he will get his own party to elect him as a presidential candidate in Victoria Falls this weekend and he is already preparing to make a farce of these elections .
For a start , he is now demanding proof of residency as well as identity cards as proof of electoral status .
A great many people find it very hard to provide such proof .
And now he wants to hold the elections in constituencies , rather than as nationwide elections throughout the country .
People who are not registered in the large towns where they work will have to travel home .
Most will not be able to afford to do so .
The aim is to ensure that as many people as possible are excluded de facto from the elections , because he knows that this will stop the majority of his opponents from voting .
There are 200 000 people currently starving in the Masningo province because Governor Hungwe has stopped food from being distributed by NGOs .
The Governor has demanded that the food be delivered to him first so that he can arrange for it to be distributed .
Then , of course , he will only feed his own people .
We must not let this man get away with it .
We must ensure that we take targeted measures to stop Mr Mugabe in time , and I call on us all to do so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is painful to have to stand by as a stubborn president , who has also earned a great deal of credit , uses unscrupulous party activists to help him systematically ruin a country , with no scruples about using deadly force in the process , because he cannot come to terms with the threat of losing power .
Like Mr Gahler , I was one of the parliamentary election observers at the time and saw for myself how Mugabe and his rent-a-mob were driving the country straight towards catastrophe .
Despite massive attempts to intimidate the electors - and we shall no doubt see an action replay of that now - and despite massive support for the opposition candidates , which has ended in death in a multitude of cases , the MDC achieved a remarkable result , clearly signalling to Mugabe that political change was on the horizon .
Now , with presidential elections imminent , Mugabe is again tightening the screw of force and terror .
There is no sign of the return to the rule of law promised in the Abuja agreement ; on the contrary .
By using more and more legislative repression , massively restricting the freedom of the press , threatening the opposition , continuing to occupy farms and permanently undermining the rule of law , Mugabe is isolating himself more and more , including from his traditional allies in southern Africa .
This was blatantly obvious at the last meeting of the ACP / EU joint parliamentary assembly in Brussels in October .
These countries are being sucked into free fall by the humanitarian and economic disaster in Zimbabwe and further pressure is needed to make Robert Mugabe change direction and hold the presidential elections in accordance with the standards of free and fair elections , and this is where we also need the support of the institutions of the European Community .
Mr President , the regime of President Mugabe of Zimbabwe is having a very bad press internationally , and with good reasons .
Mugabe is sacrificing countless human lives , literally and figuratively , to his utterly ruthless aim of retaining power .
The shocking Dutch newspaper headline of less than a week ago ' Zimbabwe stinks of blood lust ' sadly completely sums up the content of the article by the paper ' s correspondent in Harare .
The accompanying vulgar cartoon from the Zimbabwean state paper The Herald underlines this ominous message .
The cartoon turns Mugabe ' s major challenger in next year ' s presidential elections , Morgan Tsvangirai of the Movement for Democratic Change , into a downright caricature .
He is depicted as the yes-man of rich white farmers in his own country and of Western powers .
However , Zimbabwean political reality looks completely different .
Naked state terror against white farmers , their black managers and agricultural labourers as well as against political opponents of Mugabe ' s party , ZANU-PF .
State terror manifests itself in ten or so methods of repression : undermining the judicial system , politicisation of the army and police , attacks on press freedom , occupation of the estates of white farmers , slander against independent institutions like the Red Cross , purportedly acting as cover organisations for the opposition , electoral fraud , tapping the opposition ' s telephone traffic , detention of and slurs on members of the opposition MDC party , violence and intimidation against supposed supporters of the opposition and , finally , murder of political opponents .
In this context , I should like to ask the Commission urgently , in its meeting with Zimbabwean Government representatives at the beginning of next week , to speak up above all for those domestic organisations that help the victims of political violence in Zimbabwe , who now total hundreds of thousands .
When Mr Mugabe became the first President of Zimbabwe some 40 years ago , that land-locked country in Africa was a rich nation that could feed its population and export food to neighbouring countries .
About 1000 white farmers , owning most of the land , produced the food and the surplus .
After independence in Zimbabwe , the Lancaster House Agreement between Britain , as the colonial power , and Zimbabwe allowed for land redistribution to black families and appropriate compensation to white farmers without any loss of production .
Mugabe has failed in implementing these reforms .
He has failed to settle the poor black families .
Since independence , Mugabe has had much time to establish real democracy , rule of law and prosperity for all .
Instead , he has enriched himself , his friends and destroyed his country 's economy .
He has made the poor even poorer .
He has intimidated , looted and deprived the white farmers who produced so much wealth for his nation .
Zimbabwe needs a free and fair election now .
Mugabe should not fear .
He will be judged on his record .
If he is a statesman , like Mandela , then he should step down with dignity and let someone else from Zanu-PF contest the election .
If he is still a Catholic , then he should listen to Archbishop Ncube of Zimbabwe who has also condemned him regularly without fear .
Mr Mugabe cannot and will not be remembered in Africa unless he gives his countrymen a chance to breathe , walk without fear and seek opportunities to enhance their quality of life .
I have a simple message for Mr Mugabe - be an African elder and retire gracefully to your village .
Mr President , Article 96 consultations will not be easy but we should give them a chance .
Zimbabwe confirmed its participation , but the original date of 19 December for the start of these consultations was yesterday postponed .
We do not have an indication of another date .
The idea is to hold them next month .
It has been indicated that SADC , ACP and the OAU will be invited to and included in these consultations .
This is good because it broadens out the scope by anchoring in Africa the kind of discussion we have to go through with Zimbabwe .
The consultations will focus on the issues which matter to us - human rights , democracy , the rule of law , good governance and the escalation of violence .
The consultations will provide an opportunity to seek the government 's views and their firm commitment in the following areas : politically motivated violence , elections , freedom of the media , the judiciary and illegal occupation of properties .
I would like to reassure Parliament that these consultations cover practically the totality of the issues raised in their draft resolutions .
I would like to stress that there will also be a clear EU position on the points Zimbabwe is bound to raise , such as land reform , interference in its internal affairs , alleged support for the opposition and the imposition of what they call " white values " .
Finally , not pre-judging the outcome of the consultations and handling them in the spirit of the Cotonou agreement is not only necessary to address the situation with Zimbabwe , it is also necessary to maintain mutual trust and confidence between the EU and ACP countries .
But respecting the rules and the spirit of these consultations is not the same as carrying them out in a vague and weak manner .
This is not how the piano is going to be played !
As regards electoral monitoring , the Commission is getting prepared for this .
The Government of Zimbabwe has announced that it will not accept monitors ; it will only invite friends to observe the presidential elections .
The auguries for an EU presence are not too good , but we will be able to mount an EU mission should this be feasible .
We are maintaining flexibility to react to developments and possibilities .
A key requirement will be that no international observation mission - whether multilateral or bilateral - is manipulated by Mugabe into sending short-term observers only for polling day .
We have to keep in mind that last year polling day itself was relatively calm .
It is clear that the campaigning period in the run-up to the poll is crucial for determining the fairness of the electoral process itself .
The Commission considers that a minimum length of observation time - that is , one month - is necessary and we are discouraging others from sending short-term observers only .
The Commission has suggested that the EU focus its approach on the SADC Parliamentary Forum 's norms and standards , which comply with the UN standards and have been endorsed by Zimbabwe 's ruling ZANU-PF Party .
There are indications that other international partners , such as the Commonwealth and the United States , will agree to use those standards , which would then allow the international community to judge the openness and fairness of the elections .
In parallel , the SADC Electoral Forum and the Electoral Commissions Forum of SADC countries are being encouraged to open a dialogue with the Zimbabwe authorities and the political parties , on the preparations for the presidential election .
We see close collaboration with SADC in this election-related activity as a way of creating some sort of base-line case so that we will be able to do something if we cannot participate directly .
But this is the preferred option , and Zimbabwe should welcome the EU observers .
The Commission has remained engaged in the country in order , on the one hand , not to pre-judge the outcome of the consultations and at the same time to up the stakes for Zimbabwe of an eventual failure - thus increasing the pressure on them to cooperate .
This is the rationale of what we are doing at this moment .
We have therefore taken the following actions : the Commission has currently a mission on the ground to assess humanitarian needs and food security issues .
This we will do in any case , whatever the political outcome .
Preliminary results show that , remarkably , the deterioration of the situation is much slower than could have been expected .
The Commission has also participated in the UNDP land mission .
Successful or not , it is worth exerting a positive pressure on Zimbabwe by doing anything possible to move forward the dossier of land reform .
The Commission has maintained , as I mentioned before , its offer to support the electoral process .
We continue preparing our cooperation under the new five-year funding cycle , not least to demonstrate to the Government of Zimbabwe what it has to lose .
We will not take any decisions on whether or not to proceed with signing and implementing the Country Strategy for Zimbabwe until after the consultations have been concluded .
To sign or not to sign is a very important question in many cases and here it is quite clear that we want the consultations concluded before we move on .
But not to prepare would also imply lack of respect of the whole process of planning in the Cotonou framework .
The regional dimension is important .
It appears that Zimbabwe 's neighbours are becoming increasingly concerned with the deterioration of the situation and the potentially very dramatic consequences for the country and the whole region .
This is why we have taken the initiative to maintain close contact with SADC and Nigeria in view of Article 96 consultations .
It is , in fact , the first time ever that the opening of these consultations has included a reference to the use of our partners in the region .
The General Affairs Council accepted this approach , ensuring close coordination and complementarity with SADC and the Abuja process .
The Commission and presidency have proceeded with a series of informal exchanges with SADC and Nigeria against this background .
We note that these African partners are already exerting effective peer pressure on Mugabe so that a solution to the crisis may be found .
The emerging African ownership approach has to be welcomed , particularly in view of the negative effect that the continuing crisis in Zimbabwe is having on its neighbours .
I must confess that the outlook is not optimistic .
Things look very bad as we move into these consultations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Cluster bombs
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0765 / 2001 by Sakellariou , Wiersma and van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group ,
B5-0775 / 2001 by Brie , Frahm , Eriksson , Korakas , Figueiredo , Marset Campos , Papayannakis , Boudjenah and Seppänen , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
B5-0782 / 2001 by McKenna , Maes , Schroedter , Lucas and Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Greens / European Free Alliance Group ,
B5-0789 / 2001 by van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on cluster bombs .
Mr President , I wanted to begin my speech by expressing my horror at this war in Afghanistan and any other war .
We have always spoken out very clearly against the Taliban government and the measures it took against its own population , against women ' s rights in particular .
But we are also against the deaths of - I believe - thousands of innocent civilians in Afghanistan .
Today we are talking about a weapon which is being used in Afghanistan , a weapon which the United Nations Convention of 1980 called into question , a weapon which is today also the subject of discussion in the Conference taking place in Geneva .
A weapon which , together with anti-personnel mines , makes enormous areas of our planet uninhabitable .
Mr President , I believe it should be banned . As simple as that .
I even find the fourth paragraph of this resolution , which says that we must provide them with more reliable mechanisms , repellent .
I believe that nobody in this House has expressed the horror of any war better than our recent winner of the Sakharov Prize , the Israeli Nurit Peled-Elhanan , who spoke here yesterday .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . Cluster bombs , as we all know , are one of the most treacherous conventional weapons ever devised by man .
Civilians and aid workers fall victim to these bombs years after the conflict has ended .
The peace process often grinds to a halt because unexploded bomblets close off whole areas .
Refugees cannot return , because the area is no longer inhabitable .
These are the reasons why our group agrees with the statement made by the President of our Parliament and condemns outright the use of cluster bombs by the US army in Afghanistan .
This bombardment will set the peace process and economic development in Afghanistan back years .
I think it is irresponsible to continue this bombardment and I call on the USA to put a stop to it at long last .
I also call from this platform on all countries , especially those who have signed the UN Convention on Conventional Weapons , to apply an immediate moratorium at their next conference and pronounce a definitive ban on the use , production and supply of these weapons .
And I call on the Commission and the Council in its negotiations with the USA to urge them to subscribe to a ban on cluster bombs .
Could I just briefly refer to the statement made by the Commissioner on Zimbabwe , which I very much welcome .
We have put off these Cotonou negotiations and we really need to have a deadline by which they must take place .
Otherwise I can see Mugabe will just keep on deferring it until nothing happens at all .
I would suggest that we ought to set a date , such as January 12 , by which , if nothing has happened , we proceed with the sort of strong measures that we have suggested .
Turning to the cluster bomb issue , I have to say that I have been one of the foremost activists in support of the campaign to ban antipersonnel landmines because our armed forces recognise that their limited military utility is outweighed by the danger that they so often pose to civilians , often many years after a conflict is over .
There are other weapon systems that could be used instead of antipersonnel landmines to equal effect , but without the negative dangers .
There are those engaged in mine clearance actions who will testify to the fact that a large proportion of the hazardous material they come across is unexploded ordnance of various sorts rather than antipersonnel mines Sometimes this ordnance includes unexploded bomblets from cluster bomb units .
I have to say that cluster bombs are not antipersonnel landmines and it is bogus to try and confuse these two issues .
While I would support the need for such remotely delivered munitions to contain self-destruct or neutralising mechanisms , it would be most unwise to insist on a ban until our armed forces are satisfied that their operations would not be impaired or that they have substitute weapons of equal effectiveness .
We have to be very careful and beware of what I might call ' banning creep ' .
Otherwise we are going to blur the focus of our actions against systems such as antipersonnel landmines and the wide support which that sort of campaign attracts .
There are some elements in the resolution that I can support , but I am suspicious of some of its driving elements .
Therefore , I am inclined to abstain on the resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one international agreement to protect the victims of international armed conflicts states that it is forbidden to use weapons , projectiles or materials and methods of war which may inflict unnecessary injury or suffering .
So much for the theory .
In practice , things are very different .
Unfortunately , there are malicious people in today 's world who are unscrupulous in their decision to use force and who are unscrupulous as to which weapons they use .
But there are also people who have good reason - in order to limit and prevent force and terror - for having recourse to weapons , who have to have recourse to weapons on grounds which are perfectly in keeping with human rights .
Our call is to these people . If you have to have recourse to weapons , even with good intentions , then those weapons should not , as this text states , be weapons which inflict unnecessary or avoidable injury and unnecessary suffering .
In this respect , there is indeed a connection with our lasting and extremely - not completely but extremely - successful fight against landmines , which are weapons in all but name .
I think that we should state our views in no uncertain terms in this case too .
Perhaps there are technical features which can be incorporated in order to prevent this sort of injury and unnecessary suffering .
But at least until there are , there must be a moratorium and that is what we are saying today .
We are sorry that these weapons are being used , including in Afghanistan .
But what is more important is for us to look to the future and for the European Union to come out quite clearly and unequivocally in favour of a moratorium in order - I repeat - to prevent avoidable injury and unnecessary suffering .
Europe must support such a moratorium unequivocally .
Mr President , my group has given the go-ahead for the vote on this resolution , and I am one of those who support the resolution and am vehemently in favour of a moratorium .
We must tread very carefully in this particular war .
We are fighting a terrorist regime but we run the risk of not preparing for peace and of becoming embroiled in this conflict with no clear peace programme or prospects .
We oppose the death penalty which the Taliban have applied and yet we import it club class in huge American transporters .
We abhor Taliban misogyny but say nothing about the rapes carried out by the so-called Northern Alliance - a highly dubious alliance - on a massive scale .
The same applies here : obviously we have to use weapons systems in order to bring this war in Afghanistan to a successful close .
But , on the other hand , we need to ensure that as many civilians as possible are spared in order to prevent this war from escalating around the world and in order to prevent further escalation in weapons systems , especially now that more and more politicians and former pacifists are suddenly beginning to think in terms of the admissibility of war and to accept war as a policy instrument .
Sometimes it has to be the last resort , but what worries me is how comfortable we have become with the idea of war .
It is precisely at such times that we need to ban this sort of weapons system and , more importantly , to strengthen international law .
We have an international coalition against terrorism , but unless we can cash in on it by strengthening the international law of the United Nations , we shall be prey to other constellations which we absolutely do not want .
Hence , as I said , we need to fight terrorism but the ultimate aim must be to strengthen international law and ban - and this too is a topical issue - atomic as well as biological and chemical weapons .
Which is where the USA comes in and of course , most importantly , a ban on these cluster bombs which , in our view , are a means of war which endanger civilians to an unreasonable extent .
Those who know what damage was caused in the Balkans or Kosovo , mainly because of the mines laid by the Yugoslav army - that too needs to be said - they will understand why , at all events , we need to take a moderate line here .
The Commission shares Parliament ' s concern about the humanitarian , economic and social problems caused by a variety of unexploded ordnance such as cluster bombs and the particular difficulties of clearing contaminated areas .
A number of studies on cluster bombs show that no less than 10 % of delivered cluster bomblets fail to explode on impact and that the remaining unexploded ones tend to have effects similar to anti-personnel landmines .
They also are victim-activated and provoke fatal or disabling injuries as serious as those caused by landmines .
The Commission has taken due note of the proposal submitted by the International Committee of the Red Cross to address the problems caused by cluster bombs and other ' explosive remnants of war ' at the review conference of the UN Convention on the Prohibition or Restriction on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons .
This approach is broadly shared by the EU .
At the review conference , which is being held in Geneva from 11 to 21 December 2001 , the EU will present a common position on the issue of the unexploded remnants of war , requesting concrete steps to address this issue under the CCW framework .
With this in mind , we have carried out diplomatic démarches to prepare the ground for a successful outcome of the Geneva meeting .
Parliament 's initiative is therefore particularly timely and welcome .
The Commission will closely follow developments at the CCW review conference .
On an operational level , the Commission is already providing an indirect but tangible contribution to the reduction of the threat posed by cluster bombs and other unexploded ordnance through the legal and budgetary instrument of the anti-personnel landmines regulation .
Mine clearance carried out under this regulation encompasses de facto clearance of other unexploded ordnance .
We are already engaged in such broader clearance activities in countries such as Laos and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo , where the anti-personnel landmine problem is very clearly connected to unexploded ordnance pollution .
Mine clearance is also supported as part of ECHO-funded humanitarian aid in many countries and as part of development activities when we are carrying out ECHO-financed reconstruction work or building roads , etc. in a number of countries .
A week ago , in Kabul , I saw de-mining activities funded by ECHO .
Through two organisations we have employed something like 1 500 to 2 000 local Afghan staff who are continually working on de-mining .
We walked on marked paths in areas where I counted 30 to 40 recent non-exploded cluster bombs .
They do not necessarily stay on the surface of the ground .
If a neighbouring cluster bomblet explodes it may bury a few others and functionally they become anti-personnel landmines .
They have three functions : armour penetration capability , spraying shards of shrapnel from the casing , and starting a fire .
It was a very morbid experience but it gives me real satisfaction that we are funding this kind of activity on a large scale .
Certainly this is a main priority in the present situation where we are working to make it possible for the refugees to return home safely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
Mr President , Commissioner , unless women are involved , there will be no lasting peace in Afghanistan .
That was the most important message to come out of the Afghan women 's summit convened in Brussels on 5 and 6 December with the support of the EU .
Around 50 leading representatives from every social group in the country attended the conference , in a bid to make the voice of Afghan women heard in the current international political debate .
We are delighted that the UN-Afghanistan conference held in parallel in Bonn decided to appoint at least two women , including one as deputy prime minister , to the transitional government .
Our summit in Brussels certainly helped here .
They can count on our support , but more needs to happen .
We insist that women be given a good chance and be selected as candidates in future elections at all political levels .
That means they need support and practical help now in a special democracy programme .
Care must be taken in any future negotiations to ensure that Afghan women are fully integrated in efforts to resolve conflicts and in ongoing peace talks .
The whole world and the media are watching at present and this must be used to build up new structures and ensure that the voice of Afghan women is heard .
My group will use International Women 's Day in 2002 , just as it did in 1998 , to maintain the wave of support in favour of averting a humanitarian disaster .
The new watchword of the Social Democrats , who have been highlighting the plight of women under the Taliban regime for years , is this : no project for the future of Afghanistan and no form of political agreement will be accepted unless women are fully involved .
We are calling for a group of leading Afghan women to be set up to coordinate international support , with a corresponding contact for assistance from the EU .
The women and girls of Afghanistan have had to withstand 20 years of war and constant infringement of their human rights .
But that does not mean they were condemned to silence .
Afghan organisations such as the RAWA have worked hard to resist the Taliban regime .
There is no reason to believe that things will be much better under the Northern Alliance , which is why we must support the courage and determination of the RAWA today .
This morning we put budgetary arrangements in place to support NGOs such as the RAWA .
But we need staying power and committed women to ensure that women get peace , freedom and equality in Afghanistan .
We must not let up until women 's rights are fully respected as human rights under the future constitution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we live in the same world as the women of Afghanistan .
I should like to recall their Declaration of the Essential Rights of Afghan Women , which they adopted in Dushanbe on 28 June 2000 .
These were women issuing a call to action and not only victims .
I should also like to recall , as Mrs Gröner has just done , the Afghan Women 's Summit , which concluded on 6 December 2001 , last week , and which issued a proclamation which it is important to be familiar with .
This proclamation says : Afghan women want their rights now , not tomorrow , not later on .
All these rights have been returned to them ; we therefore need to restore these rights now .
That is why I have tabled an amendment which I would ask you to support , calling for these rights to be re-established as quickly as possible .
We need to give them the means to travel and to receive education and healthcare because ultimately we , the women of the same world as them , are a little anxious .
We are a little anxious and we call on the European institutions and the UN institutions to be vigilant .
Paragraph 5 of the resolution calls for the UN to focus particularly on establishing equality between men and women in Afghanistan , because these women have really been the symbols of many things .
They have been the symbols of their own oppression , but they have also been the symbols of famine .
Six months ago , when we were debating the situation in Afghanistan , they were the symbols of the destruction of the Bamiyan Buddha statues , and even of their own oppression .
It is not therefore a question of discarding the symbol once it has served its purpose .
It is a question of acting in such a way that the women are able to rediscover their rights and , for those who feel able to fight actively as representatives of all of the people , to participate in the government .
These women are active participants in this process and we live in the same world as they do .
They are demanding the freedom to travel and the recognition of habeas corpus ; I believe that these freedoms are the same as those enjoyed by Westerners and that we should not seek to draw a distinction between them .
That is why there is no secondary issue here , just one thing which I am asking you and that is , if possible , as an institution , to work to ensure that these freedoms are respected , because we are not sure that tomorrow will be any better than yesterday for these women .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to add to what my fellow MEPs have already said by stating how gratifying it is to see the delight shown by Afghan women .
However , we are also concerned about the fear that prevails at the same time .
Afghan women have good reasons to be afraid , for we know that the Northern Alliance too has perpetrated crimes such as forced marriage .
It is important that women and children should survive the winter .
At the same time , it is important to proceed with the measures referred to in this House : full access to education and healthcare for women and young girls .
We must immediately proceed on the basis of a rights-based approach .
Afghan women should not have to beg for the right to education as a favour . Instead , this must be a right .
In that way , they will achieve the dignity and receive the education that they require .
We also need to earmark funds but , in this area , equality between the different ethnic groups is required .
We are delighted about the outcome of the Bonn Conference , but the work must go on .
I should also like to draw Mr Nielson ' s attention to the special report prepared by my predecessor , Mrs Rehn , on the UN ' s peacekeeping activities and ask him to note that there is a lot to do when it comes to the treatment of women by the peacekeeping forces .
Women are needed in the peacekeeping forces , and an understanding is required of how to treat women who have suffered violence .
I hope that the UN will support the proposal tabled by Mrs Rehn in her report to Kofi Annan .
The issue of guilt also needs to be examined , that is to say who bears responsibility for what .
It is the only way in which to bring about healing .
I believe there is a lot of international experience in this area that we can draw upon .
Last but not least , quite a serious issue , Commissioner Nielson .
Mine dogs , which are extremely important in clearing away all this devastation , are also needed .
I hope that the EU can offer support in this area , too .
Mr President , the international Afghanistan conference at Petersberg in Bonn led to excellent results last Wednesday .
The 29-strong transitional government will include two women .
This is a fundamentally important message and a first step towards social recognition .
With the end of the Taliban 's reign of terror and its mediaeval regime in sight , the brutal suppression of women 's rights will also come to an end .
They have been the main ones to suffer under the caste of self-appointed warriors of God .
They have been denied an education , training , career and the right to any say-so whatsoever .
They were banned from public life .
The painful result : only 5 % of women and girls can read or write .
From now on , women will acquire equal opportunities in access to jobs , medical care and the right to vote on a par with men .
In Parliament and the government they need seats and a voice .
I am convinced that they will succeed in building up their own organisations so that they too can influence the economic and social decision-making processes .
They will be unstoppable in finding their new identity , but they need staying power and our support .
I hope that the women whom we honoured on 8 March 1998 in our campaign " A flower for Kabul " will be able to return to their professions as doctors , teachers , professors and managers .
On behalf of the PPE and as a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I support the proposal to make the 8 March next year Afghan Women 's Day .
The European Union has supported Afghanistan alone to the tune of EUR 400 million over the last 10 years .
In future , we must invest more in programmes and projects for women .
As far as reconstruction is concerned , we call on Afghanistan 's neighbours to take an active part in this process .
Mr President , as a co-author of this resolution I am proud that I spoke out in June of this year in this Chamber against the brutality and medieval obscurantist policies of the Taliban government , when they chose to destroy the beautiful Buddhist statutes in Bamiyan .
This was well before they , and their tragic country , became the focus of the world on 11 September , as the Taliban 's link with the perpetrators of the attack on the USA became clear to everybody .
Afghanistan is now at an historical crossroad .
I , as a British MEP , am proud of the role played by the courageous troops from my country in helping America rid Afghanistan of its oppressive masters and end their harbouring of international terrorists bent on the destruction of western values , including women 's rights .
I salute particularly those who have been wounded in the campaign and hope , as the UK is about to become a major component of the UN peacekeeping force , that no further casualties will ensue .
Two weeks ago I was invited to meet a representative from the Revolutionary Association of Afghan Women and I , as a Conservative , baulked initially at the title " revolutionary " .
However , after my meeting I decided that , in Afghanistan , my western views on social and political rights for women would no doubt , in the eyes of the old mujaheddin guard , such as President Rabbani , classify me , too , as a revolutionary .
I welcome the participation of two women in the interim government and I am hopeful that the new generation of younger , progressive and modern political leaders will see the way to establish a new order based on equality of the sexes and on full political and social rights enshrined in their international treaty obligations , and cease to regard women and their role as a purely economic one and a procreative one and banish them to invisibility in their burkas .
Women were once , in the 1960s and 1970s , welcomed by the government of King Mohammed Zahir Shah as full participating members of society in their professions , in higher education and in politics .
I hope that Afghanistan can return to this form of moderate secular government again , and make use of the huge pool of talent residing in more than 50 % of its population .
Mr President , Saudi Arabia has no credibility and offers no guarantees in terms of defending Afghan women .
Saudi Arabia is one of just three countries which officially supported the Taliban regime .
It has been promoting and financially aiding Islamic fundamentalism and it seriously violates the human rights of women .
Mr President , given Saudi Arabia ' s anti-women pedigree , is it coherent that at the meeting in Washington on 20 November , that country should be named as part of the group that will lead the reconstruction of Afghanistan ?
Mr President , Afghanistan is now entering a hopeful stage and they must begin to change the harsh living conditions for women .
We need a plan containing urgent measures in order that Afghanistan may embark on reconstruction and the road to peace and progress .
The European Union must concern itself as directly as possible with imposing order in the distribution of humanitarian aid and establishing speedy measures and structures so that girls and women may receive education and healthcare .
My final recommendation , Mr President , is that we remember those women ' s organisations which resisted the Taliban - such as RAWA - and it is those organisations which must now play a decisive role so that women are fully involved in the reconstruction .
' I keep on seeing dead bodies : our country is a cemetery .
We keep on resisting to free ourselves from terrorism and the war lords , and also from the USA , which created Osama Bin Laden and the Taliban and which , in order to fight and kill them , also bomb us . '
Fatima was talking to me on the telephone from Kabul : she is not a refugee but a RAWA leader .
She says the streets in Kabul are once again crowded and the markets are full but there is no money and widows still live on charity and children scavenge on rubbish heaps .
Everyone is still afraid .
A few women have removed or raised their burka , some men have had a shave , music has started to be played again , but there is fear of punishment and vendettas .
That is why , said Fatima - and I agree with her - there should be a United Nations force there , without Russians , Americans or the British but with contingents from other countries : a multi-ethnic and multi-religious force working at disarming the military groups .
Everybody is talking about the rights of Afghan women .
That is excellent , provided women are not used yet again to justify acts of war .
For years , Afghan and also European women have been denouncing the oppression and violence of the Taliban regime to deaf ears in the West .
The war is not over ; we cannot pretend it is and talk just of the future and reconstruction .
Important steps have been taken for women to be included in the formation of the government , but that is not enough and the process is not finished .
We must support those democratic women who have a secular view of the Constitution and who rise above ethnic and tribal divisions , but without denying their own identities .
Many of us have met them ; together - as other Members have mentioned - we have drawn up demands , but we have also put our own responsibilities on the table .
The mines that maim were produced in western factories ; the cluster bombs , dropped in their thousands in recent days and lying unexploded , are products of our factories ; ours are the perverse patents allowing mines to be designed in the shape of butterflies or dolls ; ours are the pretty yellow cluster bombs , the same colour as the packets of food dropped from aircraft .
A shared road links us to the Afghan women , the road to freedom and justice for everyone , men and women .
The resolution we are voting for today and the Fraisse amendment must not remain lifeless words on paper , but must be given practical effect .
Even before the rise to power of the Taliban in Afghanistan during 1995-1996 the EU was conscious of the poor position and status of women in Afghan society .
This was recognised in the nature of the aid programmes which we financed at that time and which had a strong focus on the provision of health care , education and employment creation for women .
With the arrival in power of the Taliban in Kabul in 1996 , the EU agreed a Common Position on Afghanistan .
The Common Position is renewed annually and clearly sets out among its objectives the promotion of respect for international law and human rights , including the rights of women and children .
In addition , the EU undertakes in the Common Position to support aid programmes which integrate gender concerns and actively attempt to promote the equitable participation of both men and women and promote peace and human rights .
As a result , the Commission , through its ECHO-financed programmes and through its budget for aid to uprooted people , continued , even during the Taliban period , to finance actions which provided health care and education for women and girls and provided employment opportunities and training for women .
I met many of these women and men in Kabul last week .
It made me start talking about what I call the ' other Afghanistan ' .
We all know the Afghanistan of the warlords .
But there is an alternative Afghanistan .
We also have heroes and heroines of peace and compassion .
Many of them work in projects that we are funding , did so during the Taliban regime and have continued doing so since September 11 .
In an ECHO-funded project for vulnerable children , I met the girls sitting there learning to read and write and asked how many wanted to become housewives when they grew up .
Only a few hands were somewhat hesitantly raised .
Then I asked how many wanted to become schoolteachers or doctors .
Everyone put their hand up - they all wanted to do something .
A very nice moment I would say , and their lady teacher was proud .
Another project involved a woman producing quilts which we use for refugee projects .
She was alone , her husband had died in the conflict , and when the Taliban came to power , she had to stop working as a crane operator in the construction industry .
She has 10 children and her home was being used .
They sat on the floor sewing these quilts and that was a very nice experience .
At the end , when we left , I could not resist giving her a hug to express my feelings - clearly not politically correct when the neighbours could see or , indeed , at all .
But it was well received , and I was quite happy to be part of a civilised and nice meeting of cultures in the centre of Kabul .
Now we are fortunately in the post-Taliban era .
Changes are now possible and we hope that what was achieved in Bonn on December 5 will pave the way for a big improvement in the situation of women and girls in the country .
Women were included in the delegations in Bonn ; women will hold office in the Interim Administration .
The Provisional Agreement makes a number of specific references to the guaranteed participation of women in the next phases of the political process - the Loya Jirga and the Transitional Administration .
All of this will be overseen by the UN which has a constitutional role , recognised in the Provisional Agreement , to monitor the conduct of the Interim Authority and the emergency Loya Jirga , as well as providing for the development and implementation of a programme of human rights education to promote respect for and understanding of human rights in Afghanistan .
The Commission is currently processing new , additional aid programmes worth EUR 28.5 million , which will start being implemented in the coming weeks , for emergency aid and aid to uprooted people .
Gender will , of course , be either a specific or horizontal issue in all of these programmes .
ECHO is already present in Kabul and we will formally inaugurate the ECHO office there in the middle of January .
Commission officials plan to start being there permanently from 1 February 2002 .
It is therefore important to ensure follow-up also in view of what we are discussing here .
Progress will provide crucial indicators to allow the EU and the rest of the international community to judge the commitment of the new Afghan administration to the engagement that they now have entered into .
I must warn you not to expect miracles .
It is a very traditional society , especially outside Kabul .
The reality on the ground does not reflect the elite in Kabul that we easily get in touch with .
There are many deep-seated differences .
We must take a very broad-based approach and make sure that we deliberately include women in the many decentralised activities that we carry out across the country .
Indonesia
Mr President , so it is true after all : Bin Laden ' s Al Qaeda network is definitely operating in Indonesia .
It has training camps in , among other places , Sulawesi , the island to which I shall confine myself to referring in this speech .
Using the Islamic terror group Laskar Jihad as a front , thousands of these fighters , some of them foreign , recently arrived on the island of Sulawesi .
The thirty-nine-year-old Ya 'far Umar Thalib from Yogyakarta , Pakistan-trained leader of this terrorist organisation set up in the late 1990s , denies the presence of Bin Laden ' s followers .
The opposite turns out to be true .
Only yesterday did the head of the Indonesian national security service , ex-general Hendro Pliono , after a meeting with President Megawati Sukarnoputri , confirm that Al Qaeda is operating on Indonesian territory .
I hope that the Indonesian authorities will not content themselves with making these statements .
I call on them urgently to act decisively against Laskar Jihad and this offshoot of Al Qaeda , as there is no time to lose .
Since the conflict first erupted on Amboina on 19 January 1999 , one day before the Islamic festival of Idul Fitr , Laskar Jihad has murdered at least 10 000 Christians and has put many times that number to flight in terror of their lives .
I am extremely concerned that after the Moluccas this anti-Christian force should have found its way to Sulawesi too .
I still have a vivid recollection of the story documented this autumn of the eight-year-old Christian boy .
The boy was sitting on the bus with his mother .
En route , some 50 Muslim terrorists forced the vehicle to stop .
The attackers checked the passengers ' religious identity .
Two turned out to be Christians , the woman and her son .
They dragged the boy off the bus with brute force , leaving the mother behind utterly distraught .
The young victim ' s terrified screams were to no avail .
The terrorists dragged him over the asphalt into the jungle , and nothing more was heard of him .
Just one of the countless documented attacks on buses by Laskar Jihad in Sulawesi .
I ask both the Council and the Commission to do their utmost to contribute to the combating of terrorism in Indonesia , to explore in what way they could support a process of conciliation on the ground , and to examine what measures they can take to promote economic development in this region .
As a Parliament we have passed a number of important motions on Indonesia , Timor and the Moluccas .
When we talk of Indonesia , we are talking of an empire in which , under dictatorship , whole sections of the population were forcibly transported to other parts of the empire , the transmigration .
That still underlies many complex conflicts .
At the same time the transition from dictatorship to democracy is an enormous step .
Since 1999 there has been some democratisation , but that is proceeding terribly slowly : on the one hand attempts are being made to strengthen democracy , on the other hand fierce ethnic conflicts are raging in many areas .
The Jihad , which was previously active in the Moluccas , is now operating in Sulawesi .
And every time one sees that the army has difficulty in really detaching itself and accepting the rule of law and democracy .
This is clear in Papua .
The island is still further from the capital and although legislation on autonomy is in prospect , as well as a special court for investigating certain events , it is still clear how much effort it requires to take this step .
Therefore we must strongly condemn the murder committed and do all we can to facilitate that process of reconciliation .
The same applies to Sulawesi .
Let us therefore distance ourselves completely from the terrorists , the Jihad , and at the same time support the Indonesian authorities .
The fact is that the vast majority of the population want reconciliation , want to live and build a society together .
Ordinary citizens , whether Christian or Muslim , are not interested in the Jihad .
For this reason , given all our experience , and with due modesty , we have an important part to play there .
We all have to condemn the assassinations that took place in Papua on 10 November .
There is a real danger that more assassinations are being planned .
There is an onus on the Indonesian Government to investigate thoroughly and to bring in the international investigation teams if necessary .
It is essential that those responsible are brought to justice .
It is also essential that the Indonesian Government protects witnesses from intimidation and murder and it should also protect organisations , NGOs and others from the same threat .
It is also important that the Indonesian Government should replace its Kopassus units because they are seen daily as a threat to the Papuan people .
We also believe that the Indonesian Government should call a halt to the army 's commercial activities in Papua .
Thousands have died on Sulawesi alone , where there has been two years of fighting .
The Indonesian Government needs to make an effort to ensure coexistence between the Muslim and the Christian populations , which had been possible for many years .
Mr President , since November , after a relatively peaceful period in Indonesia , we have again been alarmed by serious outbreaks of violence in , for example , Sulawesi and Celebes and by the murder of Theys Hiyo Eluay , the leader of the Papuas in Irian Jaya .
I should like first to say a few words about the murder of Theys Hiyo Eluay , which took place on 10 November after he had had discussions on behalf of the Papuan community with the senior command of the Indonesian military forces in West Papua .
Theys Hiyo Eluay was not only a charismatic leader of the Papuas , but was also a moderate man , who did not seek complete independence for his province , but whose aim was autonomy within the Indonesian state and who had succeeded in achieving this autonomy via the Indonesian parliament .
In October autonomy was ratified in the Indonesian parliament and after a dinner with the regional military staff he was murdered on the evening of 10 November .
It is typical of relations in Indonesia that military units are able to frustrate a constructive process of peace and reconciliation in this way and that this kind of murder can take place .
Many people believe that it was an act of revenge , because an autonomous Irian Jaya would never have given the military the power and financial rewards that they had previously enjoyed .
My request to the Commission and the Council is that they should ask the Indonesian Government to investigate the murder thoroughly and punish the culprit , so that justice is done in a country where injustice prevails .
In addition I should like to request help for the regional government of Irian Jaya , for example for the setting up of a civil service academy , so that people have a real chance of administering the region .
And then there is the situation in Sulawesi and Celebes .
These are the same Laskar Jihad groups that previously caused such misery in the Moluccas and were responsible for thousands of deaths and hundreds of thousands of refugees .
In this case too we would request that the Commission and the Council ask the Indonesian government to protect the Christian community in Indonesia and keep better control of the fundamentalist Muslim groups .
If Indonesia wishes to retain its respectable and important position , the present government really must call a halt to this violence and the European Union must make it clear to Indonesia that political murders and violence are not acceptable ; otherwise the relationship between the European Union and Indonesia will in my view be put under strain .
Mr President , the Commission fully shares with honourable Members their condemnation of the kidnapping and murder of Theys Eluay , Chairman of the Papuan Presidium Council , and adds its voice to the call for the Government of Indonesia to ensure a full investigation of this dreadful incident and to bring its perpetrators to justice .
We are informed that this is now being investigated as a murder case , which may not be sufficient to give us full confidence but at least they are taking this approach .
Further action is also needed to restore calm and to develop confidence in the democratic process .
In this context , the Commission warmly welcomes the adoption last month by the Indonesian national parliament of the special autonomy law for Papua and encourages the Government of Indonesia to proceed to full implementation of the new law with determination and with due speed .
The Commission also shares the deep concern of honourable Members concerning the recent deterioration of the situation in Sulawesi .
Since December 1998 , there have been several instances of violence between Muslims and Christians .
The two communities are increasingly segregated - and both are armed .
While reports from the area are sometimes unclear , the situation is certainly serious .
Intercommunal violence has flared up recently around the town of Poso .
A report by a local humanitarian fact-finding mission , which visited the area ( including Poso and Tentena ) last week , suggests that the situation is now relatively calm , but that it remains very tense .
While the TNI and police are making efforts to maintain security , to collect weapons and arrest those responsible for violence , the presence of a large and vociferous group of Laskar Jihad gives rise to continued fears of escalating violence .
The Commission ' s Delegation in Jakarta , together with the diplomatic missions of the EU Member States , will continue to make every effort to monitor developments in these areas and to draw our concerns to the attention of the Indonesian authorities in EU démarches and other contacts .
The Commission fully shares the stated position of the European Union , which firmly supports the territorial integrity of Indonesia , while encouraging the government to make urgent efforts to address and resolve peacefully Indonesia ' s internal conflicts , whether separatist or sectarian in character .
Colleagues , as you know , eight immigrants , including three children died last weekend in a freight container which had been shipped to Ireland .
Therefore , before opening the debate on the subject , I would ask you all to rise and observe a minute 's silence in memory of those victims of the tragedy .
( Parliament rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Immigration in Ireland
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I believe that this new tragedy illustrates yet again what we might call the fate of immigrants .
A year ago , it was 58 foreigners who were found dead in Dover ; the year before , Yaguine and Fodé , two young Guineans , were found dead in the undercarriage of a Sabena plane .
It seems to me that this keeps happening and that , faced with these tragedies , we actually only have one policy , which is to lock the door and throw away the key .
And , as Bernard-Henri Lévy would say , it seems to me that increasingly people are losing interest in what we might call the suburbs of the world .
It would appear , Mr President , that there are two ways of tackling immigration issues today .
The first , which is increasingly common , is to want to keep our borders wide open so as to have a source of cheap labour , liable to be ruthlessly exploited ; and the other is not to want any immigration at all , which is neither preferable nor desirable .
I believe that it is high time , Mr President , that we had some effective legislation , which is rigorous , of course , but simple in terms of form and common to all European countries , which takes account of the needs of both the southern and northern countries .
We cannot continue to strip the countries of the south of their intellectual assets whenever we need them , cynically importing brainpower as if it were just another commodity which we need , as it were , to safeguard our pensions , while at the same time speaking the language of repression .
This is not about repression or charity ; it is dignity which is at stake here .
I believe that this is how we should tackle the issue of immigration .
On the other hand - and we have seen illustrations of this throughout the afternoon - if we do not take into consideration the fact that today three quarters of the earth 's population is living in the most absolute poverty ; if today we do not cancel the debt of developing countries and if we do not discipline ourselves to invest in health , education and infrastructure , I am convinced that , once again , we will have failed to learn the lessons of history , as recent as it is .
Today , these destitute men and women , who are totally neglected , form a breeding ground for terrorism , a place where terrorism thrives .
Fighting terrorism today also means fighting this poverty .
Mr President , I have been so bold as to intervene without taking notes because I really do not think that we can continue to treat these people with such great inhumanity .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for the one minute 's silence for those who died .
There may well be further deaths unless we change our approach to this whole issue of immigration and refugee status .
I would like to convey my deepest sympathy to the survivors of this tragedy for the loss of their spouses and their children .
The discovery of eight bodies , plus the five people who are seriously ill , in a container in Wexford in Ireland was an appalling tragedy which has shocked people , not just in Ireland , but all across Europe .
Regrettably it is not the first time that this has happened .
The suffering and terror endured by the injured and those who died - including four children - during the several days they spent in this sealed metal container is barely conceivable .
They spent 53 hours at sea in a Force 10 gale in a container surrounded by furniture .
The deaths all occurred as a result of lack of oxygen .
The very thought of little children being put through that kind of terror is inconceivable .
I urge the Irish Government to enable the survivors to remain in Ireland , to help them rebuild their lives , and to provide them with refugee status if that is appropriate .
It may be that under law they do not qualify for refugee status , but if this is so they should get it , and they should still be allowed to remain in Ireland in any case .
The tragedy demonstrates once again the desperate lengths to which people are prepared to go to try to improve circumstances for themselves and their families .
We hear much about the privileged treatment given to asylum seekers and I hope we will hear no more of this .
The reality of the terrible experience facing many immigration and asylum seekers is revealed in eight people dead and others who are seriously ill .
Lessons have to be learnt from this tragedy .
There is clearly a need for more thorough checking of containers at the point of departure and arrival and for closer cooperation between the authorities in different countries .
But , given that it will not be possible to check every single container , given that inevitably others will try this desperate journey , we should look seriously at the question of obliging those who own these containers to put air vents in them .
Otherwise we are going to face this kind of horror yet again .
Ireland and Europe have to adopt immigration policies based on full respect for human rights as set out in international conventions , such as the Geneva Convention .
Our policies have to address in a much more forceful way the political , economic and social reasons why people are fleeing their homelands .
We must also relax immigration laws to prevent people from being driven to take these desperate remedies .
I very much regret this but I must condemn a statement made by Ireland 's Minister for Justice last Monday , where he accused those who argue for a more rational and open immigration policy of simply proposing an open door policy on immigration .
I am quite happy to engage in debate with the minister but the problem is that , in adopting that attitude and in adopting that frame of reference for this debate , he is feeding the paranoia which is at the root of much of the abuse that immigrants and refugees face in their host country .
I would like to thank you , Mr President and colleagues , for the moment 's silence for the awful tragedy which took place only this week in my own home county of Wexford in Ireland .
The tragic death of these eight people , including four children , found in the freight container just highlights the daily plight of many asylum-seekers and refugees throughout the European Union .
Witnessing it last Saturday will remain with me forever .
I would like to join personally with colleagues in this House in expressing my condolences to all those associated with this tragedy .
Since that awful incident , the bodies of four dead Romanians have been found inside a container bound for Canada in the Italian port of Livorno .
The scale and European-wide nature of this problem have been tragically highlighted by these episodes and it is up to us as a European Community to respond far better than we have done heretofore .
Since its inception the European Union has always been based upon the values of solidarity and community .
If the EU Council Summit at Laeken this weekend only addresses the issue of the strengthening of borders as a response to this modern day slave trade , it will have failed not only to respect these values but also to fulfil its leadership role .
These appalling incidents highlight dramatically the contradictory attitudes to migration and refugee policies in the EU .
Europe and Ireland increasingly need immigrant workers to do the jobs left vacant by greater prosperity and shrinking populations .
But sadly , at the moment more political effort is being put into erecting stronger border controls to keeping migrants out than to developing policies for structured flows of immigration .
Tragedies such as that in Wexford will continue to take place until this contradiction is seriously addressed by all Member State governments of the EU .
I welcome efforts this week to finalise an EU-wide arrest warrant to deal with these criminal ' people smugglers ' who benefit financially from the misery and desperation of others .
The single market has brought many benefits to our citizens , but it has also provided the criminals with just that - a single market for their activities .
Today , more than ever , we need Eurojust and Europol to deal effectively with the individuals who prey on the misery and desperation of others .
In conclusion , the historical legacy of Irish economic migration throughout the world in the past two centuries , particularly during and after our Irish potato famine of 1845-1849 is one which we as Irish Europeans should not ignore .
We should now be generous enough to take our share of those fleeing persecution and those seeking to make a better life for themselves .
If the deaths of migrants in freight containers , on the undercarriages of trains or in ship holds in recent months demonstrates anything , it is that responses to economic migration based solely on the monitoring of the illegal movement of people will not prevent people from resorting to desperate measures to travel to Europe .
It is imperative that we also address the underlying problems within the countries from which these desperate people flee .
Perhaps then the tragedy last week in Wexford of the Turkish , Algerian and Albanian economic migrants will not have not been in vain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution which we are about to adopt includes a series of statements on measures needed on the part of the European Union , measures which clearly need to be implemented following this incident .
Mr Sylla pointed out that this is not a one-off incident and that problems such as this occur year in year out , which is why I do not intend to go through all these measures again on behalf of our group .
We know what the problem is and we have already voted in numerous resolutions on what needs to be done and what needs to be implemented , some of which is already being implemented .
I should like to address a different aspect , an aspect which I should like to link to your one minute 's silence , Mr President .
We honour victims with one minute 's silence .
These victims deserve not just the honour of our one minute 's silence ; they also deserve the following consideration : the people who turn to the criminal elements who take money from them to get them to what they see as paradise , are people with hopes . They have hopes for a better life .
Generally , it should be said , they have hopes for a better life not for themselves but for their children .
They give everything away , all their worldly goods , their property and their hopes .
There is a German proverb which says , " Hope is the last to die " .
The people in this container still hoped they would reach their destination until they drew their dying breath .
That brings me to another aspect of my thoughts on the subject .
The people who gamble on these hopes , the people who take money for these hopes , the corrupt border officials who allowed these people , who were from Kurdistan , to cross our external borders , the criminals who want to capitalise on people 's desperation , have also earned one minute of the deepest contempt of which we as a civilised society are capable .
I should like to follow on from your one minute 's silence by dedicating this contempt to their victims .
Their children should know that the perpetrators have the full contempt of the civilised world .
Mr President , eight people , half of them children , have died under horrific and incomprehensible circumstances .
The same thing happened in Dover a year ago .
Then as now , it was said that this must not happen again .
Everyone is shocked , but the truth is that thousands of people die every year under similar circumstances .
We talk about illegal immigration to Europe and about people who try to make their way here without valid travel documents .
It is , however , we who make their status illegal by constantly making the visa requirements more stringent , by constantly sending out the signal that they are not welcome , by forcing the airlines to accept their liability as transporters and by giving shipowners the task of assessing who shall be allowed to seek asylum .
This situation cannot continue .
We must agree upon a common , humane and generous refugee policy and a migration strategy for the whole of Europe .
I hope we do not again have to sit here in this House in two weeks ' time following a similar event and express regret about the deaths of more people .
We must look forward .
We must see if we cannot find a solution to this problem other than repressive measures .
Mr President , for clarification , my group was also an author of this resolution but somehow we got dropped off the list .
This is something that we are going to see happening again if we do not look at our whole policy - this fortress Europe mentality - the fact that we are building the barricades and the walls higher and higher .
We are trying to prevent people from coming in and we need to implement measures which will prevent asylum-seekers resorting to traffickers in their effort to reach a country where they can seek asylum , as they are entitled to do under the Geneva Convention .
There is quite a lot of hypocrisy concerning this issue , and I would like to refer to my own Minister for Justice in Ireland , John O 'Donoghue .
He was crying crocodile tears at the weekend over this event yet he has tightened the laws in Ireland in every possible way to ensure that asylum-seekers do not come to Ireland to file an application for refugee status , which I would like to reiterate is something that they are entitled to do under the Geneva Convention .
To highlight this minister 's hypocrisy further : yesterday , for the first time in the history of the Geneva Convention , there was a meeting of the 141 countries that signed that Convention in 1951 .
Our minister , who was crying over what had happened at the weekend and saying that it was one of his worst fears , did not think this meeting was important enough to attend .
We really need to change our policy on how we treat asylum-seekers and refugees and we have to stop building the barricades higher and higher to keep them out .
We have to realise that there are people who are desperate to get out of their countries and that there are reasons why they want to leave .
They are human beings , they are not the so-called undesirables that some people would like to think .
They are exactly the same as the Irish who were desperate to get out of Ireland at one stage going to America and other places - where they were well treated .
We have a duty and an obligation to treat everyone in this world equally .
Mr President , the Commission too is deeply concerned by the repetition of such a dramatic event .
Everyone has in mind the tragic deaths of 58 Chinese stowaways in Dover last year , but unfortunate people die almost every week trying to reach what they consider to be a unique area of peace and prosperity .
Smuggling and trafficking of human beings are nowadays increasingly carried out by criminal organisations which profit from the distress of women , men and children in search of a better life or in need of international protection .
Although many measures have already been taken at national level and under Schengen cooperation to tackle this horrendous form of crime , the Commission can understand the frustration expressed by Parliament when confronted with the apparent failure of existing instruments .
There is definitely a need for enhanced action and cooperation at national , European and international level .
This is why the Commission put forward in November a communication on a common policy on illegal immigration , aiming at creating synergy of national efforts by adding a European dimension .
One of the main messages flowing from this communication is that preventing and fighting illegal immigration is part and parcel of a comprehensive migration policy .
It is crucial in building up support for a common asylum regime based on the highest humanitarian standards , as well as genuine immigration policy in line with our tradition of hospitality and solidarity .
More efficient controls at the external borders , improved consular cooperation and reinforced police and judicial cooperation , are key elements .
Nevertheless , there is more to it than that : partnership with countries of origin and transit , a policy of sustainable return for illegal immigrants and the fight against undeclared work are all essential in this regard .
All this must be achieved in full compliance with international obligations and human rights .
The framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings , the directive on carriers ' liability and the directive and the framework decision on the liability of smugglers , already approved by the Council , are only first steps .
In a broader framework , it is crucial to ensure a swift ratification and a coordinated implementation of the UN Palermo Convention against transnational organised crime and its two protocols on trafficking and smuggling , which now form the basis for a global recognition of the problem and a stronger approach to tackle it .
The Laeken Summit is now only a couple of days away .
This will be the occasion for a mid-term review of the implementation of the Tampere conclusions .
This should provide a unique opportunity to give a new impetus to a much needed common immigration and asylum policy .
The Union is indeed behind schedule in these areas .
A major political effort to fill these gaps as soon as possible would be our best tribute to the memory of the victims of Wexford .
But rather than looking at the global perspective , the rich world has some soul-searching and wallet-searching to do .
The general level of development assistance flowing from north to south is an unsatisfactory 0.22 % of the GNP of the rich countries .
There is a link between this and what we are discussing here and this also defines the challenge we have to face .
Togo
Mr President , Togo is still in a state of political paralysis .
The regular condemnations issued by the European Parliament , the most recent of which dates back to September , have had no effect .
Human rights are constantly disregarded and democracy remains an elusive utopia .
The leader of the students ' union , Hounjo Mawudzuro , has been imprisoned .
Last August , the chairman of the main opposition party , Yawovi Agboyibo , was sentenced to six months in prison on fallacious grounds .
New threats of legal action are hanging over him and President Eyadema will not release him unless he applies for a pardon .
In fact only someone who is guilty can apply for a pardon and Yawovi Agboyibo is not guilty .
His only crime is to have criticised the regime .
He should be released unconditionally and be able to stand as a candidate in the parliamentary elections which are to be held next March .
Democracy does not consist solely of holding elections .
These are dependent on what happens upstream , and in particular on the rules stating who can vote and who can stand as a candidate , just as we saw in the past in Côte d 'Ivoire and as we see today in Congo-Brazzaville .
The European Parliament should strongly condemn these new developments and see to it that the elections run smoothly .
Only if human rights are respected and the rule of law upheld will it be possible for normal cooperation relations between Togo and the European Union to be resumed .
It is necessary to establish a dialogue with the regime and the opposition .
This is why the Joint Parliamentary Assembly should send a mission to Togo to report on respect for human rights and the smooth running of the electoral process .
Mr President , Commissioner Nielson , ladies and gentlemen , West Africa is in the process of structuring its cooperation in the form of a common market .
It is creating common regional , economic and political structures .
If everything goes according to plan , we shall be able to talk and hold discussions with parliamentarians from the new West African regional assembly of the regional parliament at next year 's ACP assembly .
We shall be able to organise our practical cooperation .
But there are a few serious constraints , one of the most serious being the authoritarian regime of President Eyadéma in Togo .
We are calling for the immediate release and restoration of the democratic rights of Yawowi Agboyibo , who was arbitrarily arrested and is now serving a six-month sentence which he has done nothing to deserve .
Having served over five months of his sentence , the president should release him without further ado .
We are not calling for a pardon .
He did nothing wrong , he merely highlighted abuse in the system and he should be released from prison as quickly as possible .
We are devastated that the attempt by our President , Nicole Fontaine , to meet President Eyadéma in Paris last week and ask him , as a favour , to arrange for this release , proved fruitless .
Eyadéma is playing cat and mouse with us .
We can no longer allow provision to be made for more development aid here .
We support the Commission in suspending development aid .
But we hope that we shall soon be able to provide further humanitarian aid for the people of Togo and we also hope that democratisation will continue next year , despite all the obstacles , and that it will be possible to hold parliamentary elections and then presidential elections a year later .
We call on Eyadéma to put an end to this farce once and for all .
The European Commission is concerned by the political climate in Togo .
Though Mr Messan , a local journalist , and Mr Olympio , leader of an opposition party , have recently been released , Mr Agboyibo remains in prison .
Recent reports suggest that more journalists have been arrested .
The European Union has several times conveyed its concern about the political climate to the government of Togo .
It made representations to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 17 August .
On that occasion , the Union emphasised its desire that political parties and the media be able to operate freely .
On 18 October , the Union issued a declaration reiterating its concerns , emphasising the importance it attaches to the freedom , openness and transparency of the electoral process and calling on President Eyadema to have Mr Agboyibo released .
The Commission has taken note of the government 's decision to schedule parliamentary elections for 10 and 24 March next year .
The Commission has earmarked about EUR 1.56 million to help prepare the elections .
The funding will pay for electoral equipment and the printing of ballot papers .
The financing agreement has been signed , the first contracts concluded and the first deliveries received .
The European Union has also accepted the invitation of Togo 's Minister for Foreign Affairs to take part in the election observer mission .
That participation could be coordinated by the United Nations , should it decide to take on that role .
The conditions for organising and conducting the observer mission have yet to be established .
The European Parliament is obviously very welcome to take part in the election observer mission .
The Commission is , however , disappointed that the government has still not signed the memorandum of understanding required for the deployment of EU observers , and it is continuing to urge the government to sign promptly .
The Commission continues to monitor political developments and respect for human rights closely , especially in view of the early parliamentary elections .
It is ready to provide assistance for the preparation and conduct of the elections .
The main objective of such assistance is to help the government establish the conditions for transparent , free and democratic elections that would enable the European Union to resume cooperation with Togo .
We have still to note that cooperation with Togo , save of course for operations directly benefiting the vulnerable and weak part of the population , has been officially suspended since fruitless consultations with that country ended in the latter half of 1998 .
We hope change is possible , but this is a very difficult case .
Winners of the Sakharov Prize : Aung San Suu Kyi and Leyla Zana
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Aung San Suu Kyi and Leyla Zana are two Sakharov prize-winners who have never been able to come and receive their awards .
We are all aware of this .
They are also both female politicians .
I wish - if you do not mind - to stress first of all the word female , because these two women are politicians in countries where it is very difficult to attain this rank and to break into this field .
Gender equality amongst politicians is not either Turkey ' s or Burma 's strong point , as you know .
If I say two female politicians , however , then I must also say that these are two women who have been elected .
They have therefore been elected democratically and are the representatives of a nation , of a section of a nation , of a political movement in one case and a Kurdish minority in the other .
In both cases , these are , at any rate , women who represent people other than themselves .
I have to say that this is already a considerable achievement : they are women , they are politicians and they are elected .
I must also add that these are two women who are courageous .
This is not a moral judgement ; it is a political judgement that I am making when I say that these two women are courageous .
Why ?
Because one of them renounced exile precisely because she was a representative of her people , and the other does not want to be released on health grounds because she is not the only one in prison and she represents a Kurdish minority ; other militants are in prison too and she does not want the freedom which her captors are prepared to give her , or which she is said to have been offered because of her health .
That is why it is important to stress that these two Sakharov prize-winners obviously ought to be received by our Parliament but also have their fundamental freedom restored to them .
We should also recognise , however , not only that Articles 10 and 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights should apply to them , of course , but also that it is real-life democracy that is at stake here , and that in one case we are dealing with Turkey , a candidate country for accession to the European Union .
I ask you : can we accept that the violation of fundamental rights is as important as this while at the same time agreeing to this country 's cooperating with the European Union ?
Mr President , this week we awarded the annual Sakharov Prize to three very worthy recipients who fight for peace and tolerance in an environment which is anything but peaceful and tolerant .
The awarding of the Sakharov Prize is not only a grand ceremony but also an important demonstration , with echoes around the world . Hopefully , it also gives further courage to brave people coping with oppression and slavery .
The prize is an expression of the basic values characterising EU foreign policy : respect for democracy and human rights throughout the world .
Those who were awarded the prize last year live under difficult circumstances , but they live in peace .
That is not so in the cases of two former recipients of the prize : Aung San Suu Kyi , who received the prize in 1990 , and Leyla Zana , who received it in 1995 .
These two courageous women , both parliamentarians , have been kept locked up by their respective governments year after year , despite international pressure .
Aung San Suu Kyi has been kept in solitary confinement and under house arrest for an unimaginably long time .
It is eleven years since she was elected as her people ' s legitimate leader .
We have seen some softening of attitudes on the part of the Burmese regime .
A small number of political prisoners have been released recently .
That is not enough , however .
Together with the other political prisoners in the country , Aung San Suu Kyi must be released immediately .
Leyla Zana is held prisoner by a country that is applying for membership of the EU .
I hope that Turkey will be able to play its part in this House one day .
However , radical and genuine improvements are required in terms of human rights before we can even begin negotiating about membership .
Leyla Zana and all the other political prisoners in Turkey must also be released .
In this House , there is firm cross-party resolve to keep on reminding the world , including Burma and Turkey , of the fate of these two women and of the struggle for human rights , democracy and freedom of expression that they represent .
I hope that the Commission can also talk about what it intends to do to ensure that next year is a year in which we help secure the release of these two women .
Mr President , it is over ten years since Aung San Suu Kyi , the President of Burma elected by 80 % of the population , received both the Nobel Prize and the Sakharov Prize for her peaceful protest against the military coup and the military dictatorship in her country .
For ten years she has lived permanently either in prison or under house arrest , while her homeland has turned into one of the most violent countries on earth .
Over half the members of parliament have fled , are in prison , have been driven into exile or have been killed , and several million Burmese have fled to India , Bangladesh , Thailand , Malaysia , the United States and Europe .
In Burma wholesale repression is being carried out against the members of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi ' s party and members of minority groups .
There is also use of forced labour in the construction of infrastructure , and meanwhile Burma has become the world ' s second largest drugs exporting country after Bolivia .
This military dictatorship is kept afloat by drugs , forced and cheap labour , terror and that situation has persisted for over ten years .
Our question is again : European Commission , institute an investment embargo or an economic boycott against this country , as the United States has now done .
It is perhaps the best punishment for this violent dictatorship and the best gift that you could give the elected president of Burma , Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
My sympathy also goes out to Leyla Zana .
It is not good for a country seeking to join the European Union to allow such an affair to drag on for so long .
Let Turkey show that it wishes to be a country governed by the rule of law and that it wants to grant Leyla Zana as soon as possible a full place in its society and in the parliament to which she has been elected .
Mr President , at a dinner in honour of this year ' s Sakharov prizes the possibility of bringing all these prize winners together was once again spoken of .
The two female winners face the same barrier : they are still without their freedom - Leyla Zana is in a Turkish prison and Aung San Suu Kyi is under house arrest in Burma .
This is an intolerable situation and , at the same time , a reminder to us that human rights work needs not only to be celebrated but requires us to persevere and remain vigilant .
Furthermore , as both women - in the eyes of their governments - are dangerous criminals , I cannot help asking myself whether Sakharov prize winner Nelson Mandela and the ANC led by him at the time would not seem to fit the definition of terrorism now being put together by the EU .
Now , on hindsight , we opponents of apartheid are also being exposed as supporters of terrorism .
We are in danger of forgetting that without conflict and social controversy , however heated and powerful , there can be no democracy .
The right to different political views and their expression , as well as the legal protection of those suspected of crimes - even with just cause , perhaps - must be guaranteed to a far greater extent than is now the case at Laeken .
Mr President , I have the floor for one minute .
As you are the vice-president responsible for reforming Parliament 's work , I shall try and give you an example of what one can sensibly say in one minute .
All the groups are agreed .
A famous Bavarian cabaret artist once said after visiting the Bavarian regional parliament , that now he knew what parliamentarianism was : ' Everything has already been said , but not yet by everybody ' .
Which is why I do not intend to repeat what all the previous speakers have rightly and quite correctly said .
All I wish to say is that I endorse the statements made by the previous speakers .
They are right , it is an outrage that Mrs Sana and Mrs Zana and Mrs Suu Kyi cannot come and collect their prizes from us .
That they are still being kept in unlawful detention , including by a country with aspirations to membership of the European Union , is unacceptable .
Thank you for listening .
I might just add to your comment that I was brought up to know that if you cannot say something in two minutes it is not worth saying .
Mr President , it may sometimes be necessary to take more time to say less .
Still , I must say what I had planned to say .
We attach great importance to this .
I would add that the activities of Parliament on matters such as this are important in themselves and also important to the way in which Europe is perceived both by Europeans and globally .
The General Affairs Council , in the conclusions of its October meeting , called for the release of all remaining political prisoners in Burma including Aung San Suu Kyi .
The Commission strongly supported - and continues to support - that call .
It was ten years ago last Saturday that Aung San Suu Kyi was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
She is a past winner , of course , of the Sakharov Prize .
She remains , today , a formidably powerful symbol of the principles those prizes represent , as she did before - an inspiration to her own people and to the world at large .
I know how much support she enjoys in this House , support with which I want strongly to associate myself .
It is a measure of both her courage and her commitment to non-violent action that Aung San Suu Kyi has decided to remain in her country under detention and to engage in discussions with the authorities responsible for that detention in order to pursue her goal of establishing democracy in her country .
Her persistence , her passion and her wisdom have been instrumental in the positive developments that have occurred in Burma over the last year , even though it must be recalled that these developments are only the beginning of a process which needs to be further deepened and to evolve into a constructive and more concrete dialogue based on respect for internationally accepted standards of human rights .
Therefore , while we salute Aung San Suu Kyi and assure her of our continued admiration and support , we also encourage the government to pursue this groundbreaking dialogue actively .
We have already underlined the readiness of the European Union to consider positive measures in response to concrete results from the present talks .
But we need to see these results , not least the early release of the many hundreds of political prisoners still held in Burmese jails .
The case of Leyla Zana is very well known to the Commission , as stated in several Regular Reports on Turkey .
The case has been a cause for concern raised with the Turkish authorities on many occasions .
The Commission is aware that the case of Mrs Zana has been discussed many times at the European Parliament and has recently received renewed attention in the framework of the EP report on Turkey as well as during the EC-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee recently held in November .
The Commission welcomes the renewed attention of the European Parliament to this case .
In this context , as stated in the Regular Report for Turkey 2001 , the Commission expects that Turkey will observe the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights of 17 July 2001 on the absence of a fair trial in this case .
This would be a significant step by Turkey with respect to the actual implementation of the recent constitutional amendments whereby the right to a fair trial was explicitly guaranteed .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at 6.30 p.m.
Nepal
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0761 / 2001 ) by Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
( B5-0772 / 2001 ) by van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
( B5-0780 / 2001 ) by Vinci and Herman Schmid , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
( B5-0794 / 2001 ) by Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
( B5-0807 / 2001 ) by Thomas Mann , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
( B5-0810 / 2001 ) by Messner and McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
on the situation in Nepal .
Mr President , Commissioner , the developments in Nepal are worrying .
I myself , who had planned to go there in the course of the next few months , have , for example , been advised against travelling .
Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world , with only USD 220 in GDP per person per year .
Children ' s development in Nepal is extremely problematic .
Fifty-four per cent of children under five are said to be too short of stature and to be affected by stunted growth because of poor nutrition .
Illiteracy is another major problem .
Sixty-three per cent of men can read , but only 28 % of women .
This trend continues where access to basic and higher education is concerned .
That is why the Finnish section of UNICEF has launched one of its biggest projects , aimed at improving girls ' schooling in Nepal , as well as at promoting village development .
One other problem is the fact that education is extremely politicised .
In spite of the unrest in the country , the project is nonetheless continuing both in Katmandu and outside the city .
Those with whom I have talked say that the rebellion that has just taken place cannot be characterised simply as Maoist , but is a general trend .
Certain people in this House believe that Nepal is in great danger of being partitioned in the same way as Tibet .
Those I spoke to did not agree .
We are also conscious that the unrest in the country has been caused by the fact that the population really does not have any confidence in the person who took over following the tragic events within the royal family last summer .
This lack of confidence is partly due to the fact that senior members of the royal family are suspected of also having been guilty of murders other than those which occurred last summer .
Our view is that there are serious threats to human rights , freedom of the press and other traditional freedoms , and this is something to which we must be alert .
Other developments in the country must , however , continue .
Mr President , the Maoist rebels in Nepal have unilaterally revoked the ceasefire and there have been 250 deaths within a few days as a result .
This is the latest painful chapter in the history of this young democracy .
The escalation in violence has claimed over 2 500 lives in less than six months .
Policemen have been killed indiscriminately , bombs have been set off in the centre of Katmandu and innocent people have forfeited their lives .
The Maoist rebellion evokes the risk of civil war , which would obviously be supported by the Communists in China .
The economic damage is huge ; the number of tourists to Nepal , who alone represent the main source of income , dwindled to 24 000 last month , about 40 % fewer than last year .
So far , the international community has looked on passively .
With the proclamation of a state of emergency and the deployment of the military for the first time , all that has suddenly changed .
India has said it will support Nepal with helicopters and night-vision equipment and the United States is considering sending in troops .
However , political measures must take precedence .
We call on the rebels to lay down their arms and return to the negotiating table .
In any case , they will not achieve one of their aims , which is to overthrow the constitutional monarchy .
I have visited this country regularly for the last seven years and I know full well that the overwhelming majority are in favour of these government reforms , irrespective of their religious or other affiliations .
King Gyanendra deserves our full support .
He has recognised the Nepalese constitution and is continuing in his brother 's footsteps on the path towards democracy and the rule of law .
But we call on the government and the parties to get on with economic and structural reform at long last and to fight corruption consistently .
The people deserve proper measures to fight poverty .
Commissioner , the European Union has supported Nepal to the tune of EUR 120 million over the last ten years .
I have seen many of these projects with my own eyes .
They are excellent .
We are one of Nepal 's most important partners and can therefore bring our full influence to bear as an honest broker .
To put things in a less black-and-white way , Mr President , a state of emergency has been decreed , and it is correct that the Maoists have sabotaged the negotiations , but the rule of law is meanwhile being undermined .
We do not know how many victims are being claimed .
The helicopters shoot from the air and the press has been muzzled , In Nepal there is both terror and counter-terror .
Child soldiers are being recruited , and I wonder whether this will provide a solution in a country that wishes to avoid civil war but where 12 % of the population owns 95 % of the property and holds 70 % of the power and where , furthermore , corruption reigns supreme .
The Maoists have meanwhile occupied part of the country .
Real political , yet peaceful , change is required , and that end requires the consent not only of the rebels , but also of hard-liners in the regime .
On behalf our group we should like to ask the Commission to address itself to its paper on conflict prevention together with the Lagendijk report that we have approved only today .
We must be able to bring about peace negotiations and to that end exert pressure on all parties at home and abroad .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concern on the deterioration of the situation in Nepal .
We also had placed great hopes in the negotiations started three months ago by the Deuba government .
From their contacts with the Royal Nepalese Government , EU representatives in Kathmandu had drawn the conclusion that Mr Deuba was genuinely committed to finding a lasting peace with the Maoist guerrillas in order to be able to focus action on the country 's considerable development needs .
The reasons why the negotiations collapsed are not entirely clear , but the Maoist factions first broke the cease-fire .
The Commission agrees that there is a risk that the country is drifting towards civil war .
It also fears that the current state of emergency may jeopardise a fragile democracy already undermined by years of political instability and corruption .
The EU has promptly condemned the new wave of violence and launched an appeal in favour of restoration of peace and law and order .
The Commission is currently preparing its cooperation strategy for the next five years .
Under the current circumstances , consolidation of democracy , conflict prevention and poverty eradication will be the primary objectives of its new strategy for Nepal .
The EU-Nepal political dialogue should be continued and further strengthened while cooperation targets should include promotion of development initiatives in the most deprived areas of the country , to counteract the frustrations and resentment of local people .
In all its present and future cooperation activities the EU will constantly and carefully monitor the situation , including security aspects that might jeopardise its development cooperation .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
The Congo
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0773 / 2001 ) by van den Berg and Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
( B5-0781 / 2001 ) by Sylla and Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
( B5-0785 / 2001 ) by Maes and Rod , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
( B5-0795 / 2001 ) by van den Bos and Dybkjær , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
( B5-0808 / 2001 ) by Johan Van Hecke and Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
A minute ' s speaking time is not much to deal with 52 million people and three million dead , Mr President , but I shall try .
The riches of the country are being plundered by friend and foe alike . For example , the coltran that we use in our mobile phones and military equipment is being mined and exploited by the Rwandans in the Kivu , to their own advantage .
That means hundreds of thousands of dollars of profit for the Rwandan war chest , and what do we do with our policy of double standards ?
We support the Lusaka peace process and we demand the withdrawal of foreign troops and the promotion of inter-Congolese dialogue .
But why should Rwanda abandon these spoils of war and withdraw to the borders in order to guard the security of those borders if that should be necessary ?
Rwanda continues to occupy the Kivu and profit from its occupation and we support Rwanda with many hundreds of thousands of euros .
We want an inter-Congolese dialogue , but do we really expect that the representatives coming to that dialogue from occupied territory will speak as Congolese , or as Rwandans ?
In Kinshasa they think the latter .
Meanwhile we are supporting Rwanda and should like to ask : why do we not support the DRC ?
Must the people of Congo really all die of hunger before we come up with a structural programme ?
Mrs Maes , it is up to your political group to decide which issues it spends its time on .
It is not up to us .
Mr President , the Democratic Republic of Congo is neither democratic nor a republic .
It is a country with fertile land , vast mineral wealth , populated by people who are poor , sick and starving .
These people have been plundered by cruel and corrupt dictators who continue to enrich themselves .
Soldiers from neighbouring countries such as Rwanda and Congo continue to loot , rape and kill civilians at random .
Villages and towns are destroyed .
Over 2 million people have been killed and 1 million people live in fear in refugee camps .
The UN passed resolution 1376 on 7 November 2001 . It advocates disarmament and demobilisation , repatriation , resettlement and reintegration of armed groups .
These measures are essential .
How are they going to be implemented ?
Who will lead this action ?
The EU , the USA or the UN ?
Or will this be yet another UN resolution for filing in some dusty cabinet .
Last month I attended in Ghana a conference of African politicians .
A veteran politician from DRC was there .
He had had great difficulty in leaving the DRC , and this is what he asked me : how can African countries like the DRC be free from governments run by crooked dictators ?
I could not answer .
He asked a second question . Do we need to breed terrorists who will attack Europe and the USA to precipitate effective action like in Afghanistan ?
I could not answer that either .
Let us make sure that we take action before poor people become so desperate .
Let me first of all remind Members of Parliament of the fact that we are the biggest provider of humanitarian aid in the DRC this year - EUR 35 million in ECHO funded activities and some EUR 10 million from other sources .
The EUR 10 million are going to basic healthcare in the government-controlled part and the EUR 35 million to the eastern part where no-one else is doing anything like this .
Actually disbursing EUR 45 million for these purposes in the circumstances there is quite an achievement , and I am very proud of it on behalf of the many people working there , many of them still in very dangerous circumstances .
However , we have spared no effort over the last years to support the peace processes at work in the Great Lakes region .
We have been active in the region throughout its disastrous recent history .
Whenever we could , we have used our different cooperation instruments to help ease the suffering of the people there .
We have also used all our influence to push for a durable peace in the region .
I would now like to go into more detail on the Lusaka peace process .
We support it not only politically - the Commission has already funded the Lusaka negotiations by a grant of EUR 2.65 million from the SADC regional programme .
The logistic of the Joint Military Commission surveying the cease-fire was financed by CFSP budget-line to the amount of EUR 1.2 million .
The facilitation of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue has been financed by a grant of EUR 2.34 million from EDF monies , and we are considering EUR 1 million further financing from Rapid Reaction Mechanism budget line , which would provide for the implementation of the meeting of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue in January in South Africa .
We are making a meaningful contribution to all these endeavours .
Nevertheless the Commission is concerned about the lack of concrete results following the talks in the framework of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue that took place in Addis Ababa on 15-19 October .
The most difficult issues for the country ' s future are still to be addressed .
The Commission welcomes the announcement made by facilitator Masire concerning the resumption of the dialogue in South Africa at the end of January / beginning of February 2002 .
The Commission has always been supportive of the Congo .
We are the largest , as I mentioned before , supplier of humanitarian aid as well as one of the few donors that have remained active in the country throughout recent years .
However , the Commission considers that the DRC ' s stability and sustainable development will not be ensured until all parties to the Dialogue have clearly committed themselves to the establishment of and participation in one political system .
This is the core of it .
Do they see themselves as participants and players in one political system ?
Without a clear yes to this , it is very difficult to help the country from the outside .
There are the other issues of external forces at play .
These are real problems , but if we do not see a credible answer to this question emerging , nothing else will ever work .
So all these things have to be addressed in some sort of balanced overall approach .
When this political commitment is made , of course , we will have a much better basis for getting an effective cooperation programme up and running .
What I want to do is to be able to sign - and this is what we are planning - the National Indicative Programme in January in the context of the resumption of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue .
This is the line we have defined in the Commission .
The other activities linked to peace process implementation , i.e. demobilisation and the creation of a new basis for the life of ex-combatants , will be implemented following progress in the field .
I would like to stress that the Commission ' s action in the Great Lakes is only part of a wide and sustained effort to enhance the EU 's overall political presence as a partner in Africa .
With the Cotonou Agreement , the Union has confirmed that it had no intention of reducing our long-standing cooperation in Africa and the EUR 15 billion envelope that we have outlined and will commit over the next five years clearly demonstrates this determination .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
New European Labour Markets , Open to All , with Access for All
The next item is the report ( A5-0375 / 2001 ) by Mauro Nobilia , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication on New European Labour Markets , Open to All , with Access for All ( COM ( 2001 ) 116 - C5-0188 / 2001 - 2001 / 2084 ( COS ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is rather strange not to have the rapporteur here but I should like to congratulate him , nonetheless , because the PSE supports his report and will accept it as it stands .
We also support the Commission communication , although we take the view that listing current obstacles and postponing legislative proposals is not good enough .
We hope that the relevant proposals and an efficient action plan will be submitted to us at the spring summit .
One criticism we have is that the skills shortages proposed or , rather , identified in the high-tech sector are of course not good enough .
As Socialists , we want to give all employees the chance to benefit from mobility and to increase mobility on the European labour markets .
But we have to offer them these chances .
The new labour market should not be open just to small , special groups ; it must be open to every employee in Europe .
Hence we need creative ideas and solutions from the Commission , not just a list of the problems .
We also need a detailed investigation of possible malfunctions on the labour market in border regions or in specific sectors , such as the building and transport industries .
Last but not least , we also need an analysis and a debate of the results of the school system in Europe because , unfortunately , not every country in Europe has done as well as it should .
Mrs Weiler , I propose writing to Mr Nobilia saying that it really is a great rudeness to the House and to the committee that he represents , for him to not be here .
Mr President , I welcome Parliament 's report on the Commission 's communication on new European labour markets .
It is a very useful input to the preparation of the action plan on skills and mobility announced in that communication .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , maybe in writing , for his efforts and for the overview reflecting the contributions made by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , as well as the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee .
In its communication the Commission proposes three strands of action to further improve operation of the labour markets : firstly removing skills barriers and tackling skills gaps , secondly removing barriers to mobility , and thirdly improving information and transparency .
The High-Level Task Force on Skills and Mobility , which was set up on a proposal from the Commission following the Stockholm European Council , will soon recommend a set of additional policy initiatives at EU and national levels to open the new European labour markets to all by 2005 .
Its report will be submitted to the Commission in December this year , on the basis of which the Commission will present an action plan to the Barcelona Council in spring 2002 .
The rapporteur met the chairman and members of the task force at their most recent meeting , when Parliament 's draft opinion had already been forwarded to the task force .
It provided a timely opportunity for the task force to take account of your draft report in its deliberations .
The action plan will propose a set of policy initiatives , taking the form of a framework for action , to be transposed into more concrete legal texts , programmes or initiatives , in which not only the Member States , but also the social partners , regional and local authorities and other relevant organisations will be involved .
Let me now react more specifically to a number of the main points made by the rapporteur in his explanatory statement .
First of all , he suggests the effective involvement of the social partners in the representative bodies .
I agree that this is a positive feature of improving industrial relations , which would help the operation of the labour markets .
But we also have to bear in mind that the dynamics of the labour market should not reduce access to these for people who have until now been excluded from these new developments .
I share the objective of involving social partners more in the national action plans .
Secondly , he recommends the establishment of an agreement on the fiscal package to reduce disparities between Member States .
There are still important differences in the tax treatment of individuals and enterprises between the Member States , but it would go beyond the scope of the Commission 's action plan to present specific proposals in this area .
Thirdly , he also proposes greater regional and local participation in drafting the national action plans .
This proposal is to be welcomed , particularly since the employment guidelines specifically encourage this .
Fourthly , he recommends better access by local and regional bodies to research opportunities in the Sixth Framework Programme .
I recognise that improving the situation of disadvantaged regions and areas through research investment is part of the process of building up skills and human capital , which will help bring jobs to such regions .
Finally , he proposes the creation of a common legal base for the third - the non-profit - sector .
It seems to me that this requires more analysis and careful thought , in order to avoid putting unnecessary constraints on a sector which has an important potential for job creation .
To conclude , l should like to thank Parliament once again for this report , for its input into the Commission 's Action Plan , and for its support for further opening up of the European labour markets .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Language diversity
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
( B5-0537 / 01 ) by Eluned Morgan and Barbara O 'Toole , on behalf of the PSE Group , on minority languages .
( B5-0753 / 01 ) by Eurig Wyn and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group on language diversity .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that you have changed the title of this debate : it is about regional and lesser-used languages .
I welcome the fact that we are discussing this at all .
This is the first time in eight years that lesser-used languages have been discussed in this House .
It is appropriate that we discuss it now at the end of the European Year of Languages .
The fact that we have not discussed this reflects the problems that are faced by lesser-used language communities in terms of their relationship with the EU .
The legal base of the budget line is being challenged by the Council .
We have put money on this line this year and we expect the Commission to spend that money .
We do not want any legal wranglings about that .
I hope that Members will vote on the amendments we have also put forward to the joint resolution .
We are asking for a programme to follow up the European Year of Languages where we would also hope to see earmarking for lesser-used languages .
We also want to see earmarking money for lesser-used languages within relevant existing programmes .
This would formalise the procedure which already exists for example in the structural funds where structural funds are used to prop up lesser-used languages in some areas .
It would simply formalise that procedure .
We also want to see culture on a majority voting basis within the Council so that the Commission can present a programme specifically on lesser-used languages which I know the Commission has already .
These are not radical proposals .
I do not know why some Groups are resisting this and not supporting the 40 million people within the EU who speak lesser-used languages .
But I hope this will be a first step and we will see an own-initiative report on this in future .
I wish you : Nadolig Llawen a Blwyddyn Newydd Dda - a Happy Christmas and a Happy New Year .
Mr President , as my colleague Mrs Morgan has stressed , more than 40 million European citizens speak autochthonous languages , other than the main official language of the state in which they live .
Languages are an integral part of Europe 's linguistic and cultural diversity .
They lie at the heart of the fundamental rights of its citizens and are a key factor in the creation of a peaceful and democratic Europe .
I welcome this long-awaited resolution and urge colleagues to support it as it will be an excellent platform for the future .
The European Year of Languages has been a successful year and it included many projects for Europe 's regional and lesser-used languages , contrary to the expectations of many of us .
The recent Council decision emphasises that , ' all European languages are equal in value and dignity from the cultural point of view ' .
Although the Council 's decision does not refer specifically to regional and lesser-used languages , it does not exclude them either .
This is why I particularly support the amendments referring to the mainstreaming of programmes and I am calling for support for a multiannual programme by 2003 .
This is a golden opportunity to direct this agenda for the future and in preparation for enlargement .
We must ensure that Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights is on the agenda of the next Intergovernmental Conference and that we also push for qualified majority voting in Council .
Let us work together to ensure that regional and lesser-used languages are here to stay and remain part of the culturally diverse Europe of the future .
Europe 's unique richness is its diversity .
Let us ensure that we all protect this .
Just a personal comment at the outset .
My spokesman does not speak Danish .
I do not have the option of having Danish as the working language in my cabinet .
The flow of work would simply choke .
I am not speaking Danish here today - that is not an option really .
I would have to do the translation on my way to the Chamber , having got the material the same day .
I could , but honestly , in my personal opinion , if we are serious about European integration , we have to be prepared to swallow our pride occasionally in order to do things in an effective manner .
The theme of this discussion , in my view , is different .
It has to do with stimulating the diversity that exists out there , and that is , in fact , another discussion .
Here , the Year of Languages is drawing to a close , but it is not quite over yet and many activities are still in progress .
Of the 200-odd projects that are co-financed by the Commission , most are still running and many events will take place throughout Europe in the remaining weeks of the year .
The evaluation of the Year will get under way this month .
The Commission considers that the end of 2001 should not be the end of the European Year of Languages initiative .
A report will be presented to the other European Institutions by 31 December 2002 at the latest , in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of Decision No 1934 / 2000 / EC establishing the European Year of Languages 2001 .
Furthermore , on 29 November of this year , the Council adopted an important resolution on the promotion of linguistic diversity and language learning .
It invites the Commission to present proposals for actions to promote linguistic diversity and language learning by early 2003 .
Linguistic diversity is a defining characteristic of the European Union , and regional and minority languages , alongside the many other languages used in Europe are a key feature of it .
Regional and minority languages will therefore be taken into account both in the report that the Commission will present to the other institutions in the course of 2002 and in the proposals for actions to be presented in 2003 .
However , it is still too early to say what specific actions will be taken in this domain .
As stated in Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Union respects cultural , religious and linguistic diversity in its various programmes and activities .
Many , like Socrates , Leonardo da Vinci , Culture 2000 , Media Plus , e-Content or the European Regional Development Fund , are already providing funding opportunities for regional and minority languages and cultures .
We support these efforts which have to have a very broad aim in order to have the effect we intended .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome today 's debate .
I am delighted that we are holding it at the end of the European Year of Languages , because we have tried several times during the course of this year to persuade the Commission to do something about lesser-used languages .
The Commission 's standard response has been that it was not doing anything because it wanted to devise a special programme next year .
Now we hear that the Commission does not intend to do anything about lesser-used languages .
In this respect I am glad that this question is on today 's agenda .
I am sorry that some joker has taken the liberty of changing the title of the resolution .
We are not talking about language diversity , we are talking about the lesser-used languages , which is why I am also rather sorry , Commissioner Nielson , that you chose not to honour a lesser-used language by speaking Danish .
It is not a question of pride , it is a question of respect for the diversity of European languages , of which Danish is one .
I am all for talking about it , I am all for talking more about it , I am all for the Commission 's doing something about it .
But I must say to you in all honesty that the text before us today has been thrown together , it is slapdash and flippant and I , for one , am not proud of it .
I am sorry , but it has to be said .
We could have done a much better job if we had had more time , which is why our group does not support all the proposed amendments .
I think that Article 3 is better than Amendment No 4 .
Why should I agree to your proposed amendment when our article in the resolution is better than your proposed amendment ?
We mean the same thing .
We just need less flippancy here .
On another question , all of us here in the House - including me personally - are in favour of qualified majority voting on cultural affairs .
But we should walk before we insist on running .
We can only run once we have learned to walk , which is why we must keep a sense of reason and hope that Laeken prompts something in the convention to bring this about .
Finally , I should like to say that we in the European People 's Party are ready to suggest an own initiative report on lesser-used languages at the next meeting of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
This will allow all those who have spoken so fulsomely in favour today to put their money where their mouth is .
I for one would be delighted if we dumped this resolution today because it is not as good as an own initiative report could be .
I assume that the Socialists will want no part of it , so we shall see how it all turns out .
But I should like to inform the House that we shall be putting in for a report .
Please tell your fellow members to vote with us then next year .
Mr President , the approval of the resolution on regional and minority languages will provide a fitting end to the European Year of Languages .
It is satisfying for me and for other Catalan Members : Obiols i Germà , Terrón i Cusí , Colom i Naval , Jové , Mayol , Gasòliba i Böhm and Ferrer .
It is very positive that a resolution is recognising the equal value and dignity of all European languages and urging the Commission and Council to act decisively in this field and to find a permanent legal basis .
We regret that our initial proposal , which called for full recognition , has not been accepted .
This resolution demonstrates an unacceptable situation : the fact that the European Union , which derives its wealth from its diversity , should have so many European languages seeking a legal basis in order to be supported is - I repeat - regrettable .
Yesterday , a report requested by the Research Directorate-General and presented to the Intergroup on minority languages reflected these difficulties .
My language , Catalan , is one of these languages .
It is the seventh language when compared to the eleven official languages and the ninth when compared to the 22 languages following enlargement .
A recent conversation I had with my friend and fellow MEP , Mr Sakellariou will demonstrate the situation .
I said to him : Jannis , the language you speak with your parents - Greek - can be spoken in this House ; the language you use with your countrymen - German - can be used in this House ; the one you use with your wife - Spanish - can be used in this House .

The language I use with my parents , in my work and my life and which I use with my wife not only cannot be used in this House , but we are seeking a legal basis so that it can be supported .
You will understand that my only objective here is the recognition of Catalan as an official language of the European Union .
This hope is better expressed by my friend , the poet Jordi Gabarró .
He says in Catalan : " Demà , en un futur de convivència , la raó ha de guanyar " . In English : " Tomorrow , in a future of coexistence , reason must prevail " .
Mr President , Commissioner , when this House debated language diversity and lesser-used languages for the first time at the beginning of the 1980s , your predecessor , Commissioner Nielson , said a few sentences in Welsh and , although we did not understand a word , we rejoiced in this declaration of the cultural diversity of Europe .
In this respect , I should like to say to you that our vision of Europe is not a technocratic , bureaucratic or economic project ; for us , Europe is , first and foremost , a cultural project , the language diversity of which deserves to be safeguarded .
That includes your mother tongue , Mr President , the English language , because we need to guard against a standard global language which , if it were to be called English , would be an insult to Shakespeare .
Even the main languages of the European Union , such as French , which is also one of the UN official languages , Spanish , which is one of the up-and-coming world languages and was officially used for the first time in the American electoral campaign and will soon become the second language of the USA , and German , which is the mother tongue of the majority of the inhabitants of the EU , are now minority languages .
Our former fellow member Siegbert Alber once said that in Europe we are all minorities .
But our main concern is - of course - to safeguard the lesser-used languages which are official languages but , more to the point , to safeguard the languages which are the subject of today 's debate , namely the lesser-used languages which are not official languages of the EU , but which need our massive support .
Unfortunately , we cannot even introduce them as official languages in our committees .
That would probably be asking too much .
But we must do all we can to safeguard the regional and lesser-used languages of the European Union .
Because , taken together , the people who make up national minorities are already the second largest nationality in today 's European Union - never mind tomorrow 's - after the Germans and before the French .
That gives you an idea of the quantitative dimension of this issue , and if you then look at the qualitative dimension of the nationality problems in the Balkans and elsewhere , then minorities are obviously set to become either the mortar or the explosive in the foundations of Europe .
We are fighting for them to become the mortar of Europe , which is why we support the lesser-used languages .
Mr President , thank you for the debate , to which I listened with great interest .
I do not , however , think I need add anything else , irrespective of which language I might wish to use .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.50 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

Vote
We will now proceed to the vote .
The next item is the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
During the vote on Amendment No 2 to the joint resolution on Immigration in Ireland :
Mr President , I want to remove the second part of the amendment because apparently a lot of people would support the first part , but not the second part .
To make it easier for people to support it we have removed the second part .
Mr President , I fully support our friend 's request , given that if we put the amendment to the vote as it stands some Members may well abstain , and this is after all a very important matter .
If then it is necessary actually to delete the second part we will do so .
It is a pity , but that is the way it is .
In any case , I should like to thank you for your proposal .
Report ( A5-0426 / 2001 ) by Pat the Cope Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for in the Agreement on cooperation in the sea fisheries sector between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the period 1 August 2001 to 31 July 2006 ( COM ( 2001 ) 590 - C5-0555 / 2001 - 2001 / 0246 ( CNS ) ) .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0405 / 2001 ) by Patricia McKenna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the role of flags of convenience in the fisheries sector ( 2000 / 2302 ( INI ) ) .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0381 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission report on the implementation of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1221 / 97 laying down general rules for the application of measures to improve the production and marketing of honey ( COM ( 2001 ) 70 - C5-0398 / 2001 - 2001 / 2156 ( COS ) ) .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0375 / 2001 ) by Mauro Nobilia , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication on New European Labour Markets , Open to All , with Access for All ( COM ( 2001 ) 116 - C5-0188 / 2001 - 2001 / 2084 ( COS ) .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
We now come to the vote on the joint resolution on linguistic diversity .
The title is not correct .
It should be a resolution on regional and lesser-used languages and I hope that this will be corrected .
If the title is going to be changed , then let us do it properly .
It should read " the lesser-used languages in the European Union " . European languages , not any old languages !
I do not agree .
There are languages which are not spoken by many people but which are nevertheless national languages , such as Luxemburgish .
This is not a minority language ; it may become one as a result of immigration , but it is not a minority language .
Admittedly it is not widely spoken , but this proposal is unacceptable .
Colleagues , we appear to have a difficulty .
The wording in the joint resolution , which was agreed by everybody who was party to the joint resolution , is regional and lesser-used languages . That is what is used throughout the document .
Mr President , lesser-used European languages is correct .
Is that acceptable to the House ?
Regional and lesser-used languages of the European Union .
Colleagues , the proposal now is " regional and lesser-used languages in the European Union " .
Mr President , forgive me but , initially , in the meetings aimed at reaching a consensus , the title we agreed on was ' regional and lesser-used ' .
But furthermore , Mrs Pack , there is another problem with your proposal : if we only talk about the ' lesser-used ' , my language would simply not be included since it is not ' lesser-used ' , but regional .
Therefore , firstly , that is what we agreed on , and secondly , to be precise , we must say ' regional and least-used ' because that is what we are talking about .
There is no other option .
Mr Esteven , we do have the word " regional " right at the beginning .
I want the original version with ' European ' in between - regional and lesser-used European languages .
' Regional and lesser-used European languages ' .
Is that acceptable ?
Mr President , I should like to put another oral amendment to the vote , which needs to be voted on first .
Recital C in the German version reads : " Whereas 14 million Union citizens regularly use a regional or lesser-used language and whereas there are more than 60 linguistic communities in Europe . "
This should read " in the Union " , not " in Europe " .
In Europe there are about 300 .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution ) President .
That concludes the vote .
- McKenna report ( A5-0405 / 2001 )
Mr President , perhaps Mrs McKenna will be worried if I say that as my name is Fatuzzo I cannot help mentioning the austromerluzzo , the toothfish , which is the victim of illegal fishing under flags of convenience in the seas of Patagonia .
To save her from worrying I shall say that I voted in favour .
I think , however , it is time the Galileo project was approved , through which it will be possible to see from satellites where the illegal fishing vessels are , when they increase in weight from their cargo , and therefore when and where they carried out the illegal fishing .
In this way it really will be possible to control the phenomenon .
Gallagher report ( A5-0426 / 2001 )
Mr President , on page 15 of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets we read that appropriations of EUR 86 million are being devoted to assistance for Mauritania : assistance for research , for fisheries , for developing statistics , for rescue services at sea , for fishing licences , for the costs of organising seminars and meetings , for the development of regional fishing ; but I do not , Mr President , see any entry with the title ' assistance to the pensioners of Mauritania , assistance for speeding up the payment of contributions and for having occupational pensions for fishermen ' .
I did vote for this document , but I hope that when we next vote on provisions for Mauritania , there will also be assistance provided for the pensioners of that country .
- ( PT ) I would like to express my support for the new fisheries protocol concluded between the European Community and Mauritania for the period 1 August 2001 to 31 July 2006 , which I deem of vital importance to the European Community , not only because of the fishing opportunities it offers and the sums involved , but mainly for socio-economic reasons , since it enables a large number of vessels operating in Moroccan waters to move to new fishing grounds .
I would like to congratulate Mr Gallagher , the rapporteur , on his work .
I support the conclusions set out in the report in the explanatory statement .
Lastly , with regard to Amendment No 4 ( Article 3b ) , I would like to point out that the Council only grants a negotiating mandate to the Commission for the purpose of concluding new fisheries agreements and not for the renewal of implementation protocols , since the latter do not alter the substance of the framework agreement .
I also advocate the redrafting of the rapporteur ' s proposal in order to make it consistent with Community law in force on this subject .
Nobilia report ( A5-0375 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the report by Mr Nobilia , which is concerned with increasing employment in Europe .
How could I not have done so ?
I must stress , however , that to achieve this result it would be important to set up a single European Internet site that gathered together all job requests and offers from all 15 States in the Union .
It would be essential to have a single European second language , because one cannot move about in the European Union without knowing at least one language in common with all other Europeans , in addition to one ' s own language , and lastly one cannot move freely if there is not a single European pension .
You cannot have 15 different pension contributions , paid by 15 different European countries if you have worked in all 15 Member States .
We must have a single European pension .
- UK Conservatives welcome the principle of labour markets being open to all , with access to all , as central to the Single Market .
However , we have voted against paragraph 15 of the Nobilia report , as the idea of setting up a European framework of incomes policy and social security cuts directly into Member States ' competences .
We have encouraged colleagues from other parties and groups to follow our lead in rejecting this particular suggestion while supporting the report overall .
Lulling report ( A5-0381 / 2001 )
Mrs Lulling , what can be sweeter than honey ?
What can be more nutritious than honey ?
There must be a reason for saying ' honeymoon ' !
Mrs Lulling , honey is also the nectar of the gods .
When climbing Mount Olympus I stopped to taste the Olympian honey , the honey of the gods of Greece .
How , then , could anyone vote against this document , which seeks to improve the production of honey in Europe and help beekeepers produce larger and more profitable quantities of this nectar of the gods ?
I hope that next year , before we come back to this House , all of we Members will be supplied with just the right amount to keep our brains fresher and our bodies in better condition for the long hours of voting and also Mr Fatuzzo ' s further explanations of vote .
Finally , a merry Christmas and a happy New Year to the interpreters , to all those who work longer hours because of my explanations of vote , and to you , Mr President , in particular .
Resolution on linguistic diversity
Mr President , I just wanted to say that , like my fellow Member Bernd Posselt , I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution out of conviction .
We also took the view that this motion for a resolution and this resolution could have been formulated in rounder , more comprehensive terms , with a broader platform , and we are sorry that this was not the case .
Nonetheless , it is a step in the right direction and we hope that the plenary sittings and the committee responsible will not just discuss the issue of lesser-used languages , regional languages and minority languages in the Year of Languages , but will take a specific , targeted and positive approach to this problem in general , so that the problems which have arisen in the past from majorities or minorities remain a thing of the past and positive solutions to these problems can be found .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Adjournment of the session
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament and wish you all a happy Christmas .
( The sitting was closed at 6.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday 13 December 2001 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I have a question concerning the complete report of the meetings : last Wednesday evening Vice-President Onesta announced that a vote would be held on Thursday morning on an urgent debate on the European arrest warrant .
However , on Thursday morning , Mr Watson , chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , asked the plenary meeting to vote on an urgent debate on - I quote now from the complete report - " two framework decisions from the Council , one on combating terrorism , the other on a proposal for a European arrest warrant " .
Confusion abounds .
It proves in particular that last Thursday ' s decision was taken too hastily and carelessly .
Can you explain to me , on the basis of the complete report of the meetings , on which topics precisely we are to hold an urgent debate ?
And since we are on the subject of clarification , can you also assure me that the text on the European arrest warrant on which we could submit amendments up to 4 p.m. last Thursday is still the same text and was not changed last weekend ?
If that were the case , we would again be making incredible fools of ourselves today .
In answer to your question , Mrs Buitenweg , the subject is solely the European arrest warrant .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Announcement by the President
As you know , this is practically the last time that I will have the honour of presiding over this House .
I am pleased to be able to do so on the occasion of this Conference of Presidents , where Mr Verhofstadt , the President-in-Office of the Council , will give us his account of the Laeken Summit and of a Belgian Presidency that has been particularly outstanding .
I am not going to make a speech .
I would just like to say a few words to once again sincerely thank you for the confidence you placed in me when , on 20 July 1999 , you elected me President of the European Parliament .
I took on this role with determination , with passion and with an overriding desire to accurately reflect the beliefs and the positions of the majority in this House to the greatest extent possible .
In this regard , I would like to tell you that I have always been able to feel proud of the European Parliament .
If I may , I would like to thank in particular the Secretary-General , Mr Julian Priestley , and all those working here who have helped me with their extraordinary degree of motivation and friendship .
I thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for the unfaltering support you have given me , and I would hope that my successor can enjoy a Presidency that is as active and happy as that I have had the fortune to experience myself .
( Loud applause ) Ladies and Gentlemen , thank you , from the bottom of my heart .
( The House gave the President a standing ovation )
Madam President , allow me first and foremost , in my role as President-in-Office of the European Council , to show my gratitude , and also my admiration , for your Presidency .
Under your guidance , the European Parliament has accomplished an impressive political and legislative career .
You yourself have carried out the work of a pioneer , both externally and in the EU itself .
Well before the start of the crisis in Afghanistan , you drew our attention to this issue , and you had already embarked upon the fight for the improvement of the situation of women in this country .
Your role in the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights should not be underestimated , and this is an issue of relevance to all European citizens .
At Laeken , we once again used the model for a Convention of which you , personally , were one of the architects .
In many respects , you have prepared the European Parliament for the new phase that is opening up in inter-institutional relations .
Lastly , I would also like thank you most warmly for the excellent degree of cooperation that has been apparent between Parliament and the Council during both our Presidencies .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , I too would like to express my deepest admiration for your work and my sincerest appreciation of the results achieved during your term as President of the European Parliament .
These have been extremely important years which have seen the launching of the key debates for the future of the Union .
You have played an extremely active , diligent and committed part in all this , constantly remaining open to the demands of the European public and the needs of us all .
Both Parliament , therefore , as we have just seen , and the Commission too are grateful to you for your constant , effective endeavours .
At this time , I would like to make particular mention of your great sensitivity , evident in your constant rejection of any form of violence , especially terrorist violence .
Your speeches , Madam President , have been moderate in tone but clear and incisive in substance , and they have encouraged and sustained all the democratic Europeans in their fight for peaceful coexistence amongst their citizens .
I wish you every success in the future , which I am sure you will spend in the service of the European cause for which you have done so much in the past two and a half years .
Thank you , Madam President .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today is the day for saying some very , very warm words of thanks to our President , Nicole Fontaine , who is from our group , for discharging her duties over the last two and a half years - as she herself has just said - with such passion .
Madam President , you are one of a distinguished line which includes Louise Weiss and Simone Veil .
Louise Weiss , Simone Veil and Nicole Fontaine : these are three great Presidents of our European Parliament .
Today we ask ourselves the following question : what were the outstanding qualities of your Presidency ?
The first is that you have always put the concept of the Community , action by the European institutions , at the centre of your policy , and indeed you continue to do so ; this means first and foremost the European Parliament , which you - and this is my second comment - have consistently represented with great dignity , both in public and at the summits .
The fact that the Laeken photograph shows you between the King of Belgium and the President of the French Republic is testimony to your powers of persuasion .
Thirdly - and here you were an example amongst so few - you spoke out against any form of terrorism , obviously in particular against the terrorism in Spain , but also throughout the world .
Extending an invitation to Commander Massoud was one of your great decisions and in so doing you , as it were , anticipated subsequent events in Afghanistan .
That is why we have every reason to thank you so warmly today !
You were of course always a full Member of our group , even as President , but now , when you stand down as President in January , you will be coming back into the fold of our group and you will then take your seat alongside another former President of the European Parliament - whom we hold in equally high esteem - José María Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado .
We will be delighted to have you , as well as Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , working alongside us on a day-to-day basis .
We welcome you very warmly back into our group and we thank you most sincerely for your convincing work , our dear President , Nicole Fontaine .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost , I would like to say , dear Nicole , that I understand how you must be feeling today .
It is obvious that our political group , the Socialists , did not elect you to your post .
But today , in the name of this very political group , I would like to thank you for your Presidency ...
... and say that you are very welcome in our midst , for , at the end of the day , each and every one of us here is a European politician working for a noble cause which , today , is at an historical turning point .
I believe that , during your Presidency , you have , more than anything , shown a commitment to the cause of freedom and democracy , not only outside the EU but within the Union , and for this reason I would like to thank you .
On the other hand , this has already been said but it cannot be stressed enough , you have played a part in the fight for freedom and democracy versus terrorism , which at this present time is the global scourge .
And you have also fought to ensure the EU moves forward , and it is increasingly accepted that it should be equipped with the constituent process used in each of our countries , that is to say , a debate that is open and democratic .
I think we should also praise your support of the Convention as a method where the two pillars of democratic legitimacy are combined . Thank you for this .
Regarding the issues on which our opinions differ , Madam President , you have always had the courage of your convictions .
We , on the other hand , have had the courage of ours .
But in any case , I think that this has also helped in advancing the cause which unites us in this House , the fight for democracy , for a European Union that is democratic , that represents not only our peoples but also our citizens .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
( Applause )
Madam President , dear Nicole , my Group supported you at the outset .
We were proud to do so then and I am proud today after your record in office of two and a half years .
You have been an outstanding representative of this House who has earned the thanks and support of everyone here .
You took over at a very difficult period when relations had been fractured between the two key institutions of the Union , the Commission and the Parliament .
I believe you have succeeded in restoring an effective and substantial working relationship which is so necessary at the heart of a proper functioning Community method .
I thank you for doing that .
It was a strategic act of considerable European importance , not just European Parliamentary importance .
There have been impressive improvements under your Presidency in our work rate with regard to co-legislation and that is due to good management of our agenda .
You have been an impressive defender and promoter of the Charter on Fundamental Rights and we salute you for that .
You have brought a very special conviction to the fight against terrorism and in doing so you have brought dignity to the democratic purpose of this House .
You strongly promoted the case for a Convention .
One year ago , 11 months ago , 10 months ago - yours was an isolated voice .
Today your voice is the common currency and we salute you for that .
There have been controversies during your Presidency and I agree with Enrique Barón Crespo that you indeed had the courage of your convictions .
For my part I have always believed that you acted in those controversies without fear or favour .
That for me is a measure of the enormous personal integrity and strength which you have brought to your task .
Of course as a woman you have brought not just the quality of being female but also femininity to this task .
You represented that large section of our community in Europe which is so inadequately represented , not just in electoral politics , but in so many spheres of public administration and public life .
Thank you for what you have done for this Parliament .
Thank you for the strength and for the élan feminin which you have brought to your High Office and we wish you good luck and good fortune in the future .
Madam President , dear Nicole , I would also like to thank you on behalf of my Group for the work you have done over the last two and a half years .
In particular , I would very much like to say that our Group has been truly proud of you every time you have stood up for human rights in the world .
You always immediately took a stance in situations in which people ' s lives were under threat .
I remember that case in which Ghanaian children died in the hold of an aircraft .
They sent a message to Europe which said how difficult the situation in Ghana was .
You showed no hesitation in promptly adopting a position on the matter .
You also invited Commander Massoud to Parliament last spring , just as if you had foreseen what was coming , and you boldly appeared in public beside him .
I am quite sure you also jeopardised your own personal safety on many an occasion in this way , and it is for this kind of courage that I wish to express my sincerest thanks .
The European Parliament , which has always been keen to act as the European Union ' s moral conscience , has actually managed to acquire a human face during your term of office , and that face has been yours , for which I thank you .
You have also bravely reflected the majority view in this Parliament in situations in which that has not been very easy .
I remember when we were discussing here Austria ' s new government : you put in words what the majority in this Parliament felt , that our hearts were not entirely in it .
That cannot have been easy for you either .
But now things are changing , there are going to be new faces , and I want to wish you all the very best for the future .
Perhaps , as someone in my Group has already called out , you would have been a sparkling presence in the newly set up Convention .
You are just the sort of person I would have liked to see leading it .
At present I am not sure if I am happy about what has been done , but I wish you well in any case .
Madam President , it is no secret that neither my group , on the whole , nor myself , played a part in electing you two and a half years ago .
The reason for this is that , as far as we are concerned , for democracy to function properly , the pluralism characterising our societies must be properly expressed .
I am , however , speaking completely from the heart when I say that both my group and myself truly appreciate and have a great deal of respect for your Presidency .
You have given us proof of your impartiality , your respect for all political sensibilities , even minority opinions , and your ability to avoid political discrimination .
This has not always been the case in this Parliament .
Your attitude in this regard is worthy of a special mention .
You have also been able to adopt difficult positions , for which you deserve credit , when the fundamental values upon which the European Union is founded have been called into question .
A great deal of courage was required to adopt such positions , which you proved to have .
Although , generally speaking , we have not always supported your public statements , because they put forward the majority view of Parliament , which , unfortunately , on too many occasions is so different from our own , you have nevertheless been able to give a dignified image of Parliament .
One of the highlights of your Presidency has to be the outstanding Sakharov prize ceremony that you so wanted and that you were able to expand on through your wise words in your speech at the Laeken European Council .
For all of this , and for the excellent degree of cooperation between us , thank you very much !
Madam President , I too would very much like , on behalf of my Group , to thank you for the very great work you have put in on behalf of the European Parliament over the last two and half years , which have coincided with major political developments , particularly since September last .
I totally agree with all the very many well-deserved , fine compliments which have been paid to you by the leaders of the other Groups here today .
The Presidency of the European Parliament has to reflect the views of all its Members and I am more than satisfied that you , Mrs Fontaine , have worked exceptionally hard during your term of office to ensure that all our views were represented on the many occasions on which you had to fulfil this responsibility .
I would like to wish you well for the future .
You have represented us all with very great dignity and at all times showed great respect for all the Members of this Parliament .
You have spoken out clearly on our behalf when clear statements were needed on the fight against terrorism and the protection of human rights .
This is an area of major importance for this Parliament and an area in which we are gaining international respect .
It was a pleasure and a privilege having you as our President for the last two and half years and for me personally , as someone who supported you unequivocally on the important day at the beginning of your term of Presidency , I am very happy to say that you have succeeded beyond all my hopes and expectations .
Madam President , the majority of my group were involved in securing your election in 1999 .
I recommended you and also voted personally for you , because I thought it important to break with ten years of cartel agreements between the two largest groups .
Previously , the post alternated between the two large groups , and within the large groups it alternated between the largest sub-groups .
If there were a qualified candidate from a smaller group - from the independents or from the smaller sub-groups in one of the large groups - the person concerned would have no chance of being elected .
It was also an outstanding Vice-President who could conduct the very difficult votes to the satisfaction of all MEPs .
In my speech of recommendation , I looked forward to your being a fair representative of us all and , with the open election campaign we now have between Mr Cox and Mr Martin and the three other candidates , the break with the cartels of the past has been confirmed .
The break with the major coalition has also made for a very good atmosphere in the Conference of Presidents .
Now , all the chairpersons have the same opportunity to present their arguments .
Agreement and disagreement cross political divides .
No one knows the outcome of meetings before they have been held .
In the past , your predecessors could look at Mrs Martens from the Group of the European People ' s Party and Mrs Green from the Group of the Party of European Socialists and , if these people looked down , the proposal was abandoned and , if they looked up , it was adopted .
The cartel was so far-reaching that , on one particular occasion , it led to the appointment of an official to Parliament in opposition to the consensus reached by the group chairpersons .
The person concerned was only elected because it was a particular sub-group ' s turn to be given a titbit in terms of the administration of Parliament .
This happened even though Mrs Green was on that occasion opposed to the election of this person and then had nonetheless to vote in favour of it .
I should like to thank you for your cooperation in the far more open period that has just gone by .
It is by setting good examples that we can help ensure a Parliament in which the best candidate for each post always has at least a fair chance of being elected or appointed .
May I also thank you personally , Madam President , for your resolute efforts on behalf of human rights on every occasion on which these have been an issue .
Thank you , and good luck in your next job .
Madam President , if pluralism characterises a democracy , the small troupe of Non-attached Members is certainly the quintessential element of this democracy .
This is a group of variable geometry , composed of strong individuals with strong opinions , which very often are completely different to one another , to the extent that they are often in total opposition .
I will therefore not be so audacious as to express my opinions other than on my own behalf .
But I would like to think that my choice of words will be shared and accepted by each of these Members .
I think that your Presidency has been characterised by a great deal of elegance .
In my opinion , this is a virtue that is becoming so rare , particularly in political circles , that it deserves special mention .
Your Presidency has been characterised by elegance , by the dignity that you have managed to maintain at all times , on your personal behalf and for this Parliament that you represent .
It has also been characterised by an independence of spirit , the concern expressed by you that some would possibly say has not been felt in all areas , but which has in any case , in my opinion , been expressed with a great deal of sincerity . You also have the ability to detach yourself , in your role as President , from any political in-fighting , to detach yourself from the concerns arising from your own personal convictions to respect those of others .
For these great virtues you have displayed , Madam President , I would like to thank and congratulate you .
Thank you , Mrs Garaud .
The very least that I can say is that I am deeply touched and indeed moved by what you have just said .
I do not want to add anything else .
Thank you once again from the bottom of my heart for your friendship and for these words of support .
This Parliament is extraordinary , and I think that it will always have a special place in our hearts .
European Council / Belgian Presidency
The next item is the joint debate on the European Council report and the Commission statement on the European Council meeting of 14 and 15 December in Laeken , and the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the Belgian Presidency .
Mr Verhofstadt , thank you very much for your marvellous speech .
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly honoured to be taking part in this debate , just after the Laeken Summit .
At Laeken , we took a great step forwards towards the kind of Europe we want : a more democratic , more open Europe with which our citizens are , at last , starting to identify fully .
I would like to start by paying tribute to the Belgian Presidency of the Council for the way it has managed the work during this second half of the year , particularly the work which led to the Laeken Declaration .
Laeken launched a new constitutional phase in European integration , one in which this House and the national parliaments will be able to play a key role .
Indeed , the new process will be open and transparent and will help to give our fellow citizens a better grasp of the key issues being debated in Europe today .
From the point of view of enlargement and globalisation , the stakes are very high .
I see the path mapped out at Laeken as the only way of ensuring democratic legitimacy , ensuring that the Union can pursue integration and enlargement without the danger of its citizens subsequently rejecting the solutions adopted by their governments .
The enlargement of the European Union is an irreversible process that is already well advanced .
Indeed , we must not forget that this is one of the main reasons why we need the Convention .
Without institutional change , the enlarged Union would simply be unable to function .
Without open discussion , we would be in danger of losing the support of the citizens of the Union and the candidate countries .
Furthermore , we must not underestimate the importance of the candidate countries being involved for the first time in an institutional process that has constitutional implications .
It is their future , as well as the future of the existing fifteen Member States , that is being decided here .
The achievements of the Laeken European Council go beyond launching the Convention , however .
The events of 11 September were a reminder of what those who want to abuse and destroy freedom can do , and the Council ' s endorsement of our activities in the field of home affairs will help us to achieve our aim of building an area of freedom , security and justice in the European Union .
Work on defining a common asylum and immigration policy has received fresh impetus .
The European Council has called for the Commission ' s communication on illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings to serve as the basis for an action plan .
In this context , as I proposed in my recent speech in Bruges , the European Council has asked the Council and the Commission to explore ways of enabling those that guard the Union ' s external borders to cooperate effectively , and to look into the possibility of setting up a common mechanism or border-control service .
I regret that the Laeken Council was unable to go further in settling the issue of the future European agencies .
This is not a disaster , let us be clear about that - I too agree with what Prime Minister Verhofstadt has said - but , as we have been on other occasions , we are forced to note that the unanimity rule really is an obstacle to decision-making .
One thing must be clear from now on .
The ' Community method ' has enabled the Union to become what it is : a union of peoples and a union of States , requiring an innovative decision-making structure with common institutions and a single voice representing all the countries , both large and small .
The ' Community method ' has served to promote efficiency and democratic legitimacy .
Our task is merely to adapt and strengthen it . This is not just in order to avoid losing public support : it is also ensure that our actions are effective .
Our fellow citizens have had enough of this sort of horse-trading .
They are more interested in whether the much-heralded European Food Safety Authority is actually up and running than in where it is located .
I can therefore confirm that , as of 1 January 2002 , the Authority will start work at its temporary - and I stress ' temporary ' - headquarters in Brussels .
Europe ' s citizens cannot wait any longer for us to set up a body dedicated to protecting their health .
In this connection , the Commission will continue to attach great importance to its relations with Parliament .
We have improved our procedures and our working methods , but recent weeks have shown that this process of building relationships and establishing procedures has not yet allowed us to achieve the aims we all set ourselves .
We must work together to achieve them speedily and make total synergy between Commission and Parliament the basis of the second half of our term of office .
The goal we set ourselves at Lisbon in March 2000 was to make the Union the world ' s most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy within ten years .
At the same time , we committed ourselves to making Europe a fairer society which is attentive to the needs of all .
I am delighted that the Laeken Council agreed to give these objectives priority status .
Barcelona will therefore have to represent a significant and irreversible step forwards in consolidating and developing the European social model , but we shall return to this subject during the run-up to the Summit .
The European Council has once again confirmed that the Galileo satellite navigation project is strategically important and a potential catalyst for innovation and competitiveness .
It could hardly have done otherwise given that , just a month ago , the member States of the European Space Agency - 13 out of 15 of which are also Member States of the European Union - committed EUR 550 million to this project .
Any other decision would have given a conflicting signal regarding the project , which is vital for our future and our independence .
The European Council has set out clear dates and objectives for the first half of 2002 : now it is time to move ahead without further delay .
Our credibility and the credibility of the Council and Parliament depend on it .
The Commission is therefore ready to help ensure that the commitments made are fulfilled and to move on to the practical implementation of the project , taking into account all its technical and financial aspects .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Convention must deliver what is expected of it and bring about a change that will enable us to face a difficult , complex future with confidence .
Its task will not be to reinvent the Union or call into question the ' acquis communautaire ' , but rather to chart a course which will enable the Union , including its new Members after enlargement , to move ahead with political , social and economic integration .
The Convention approach is a deliberate break with the past .
Our aim is to have it draw on the ideas and experience of the many , not the few .
Our aim is for it to conduct its business in the clear light of day rather than behind closed doors .
Within the Convention , the Commission will act as Guardian of the Treaties and promoter of the Community spirit .
Equality between all the Member States and a balance between the Union ' s institutions are the best guarantee of a fair , efficient Europe Moreover , the latest Eurobarometer indication is actually that the European citizens appear to be drawing closer to Europe and its institutions even more quickly than we might have imagined .
In 2004 at the latest , but probably before that date , the Convention ' s contributions will be put to the test at an Intergovernmental Conference , after which the citizens of old and new Member States will elect representatives to this House .
We must start to prepare now for these major , important events .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , there is a good atmosphere in today 's sitting , which is fitting in this pre-Christmas season .
We have thanked our President , but we must also warmly thank the Council Presidency , and here first and foremost Mr Verhofstadt , the Prime Minister , for the success which you , which Europe , and all of us , achieved in Laeken with the adoption of the Laeken Declaration .
Mr President-in-Office , you - and the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Michel , whom I should like to include in these words of thanks - have acted in the best Belgian tradition , as your predecessors - Leo Tindemans , who will be 80 years old in just a few months ' time , Wilfried Martens , the President of the European People 's Party , and Jean-Luc Dehaene - also consistently did : with commitment , conviction and in the European spirit .
This is also an example of how the government of a so-called smaller country can sometimes operate far more effectively and move Europe much further forward than so-called larger countries always claim to be capable of doing .
That is why I should like to thank you most sincerely .
I should like to limit my comments to the Laeken Declaration , because many colleagues from our group will be addressing the other issues . Laeken is a great personal success for you , Prime Minister , and we very much welcome this .
I should , however , also like to thank the Commission very much .
After all , from time to time we do also express criticism of the Commission , even if it considers this to be unjustified .
The President of the Commission , Romano Prodi , with the Member of the Commission responsible for reforming the European Union , Michel Barnier , at his side , have not only constantly monitored our progress along the road to reform , they have also trodden the road with us .
It was our party , the European People 's Party , which proposed at its Congress in Berlin as early as January that a Convention be convened .
We are glad that this is the position of the European Parliament as a whole and also that of the most important institutions .
What is most significant , in my view , is our new working method , the fact that the reform of the European Union is being made into a parliamentary process .
A majority of the Convention are members of parliament , and we hope that this will also mean that the media will contribute to actually making our work public , because it is all very well to hold public meetings , but this is not of course sufficient on its own ; it is only effective if the media cover these meetings so that the public has access to them , and this is a request which we wish to make of the media today .
There has been some debate over this tripartite chairmanship which has been created for the Convention .
May I say , Mr President-in-Office , that I consider this to be a very wise move .
Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing was of course not only the French President , he was also a Member of the European Parliament , and in the end a Member of our group .
At one time he was a Member of the Liberal Group but he subsequently came to us , which was of course a step up , ...
( Laughter )
... and above all he did something which does not come at all easily to a former French President ; he wrote a report on subsidiarity .
I say to you : it is better to have a chairman who is a little advanced in age and who has an alert , keen mind and an open European heart , than a young chairman who is a Euro-sceptic !
That is why I think that this appointment , complemented by the appointments of Jean-Luc Dehaene , with whom we as a group have excellent relations , and also Giuliano Amato , who is a proven European , is a very sound one .
There will be nine further members of the praesidium and I would have thought that the two European Parliament representatives would be drawn from the two large groups .
It is precisely because this will probably be the case that I firmly believe that it would provide a good counterbalance if the next President of the European Parliament were to come from a smaller group , and that is why our group will be giving its full support to Pat Cox , the Chairman of the Liberal Group .
( Laughter and applause from the right , protests and heckling from the left ) Ladies and gentlemen , obviously this is still open for discussion and the final decision remains to be made , but I am fairly optimistic in this regard .
As far as content goes , Mr President-in-Office , I thought it was very astute of you to pose questions .
I do not wish to give our answers to these questions now .
Issues included strengthening Parliament , Parliament 's right of codecision , more openness , transparency in the Council of Ministers and obviously a role for the Commission which is based on the will of the electorate . This will all have to be negotiated .
Another crucial factor is how the work of the Convention is structured , and I think that with our 16 representatives we in the European Parliament have a tremendous opportunity to be , as it were , in the vanguard here .
I have just proposed to our group that our family of parties - I do not know how the other groups do this - meet together as a group , as befits a parliamentary process , that our Convention members from the EPP / ED Group and the members of the national parliaments meet together to do some preparatory work in an appropriate setting .
I would call on the fifteen governments to send their best people to the Convention .
These must not be people who think that they will be taking part in a seminar ; the governments need to be represented by personalities who also have the ear of their government .
If the Chairman , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , is supposed , pursuant to the Laeken Declaration , to report back to the Heads of State and Government at each summit , then it would only be sensible to introduce a similar reporting requirement for the national government representatives .
They should report back to their respective national governments , thus ensuring that the Convention does not work in isolation and that constant feedback is provided .
Whether this Laeken Declaration ultimately merits the epithet ' historic ' - it is a good start , but unless the working method proves to be effective the result will not be either - whether all of this is ultimately of historic significance will of course only be known once the result is on the table and the Heads of State and Government and their governments have adopted it .
I hope that their commitment to the process , as expressed through government representatives and parliamentary colleagues , whether from the European Parliament or national parliaments , is so strong that the result can also by and large be accepted .
If we achieve this together then this European Union , our venerable Europe , which will then be renewed , will be capable of acting both internally and externally ; it will be a democratic , convincing Europe which is representative of our values .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would firstly like to welcome the decision taken at the European summit in Laeken .
You have decided to cross the Rubicon by acknowledging that we are in the process of creating a constitution and that is a fundamental change which demonstrates that political alternation can generate new ideas and new proposals in Belgium as well .
I congratulate the Belgian Presidency on the perseverance it has shown in taking this step .
And furthermore , thanks to the efforts we have all made together , I believe that we have managed to make progress with the Convention , despite the significant reservations we had about it .
I believe that each and every one of us can take credit for the Convention .
Mr Poettering pointed out that the Convention was born under the German Presidency , at the Cologne Summit , but he forgot to mention that it was a Social Democrat / Green Presidency .
I believe that the joint efforts of all the European political forces are characterising this process , and this is reflected in the Lehne / Méndez de Vigo report .
I would like to acknowledge that our proposals have been heard ; firstly , with regard to the membership of the praesidium , or Bureau , there is parliamentary representation which is balanced , in terms of democratic legitimacy , with that of the Council - we must not forget this - and a solution has been found - I would say a Belgian solution - in the triumvirate they have created as well as the praesidium .

With regard to that praesidium , I must say that I have a high regard for Mr Giscard d 'Estaing ' s European credentials ; he was not our candidate , but , as well as President of France , he was also a good Member of the European Parliament , and I believe that what we must ask at this point , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is that we do not create a body separate from the praesidium , that is to say that we do not create a directorate of three set apart from the praesidium .
There must be a team of twelve that works together and that is the way to make progress .
We can all say that things have gone better for our friends , but what I do not understand , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , is why Mr Poettering , who is also my good friend , is determined to say that being liberal is a sort of apprenticeship for becoming a Christian Democrat .
I do not believe that Mr Cox is very happy with that view .
In any event , the important thing is that we are all prepared to work together in this process .
You have done something which I believe to be positive , and that is that with regard to the four issues raised in Nice , in Annex IV , Declaration 23 , you have posed 64 questions .
We have done our calculations and we make it 64 .
Some will be million euro - rather than dollar - questions .
There are some questions on relations between national and European parliaments which I do not believe are very well worded , but we will help you to correct them and , above all , the important thing is that a constructive momentum is being created for the Convention , which is something my group has been working for for some time .
We have seen this in the COSAC , and we are doing it as a political family so that there may be increasingly significant coordination between groups in Member States ' parliaments , in the parliaments of the candidate countries , which also have the right to express their opinion on what we are doing , and in our Parliament .
We have a great responsibility .
Otherwise , please allow me to make certain criticisms in relation to Laeken .
Progress has been made in terms of making the common foreign and security policy operative , and certain defence elements have even been raised .
The Minister , Mr Michel , was perhaps rather hasty in announcing it , but I believe that it is better to be hasty with regard to our responsibilities than to do nothing .
We must be able to take risks .
With regard to the agencies , the truth is that after a Beethovenesque symphony , in the words of my good friend Giuliano Amato , we have come up against a complete cacophony ; and there is another issue on which I agree with him , and that is that we cannot say that the future is going to be wonderful , when as soon as we stop discussing the future and deal with current issues , we end up in a catfight .
That is not acceptable and I must point out that Parliament , in the Whitehead report , withdrew its amendments because we were told that the problem was going to be resolved at Laeken , and it has not been resolved .
And I take good note of what was said by a liberal President-in-Office of the Council with regard to the Barcelona Summit : social cohesion , the defence of the European social model , the capacity for adaptation and dialogue with social partners ; I believe that that defines the route we must take .
Finally , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we must state here today that the Laeken declaration , which sets the objective of creating a European constitution , must be the beginning of a process and a momentum to which we must all be committed .
On behalf of my group , I can say that we are united and determined to cross the Rubicon with you , if we do so seriously and with a view to the future , for the sake of a united Europe .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking the Belgian Presidency and the Belgian Prime Minister for the degree of cooperation with the European Parliament .
While I have not checked the record , from my own memory I believe Prime Minister that you may have been here on the floor of this House more often than any of your predecessors in any previous Presidency .
That is a measure of the personal commitment which you have brought to dialogue with this House and democratic issues in Europe .
I salute and thank you for that .
There has also been a very dramatic change in the mood of this House between now and twelve months ago .
Twelve months ago we all approached the Nice event as an important and defining moment and we felt disappointed when it produced something which resulted in more complexity rather than less , was more incomprehensible to the public rather than less , and seemed to reflect more a sense of deal-making than a sense of ideals behind the European process .
At the end of this Presidency a balance has been restored and we should acknowledge that .
There has been an extraordinary change in mood .
The mood now is more upbeat and much of the thanks should go to you , Prime Minister Verhofstadt , and your colleagues in the Presidency .
One cannot of course confuse mood and substance and so we must now exploit that dynamic for the future through the Laeken Declaration and through the Convention .
The Laeken Declaration is indeed a defining moment for the Union and will be a durable measure of the quality of this Belgian Presidency .
The Convention method is a defining method .
Indeed , so many are so pleased with it that , like all successes , it now has many fathers and we all claim our share .
But so be it .
It is in the nature of success that we should all wish to celebrate it .
With regard to the Convention , we look forward to its inauguration in March 2002 and we take note positively of the Presidency of the Convention in the persons of Mr Giscard d ' Estaing and Mr Amato and Mr Dehaene and those others who will join them .
We have to ensure that this Convention , through its Bureau , works in a single and coherent way .
It is a vehicle for Europe , for neither more nor less .
I want to say to my good friend , Hans-Gert Poettering , that about 10 years ago the former President of the Liberal Group was looking for political asylum in this House and I want to thank my colleagues in the Christian Democrats , even before Tampere and the development of justice and home affairs , for offering asylum to that man .
He is a very capable European and I am sure in his hands that the Convention can make progress .
It is wonderful to feel , as the Prime Minister has already remarked , that there are no taboos .
At least with some of the concepts we have crossed an important bridge .
The willingness to contemplate a constitution for Europe , is necessary not just for reasons of simplicity but for reasons of stating and re-stating ideals , contemporary values , citizens ' rights , institutional balances , and creating the proper checks and balances .
We need this and I am glad that you found the courage and a consensus to build on .
September 11 was an extraordinary moment in your Presidency , a difficult challenge in terms of our common vulnerability and a recognition that non-Europe , or indeed transatlantic unilateralism , could not work .
It has been a tremendous success for all the institutions , led by the Belgian Presidency and the European Commission and with the willing contribution of this House , that we seized that moment and that we have understood that our common vulnerability can only be answered by common response .
All in all this is a Presidency worthy of the challenge of contemporary Europe and it is a Presidency , Mr Verhofstadt , which you and your colleagues can take great pride in .
We , as your Liberal Democrat colleagues in this House , also feel a great pride in your achievement .
We wish there were more people like you running states in Europe today .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I would like to echo the comments made by my fellow Members regarding the wonderful spirit of cooperation that you have fostered between the Council and Parliament over the last six months .
I shall now turn to the Laeken Declaration .
We cannot fail to acknowledge that the Laeken Declaration is an important step along the road towards a re-designed , more transparent , more comprehensible and more democratic European Union . I also believe that it will be more efficient and stronger at international level .
All these positive assessments are justified by the fact that a new dynamic has now been set in motion .
We have observed the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Treaty of Nice , which were major disappointments .
We now know that we have an opportunity to make a success of the new Intergovernmental Conference .
If we work hard at the forthcoming summit - and the spirit of a joint undertaking that you introduced shows great potential in my view - I believe that the Convention , its open mandate , the working method that will be adopted , and the personality of those who will represent us there will enable us to reach an outcome that is extremely positive for the European Union .
Therefore , do not spoil our fun , even though we could voice some misgivings about the lack of female representation , which I believe is extremely regrettable , in the triumvirate that will guide the Convention ' s work ,
even though it is regrettable that the European Parliament does not have sufficient representation , I think that , overall , we have a good starting point .
I would also like to thank you for all the effort that you have made in this area .
You mentioned your six-month Presidency .
I have , however , been a Member of the European Parliament for a number of years now , and I notice that all the presidencies are disappointed when they reach the end of their mandate , particularly in the second half of the year , because it is much shorter than the first due to holidays , and also because the Presidency does not do everything in the European Union - fortunately , that is .
The Presidency greatly depends on the good will of the other Member States ; it depends on the work of the Commission and Parliament .
Do not be overly disappointed .
Personally speaking , I am rather disappointed about some aspects , I have to say , but I think that even if the events of 11 September had not happened , you would not have been able to complete all your projects .
Having said that , the dramatic events of 11 September did happen .
And combating terrorism became a fundamental theme .
In this respect , I think that the prevention of terrorism is an area that we must consider extremely carefully and in which we must take action .
It is a matter of regret to me that the Council ' s final text does not send a message to the United States .
This is something I want to make very clear .
There is a positive message stating that ' we re-affirm our solidarity ' which is fine .
Perhaps , though , a more political message should have been added , to express our regret at the attitude of the American Government regarding two important aspects related to world peace and terrorism .
For example , I think that the withdrawal from the treaty on antiballistic missiles , announced by President Bush , is a serious political error that threatens world peace .
I also feel that blocking the Convention ' s work on banning bacteriological weapons in Geneva in November , because of the United States ' refusal to accept controls on their territory , is also a political error , and even a mistake .
I think that the European Union should send a message to the American Government to ask it to change its mind .
Lastly , I would like to mention two important meetings , because the day after tomorrow will be better than today , but before the day after tomorrow , we have to deal with tomorrow .
In particular , there is the Johannesburg conference next September , which will evaluate what has happened in the ten years since the Rio conference .
Ten years have passed - that we must realise , and all we need to do is to re-read the Commission ' s texts to convince ourselves that we - the rich , industrialised countries - have not succeeded in changing the way we produce or consume food so as to promote sustainability for the planet . We have not succeeded .
This means that strong initiatives must be taken in this area .
The Gothenburg Summit took place , which was promising , and there were several positive aspects , particularly Kyoto , which was saved thanks to the initiative of the Belgian Presidency and the European Commission , in spite of the negative attitude , once again , of the United States .
But the Kyoto protocol is no more than one tool of many , and is even a rather disappointing tool in terms of its initial ambitions . I do not think , however , that we will achieve the concrete results in Johannesburg that we will have obtained in the fight against the greenhouse effect , or in the protection of biodiversity .
There is a whole range of dossiers on which we have even regressed somewhat .
As for world poverty , you said yourself , Mr President , that the gap between the north and south has not diminished and instead has become even wider .
I therefore feel that we need to make a considerable effort in this area .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I have already had the opportunity to say that , in my view , the passion of any European politician should be , in the short term , to narrow the gulf of suspicion , if not distrust , which continues to grow between the citizens and the European institutions .
My group therefore welcomes anything that can help to open up our respective societies to the debate on the future of Europe .
This is why we sincerely appreciate the principle of the Convention , which is a departure from the typical intergovernmental behind closed doors meeting , as it involves European and national members of parliament in the preparatory work of the IGC , and allows representatives of candidate countries to participate . It is also open to contributions from social players .
Rest assured that we will urge our counterparts from civil society to work in a constructive and open manner in the new , European political forum .
Let us hope that those whose desire is to avoid tackling the disturbing issues that have surfaced in our societies will not be supported by the majority of the Convention .
A problem cannot be solved by ignoring its root cause .
That is why I thought the current state of affairs described in the draft declaration that Mr Verhofstadt submitted to the European Council was interesting , because it corresponds exactly with what our fellow citizens are experiencing , but the Fifteen unfortunately decided not to take it on board .
On the other hand , I regret that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council has not shown the same critical attitude when preparing the questions submitted for discussion .
Of course , the European Council did not find fault with any of this .
The two vice-chairs of my group , Mrs Kaufmann and Mrs Frahm , will speak again with regard to the specifically institutional aspects of the Laeken Summit .
As far as I am concerned , I would like to stress one single idea in relation to this .
If we genuinely wish , as the Declaration by the Fifteen stated , to use citizens ' expectations as the main theme of our imminent reflections , then , in my view , the debate cannot fail to include the institutional questions of the European project , the political guidelines that the institutions are supposed to implement .
Anyone who has taken part in citizens ' debates within the framework of the pre-Laeken consultation , or has taken the trouble to listen to the messages that came to light recently in the large demonstrations that took place in Brussels , will have in mind those urgent demands which are practically absent from the Convention ' s agenda as defined by the Laeken Declaration .
For example , all social issues , in the widest sense of the word , should provoke discussion on the new role that the euro and the European Central Bank will play .
It should lead us to examine more closely the conflicting ideas on European services of general economic interest .
It should lead us to question the dogma of rationing public spending , to re-launch the debate on the taxation of movements of capital , to stimulate the will to put an end to fiscal dumping and tax havens .
The European Union ' s economic policy should no longer be limited to competition policy , nor should its monetary policy be aligned with the demands of the financial markets alone .
In my view , the question of the effective rights of employees facing the might of large corporations , and that of the effective involvement of citizens in drawing up European policies and the assessment of their effects are also an unavoidable topic from this perspective .
All these questions , which we are bearing in mind , make up an institutional dimension .
They have a place , therefore , in the debates of the future Convention .
The same applies to enlargement .
Can the institutional challenge posed by this historic event be separated from the other critical problems that we should urgently prevent ? Two figures are all that are needed to illustrate what is at stake .
We remain silent about these figures when we should be confronting them head on and with total responsibility .
By 2004 , the European Union ' s population will have grown by 30 % , but its GNP will only increase by 4.5 % .
What sort of structural reforms , and , in particular , what type of solidarity policy will be needed in order to avoid dangerous tensions , to enable us to become what the Laeken Declaration calls a big European family ?
Lastly , the few lines that this framework document devotes to the CFSP can be summed up almost exclusively by - and I quote - ' updating the Petersberg tasks ' .
As if Europe ' s ability to wage war was a guarantee of its international authority .
Having had the opportunity over recent weeks to visit several regions of the globe , I can say that this is not the most important thing we are asked to do .
What people want from Europe is liberation from oppressive American imperialism , to drive back much more aggressively the rule of unilateralism , to develop a wide-ranging strategy of conflict prevention by meeting the needs of development , equality and dignity of the people of the south .
In short , they want Europe to give a very different perspective on events , post-11 September , to that of George Bush .
Let us have the courage to look at life as it is .
Let us once again give a clear and inspired meaning to Europe , and I think that this will liberate the institutional dynamic .
This , in any case , is what I believe .
Madam President , the Belgian Presidency assumed the Presidency of the European Union at an extremely crucial time .
The tragic terrorist attacks in America last September highlighted the need for European Union Member States and our international partners to bolster cooperation to defeat the evils of international terrorism .
European Union leaders confronted these new challenges with vigour and determination and we are all collectively intent on tackling the scourge of terrorism .
The European Union has brought forward proposals to prevent our financial systems being used for money-laundering to fund terrorist activities .
We must all continue to cooperate more closely in the future to ensure that the twin evils of international terrorism and international criminal activities are defeated .
The Laeken summit last weekend had to address a whole series of wide-ranging political issues .
I note with interest that in the final text of the Declaration issued by EU Heads of State , they say " The European Union is a success story but 50 years on , however , the Union stands at a crossroads , a defining moment in its existence " .
I fully agree with this political sentiment .
We have to be sure that any changes which are brought about within the European Union in the future command the goodwill and support of the citizens of the Union .
This is a very tough challenge indeed , not only for European Union governments but also for the European Commission , and indeed for ourselves in the European Parliament .
As the European Union develops more closely , we must guarantee that the citizens of the EU support these new developments .
Without the political support and the goodwill of the people of Europe , the EU as a political and economic entity will be badly weakened .
I hope that this is one of the core issues which will be addressed by the new Convention which has now been set up by the EU leaders .
There will be broad-ranging representation at this Convention which will afford all participants a time for real reflection as to the direction that the European Union must take in the immediate years ahead .
How best to sell the message that the European Union is a positive force for the people of Europe will be a central challenge for the participants of this Convention .
I support the European Union .
I believe that the European Union has helped to improve living standards within the European Union and it has helped to improve our quality of life .
But not everyone is convinced of this argument and we must persuade the opponents of the European Union of its benefits .
The difficulty of this task should not be underestimated .
The European Council decided to participate in international efforts to restore stability and peace to Afghanistan .
This was an important decision , affirming the EU ' s readiness to provide humanitarian and development assistance to the people of Afghanistan .
I welcome our political support in this regard but any future actions which are taken on this issue must be strictly dealt with under the auspices of specific United Nations mandates .
I also welcome the strong support given by EU leaders to Yasser Arafat ' s role as " Israel ' s negotiating partner both to eradicate terrorism and to work towards peace . "
EU leaders have rightly called on the Palestinian authorities to dismantle terrorist networks run by Hamas and Islamic Jihad and to arrest and prosecute all such suspects and end the armed intifada .
Equally , European Union leaders are right to call on Israel to withdraw its military forces , stop extra-judicial executions , lift closures and restrictions on the Palestinian people , free settlements and end operations directed against Palestinian infrastructure .
I welcome the fact that European Union is prepared to play an active role in third-party monitoring operations in the Middle East and I believe that the European Union must and should play a stronger role in any future talks that may take place in the Middle East region .
Madam President , my mother taught me that you should keep quiet if you have nothing worthwhile to say , but how are the elections of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Amato and Mr Dehaene as leaders of the Convention to be commented upon ?
We can of course commend the appointment of the three wise men with their splendid careers behind them as a good signal to the Chinese leaders as to how we promote women and young people in the European Union .
What , however , do our own women and young people say about the fact that the future of the EU is now to be directed by those responsible for the majority of our laws ' now being adopted by officials and Ministers behind closed doors ?
My group expects the leaders of the future to be given places in the Convention , which it also expects to be opened up to that 50 per cent of the electorate who voted ' no ' in the referenda in France , Denmark and Ireland and who might have voted ' no ' in other countries if the latter had had the courage to ask them .
The critics of the EU , or Eurorealists , ought at least to have one place in every single national delegation , and I should like to thank Mr Verhofstadt for having supported this demand when SOS Democracy had a meeting with him .
The Danish Prime Minister has already offered the Danish critics of the EU a place .
The Convention should draft two texts : a constitution , as desired by the majority , and an agreement between independent nations which cooperate on cross-border matters that we cannot solve ourselves in our own countries ' parliaments .
The two proposals can therefore be subject to consultative referenda in all the Member States so that our politicians can see what people want before they call an official Intergovernmental Conference for the purpose of making changes to existing treaties .
The two proposals should be prepared as completed drafts that can be adopted if desired .
The Convention should therefore do some detailed work and employ the necessary experts to help with both the majority and minority approaches .
There should also be ongoing debates on the two drafts in the national parliaments and at public meetings in the Member States .
The successor to the Treaty of Amsterdam must not come as a surprise but as the result of a democratic process .
The democratic process is at least as important as the content of the new treaty , in which it is not only the future of Mr Amato , Mr Dehaene and Mr Giscard d ' Estaing that is now at stake , but that of all Europeans .
Madam President , I would also like to thank , in particular , the Belgian Presidency , Mr Verhofstadt , and Mr Michel especially , because I believe they enabled us to keep the game open in terms of the Convention .
I see , in particular , that behind one of the issues , namely , that of the direct election of the Commission President , lies the characteristic and insistent work of the Belgian Presidency .
I think , however , that we should not forget , and I am also addressing my fellow Members here , the objective , and , with regard to this , the issue of terrorism , an issue that has already been put on the backburner . I disagree with you , Mr Lannoye .
There was a paragraph which , under the influence of the British members , I believe , was withdrawn , that placed the Americans at a distance . I think that we are already forgetting that terrorism is an international phenomenon .
We are forgetting that not only was Afghanistan under the Taliban , but the issues of Syria , Iraq , Somalia and North Korea remain .
However , we are , above all , forgetting that the events of 11 September revealed that terrorism is born of and feeds on dictatorships , on these dictatorial regimes . And we have already forgotten this , since , at the last session , we adopted an association agreement with Egypt , without batting an eyelid , disregarding the warnings and requests for additional information on a number of serious human rights violations , which have also been voiced today .
I would also like to thank our President . Chairman Poettering reiterated the role played by our President in supporting Commander Massoud .
Our own President had invited Mrs Sihem Ben Sedrine here today , who , once again due to despicable , base , mediocre action taken by this dictatorship , which is becoming increasingly dictatorial by the day , will not be able to attend the reception that the President of our Parliament had organised in her honour .
This is the reality of these dictatorships which are at the root of the growth of terrorism , and we are doing nothing , we have already forgotten the lessons of 11 September .
I hope at least , that the next President of the European Parliament will re-extend the invitation originally made by our President , Mrs Nicole Fontaine , and I hope that , for Tunisia , for the Tunisian democrats , for the Egyptian democrats , for all democrats , particularly in Arab countries , our Parliament will in time live up to its objectives and its ambitions .
Madam President , we have all known for a long time that the Intergovernmental Conference on its own is no longer an effective instrument for bringing about a proper treaty amendment .
It is encouraging to hear that a different working method has been opted for at the Laeken Summit .
The Convention has been launched , and its agenda is far wider than the four points imposed at Nice .
That is an achievement on the part of the Belgian Presidency , on which I would warmly congratulate it .
The quality of the triumvirate which will be heading the Convention and its praesidium is also promising .
Nobody will reproach me for the fact that my trust in this leadership is mainly based on the presence in this trio of former Prime Minister and party colleague , Mr Dehaene .
The Laeken Declaration contains more than sixty non-rhetorical questions .
Although everyone involved in Europe since Amsterdam , and Ioanina in fact , knows what the questions are , nobody had expected adequate and complete answers yet .
However , many of us were looking forward to receiving some indicators , and I actually miss them a little in this Laeken Declaration .
There has not been the slightest hint of reaching political agreement between Heads of State and Government about the direction which we need to take with Europe .
In fact , wearing my Belgian hat , I could also say that Mr Verhofstadt asks the questions , and Mr Dehaene should make sure the answers are found .
I am left with three questions for the Council Presidency , to which I should like to receive answers .
First of all , do you believe , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that you can deepen the European Union even further through this Declaration and with the Convention , to coincide at the latest with the imminent round of enlargement ?
Secondly , do you expect that the national parliaments that have made their ratification of the deeply disappointing Nice Treaty dependent on the contents of the Laeken Declaration will now soon embark upon the ratification process for Nice ?
Thirdly , I warmly welcome the idea of publishing the Laeken Declaration in dozens of European newspapers , but are you not concerned that people will also want the questions answered and will want to see concrete policy steps taken before they will well and truly feel at home in the ever-expanding Europe ?
I should like to finish off by saying that , at the start of the Belgian Presidency , I had asked you to convene an NGO summit , preferably a few weeks before Laeken .
I did not receive a response during that sitting , but you did organise the summit .
This was therefore a matter of actions speaking louder than words .
We had not been used to this for a while in Belgium , and it was a nice surprise when it did happen . Thank you for this .
Mr President , one of the conclusions in the Laeken Declaration is that citizens feel that deals are often cut behind closed doors and away from democratic scrutiny .
That in fact could be an assessment of summits themselves , which are often conducted out of sight and away from public scrutiny until the very end .
One easy way of starting to remedy that process would be to ensure that the European Parliament , just like the European Commission , is represented throughout the summit and not asked to leave after the aperitifs .
I would , however , like to add my congratulations to the President-in-Office of the Council for his management of the summit .
He was absolutely right not to allow the meeting to degenerate into a fight over the seat of agencies but instead to allow the spotlight to fall on the more significant issues .
The Laeken Declaration rightly refers to the twin challenges facing the Union .
My Group has asked me to concentrate on internal matters , and particularly the issue of governance , but I would like to say just a few words about the external challenge .
The Declaration is of course right to say that there must be no weakening in the fight against those who use terror and violence .
But for me the real strength of the Declaration lies in its wider recommendation that the European Union takes the fight against poverty and exclusion seriously .
I wholeheartedly support the aim of the Declaration to " set globalisation into a moral framework " .
As Tony Blair might have put it - " Tough on terrorism but also tough on the causes of terrorism " .
Parliament ' s key objective at Laeken was to see a Convention launched with a broad-ranging agenda .
It is a pity that the leadership of the Convention is not so broad-ranging .
Three men of a certain age .
For me that sends the wrong signals .
They are each very worthy in their own right but collectively they fail to represent Europe ' s rich diversity of talent and in particular : how does this demonstrate the Union ' s so-called commitment to gender mainstreaming ?
( Applause ) But at least we have the Convention , and it is now up to all of us to play our part in making it work and involving the public of the Union in the debate about the future of Europe .
However , any fruits of the Convention will not be ripened until well after 2004 .
The Laeken Declaration ' s objective of good governance , that is connecting better with citizens , reducing bureaucracy and delivering on our objectives more effectively and efficiently , cannot wait .
Laeken must not be seen as an excuse for postponing action on governance but instead create a new impetus for reforms that do not require treaty change .
In particular there are three areas where urgent action is required :
Firstly , the continuation of the reform of the staff structures and administrative procedures inside the Commission .
There is a need for high profile support at a high political level for continuing the work of transforming the Commission into a first-class civil service .
Secondly , the European Parliament itself must reform its own working methods .
I believe that we do a good job in terms of our legislative , budgetary and control functions , but no Parliament can work in the dark .
By reforming our working methods to make ourselves a livelier and more relevant debating chamber , we can shed a little light on our role as the voice of the people in EU decision-making .
Thirdly , we must make progress on better regulation .
I note the Presidency ' s conclusions which welcome the report of the Mandelkern Group on the quality of regulatory arrangements and the Commission communication on regulatory simplification and their calls for an action plan for the first half of 2002 .
This Parliament , in the report prepared by Sylvia Kaufmann , called for an interinstitutional working group on better regulation .
Notwithstanding what was agreed at Laeken , I hope the Spanish Presidency will re-visit this issue and set up a working group with a mandate to arrive at draft interinstitutional agreements and an action plan agreed by all three institutions to be presented at the Seville Council next June .
Let us be clear that the alternative to an agreed plan is a guerilla war where Parliament is left with no alternative but to defend its prerogatives .
If that happens , we will have a non-stop dogfight where , proposal by proposal , Parliament will defend its rights as a co-legislator .
The Convention has the potential to reform our institutions , to renew our goals and to reconnect Europe with our people , but none of this should have to wait until 2004 , the process needs to begin now .
Mr President , may I join in the praise of the Presidents of the Commission and Council for having brokered the deal at Laeken .
To have got a British Prime Minister to have signed up to the prospect of a federal constitution is an extraordinary thing .
It is certainly unprecedented .
I fear though that the size of the podium in this chamber will require strengthening and extension so that it can fit in Valerie Giscard d ' Estaing and his entourage .
The European citizen will feel truly privileged that we have such a grand praesidium to service our work .
Thank you for the 60 questions or so .
Frankly , I would have wished for more .
First , there is nothing on strengthening the powers of the Court .
Secondly , there is nothing on revising the formula of a qualified majority in the Council .
Thirdly , there is nothing on strengthening the role of the regions within the political system of the Union and , fourthly and finally , we would have appreciated some critical self-assessment of the functioning and performance of the European Council itself .
But we are blessed with a truly pluralist procedure - an exciting and novel one - and we retain the freedom within the Convention to ask ourselves questions .
We will exploit that freedom .
Madam President , allow me to start by using a military analogy in these times of war .
Mr Verhofstadt , over the past six months , you , together with your colleagues in the federal government and the federal state governments , have been Europe ' s Lieutenant-General .
Unfortunately , however , you have been the Lieutenant-General of an ill-disciplined army , an army in which too often the Member States refuse to bow to your supreme authority , in which all too many Member States act at their own discretion and wish to go their own way and in which the Member States only serve their own interests and too often put narrow state nationalism above the general European interest .
You may have been aware of this over the past six months , Mr Verhofstadt , but we experience this on a daily basis in our files .
Credit to you for having succeeded in creating a sense of order in that ill-disciplined army at Laeken .
However , the Council is not only an ill-disciplined army , they are also a bunch of opportunists : typically , they quickly wanted to resolve the location issue on Saturday evening .
Credit to you once again , Mr Verhofstadt , for having nipped this in the bud .
For we want , in fact , to move away from the back-room mentality , we want to move away from closed meetings between officials , between diplomats and between fifteen Heads of Government .
We are in favour of an open method , we want to give the Convention ' s hopeful method a chance , we want to throw open the doors to let a fresh breeze in .
You posed the right questions at the Convention .
You rightly stated that the debate should be about the distribution of powers at different policy levels .
You also rightly questioned whether it would not be better to leave the daily running of the Union ' s policy to the regions where the constitution regulates this automatically .
However , Mr Verhofstadt , could I also level some form of criticism ?
You did not ask , for example , how constitutional regions , including Flanders , Wallonia , the Basque Country , Catalonia , Scotland and Wales could emphatically be involved in European decision-making .
In failing to do so , you have ignored the demands of your party colleague , Mr Patrick Dewael , the Prime Minister of Flanders , who , together with some fifty colleagues , had even published a weighty document on this matter in May and in October .
I should like to make three observations with regard to the composition of the Convention .
Firstly , I do not believe that a triumvirate without the presence of one single woman genuinely reflects present-day society .
Secondly , there is an imbalance in the composition of the Convention between the MEPs , on the one hand , and national parliaments , on the other .
You , the Council , are making a mistake here . In my view , the European Parliament is the institution par excellence where the European idea , where the European general interest , applies , and you are missing an opportunity here .
And my final comment with regard to the composition of the Convention is that the representatives of the constitutional regions are unable to participate directly in the Convention .
They need to take the indirect route of the Committee of the Regions as observers , and that is a sad state of affairs in my view .
Mr Verhofstadt , whatever happens , you can rely on me and my party , with the nine representatives of the European Free Alliance , to make a constructive contribution to this Convention , for Europe must not lead to uniformity . Europe must remain a sparkling diamond with many facets , facets displaying its diversity and its own identity , for only then can the European diamond sparkle in the European firmament .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , in adopting the Laeken Declaration convening the Convention , the summit has made a decision of historical significance for the future of the European Union .
It is particularly noteworthy that none of the numerous open political questions on the future of the European Union have been declared off-limits and that the Convention mandate can also be seen as marking the beginning of the process of developing a European constitution .
A further reason why the convening of the Convention is a milestone in European politics is that it will consign the policy of secret diplomacy behind closed doors , of non-transparent decision-making and haggling in marathon night sittings - as happened most recently at the Nice Summit - to the past , hopefully once and for all !
In my opinion , it is impossible to overestimate the significance of the fact that a majority of the members of the Convention will be democratically-elected members of the national parliaments and the European Parliament , that it will meet in public and talk to all kinds of organisations from civil society , and that the candidate countries will be involved in drafting proposals for the most far-reaching reform in the European Union 's history .
This provides the opportunity for controversial issues to be discussed in a genuine pan-European context and thus for us to have a broad-based public debate on the future of the EU .
Since , however , a debate of this kind only comes to life if the pros and cons are discussed openly , I should like to refer once again to a position of this Parliament , namely our call for political plurality to be guaranteed in the composition of the Convention .
The choice of those who will represent their countries , their national parliaments or the European Parliament is of particular importance in this context , and we must ensure at all costs that the Convention does not consist solely of representatives of the large European families of parties .
Diversity of opinion must be delivered , because the European Union is actually at a crossroads and the proposals to be drawn up by the Convention must in their final form really reflect a European position on the future of Europe which is supported by all of us .
If the Convention is to be a success and ultimately if the European Union is to be viable in the future , it will , in my view , be crucial for us to succeed in making the European Union more democratic across the board and in strengthening the rights of individual people .
It is my hope - indeed I am counting on this - that , through the commitment of all of its members and as an independent forum , the Convention will gather its own political momentum during the course of its consultations , so that the next Intergovernmental Conference will not be able simply to disregard the Convention 's proposals .
Mr President , the past week has been pivotal for the future of the Union .
Firstly , agreement was reached on the European arrest warrant , a major , sensitive agreement which must be seen as an initial step , to be consolidated by a broader , further-reaching political and institutional project bringing further integration .
In particular , at Laeken , we started to define that political and constitutional Europe in which we firmly believe .
The idea that Europe might be condemned to being just a union of agriculture and trade or just a financial and monetary union is waning .
We are , at last , entering a new phase : an exciting phase , a phase of laying foundations and further integration , in which we must establish European political unity while safeguarding national identities and diversities .
The diversities unite us ; they must not be seen as dividing the European peoples , for they have come to represent precious social and cultural assets .
Europe ' s strength stems , in actual fact , precisely from its ancient culture , from its diversities as well as its common roots .
In this sense , as a European and an Italian , I can only appreciate the work of the Italian Government at Laeken in enthusiastically upholding Parma ' s application to be the site of the Food Authority .
If we want the Europe we are building to be a Europe of excellence , quality and competitiveness in the area of quality , when it comes to the Food Authority , Parma is the natural , most suitable and most prestigious choice , precisely because of Italy ' s longstanding gastronomic traditions : it has a tradition of culture and quality , professionalism and rigour , and a history of consolidated scientific excellence which is recognised the world over .
In promoting Parma ' s application - energetically , moreover , as Italy did at Laeken - we are not trying to impose unnecessary vetoes or advancing nationalistic claims ; rather , this is an attempt to allow the quality , capacity , skills and natural , genuine vocation of a territory to prevail over bureaucracy , sterile bureaucratic agreements and pre-established lists , rather than allowing the latter to prevail as has happened on countless occasions .
The citizens do not want the site of the Food Authority to be purely administrative but to have proven experience and capacity in the field of food safety .
I feel that Parma has that proven experience and capacity .
Finally , my heartfelt thanks go to the President , Mrs Fontaine , who , with great authority and courtesy , has steered the work of this House during this first part of our parliamentary term .
Mr President , some believe that the debate on the future of Europe can be summarised in the development of the Community method , where the Commission has the monopoly on initiative , the Court of Justice has political power and interpretation , and the right to impose European law on one or more Member States is achieved by increasing majority decisions .
This centralised vision of Europe in even more areas runs counter to the will of the people , who want to benefit from each other ' s experience .
The people of Ireland , which was the only nation to be consulted by referendum , were not mistaken in rejecting the Treaty of Nice .
The Convention will be nothing more than a sham if it pursues the same objective without acknowledging that the Treaty of Nice is dead and buried .
Unfortunately , the objectives appear to remain fixed .
The conclusions of the Laeken Summit welcome the progress made and the agreements reached on the liberalisation of the postal services , which will bring about a weakening of the social and territorial cohesion of our Member States .
It is unacceptable to impose on everyone the choice made by some Member States to privatise and open up their public services to competition .
This proposal is not likely to bring the people of Europe closer , nor is it a condition for peace on the continent .
We must adopt the opposite approach ; in other words , bring Europe closer to the people .
In order to do this , we must listen to them and , once genuinely common concerns have been expressed , debate an appropriate common response .
In my view , the European Summit and the Laeken Declaration proved , in fact , to be a fitting sequel to the Belgian Presidency .
It became a catalogue of hollow phrases , of nothingness , of unanswered questions .
It is very characteristic of the state of affairs in today ' s Europe that , actually , only someone like former Commissioner , Mr Van Miert , dared to put his finger on the wound .
What Mr Michel ventured to call the ' Grand Cru Verhofstadt ' ultimately turned out to be a cheap table wine .
So there will soon be a Convention which is supposed to give a democratic face to an enforced federal Europe .
But surely this Convention cannot cover up the fact that our institutions are systematically riding roughshod over the subsidiarity principle , that extremely drastic measures are taken without prior referendums , and even that the European Union is once again flouting the sovereignty of the Member States at this summit , for example by again callously ignoring the results of the Irish referendum .
Apparently , European democracy suggests that citizens preferably have no say , and if they do , they have to carry on voting until they agree with what the eurocracy has decided , as was the case in Denmark and is also required from Ireland .

The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Verhofstadt , may well go down in history , albeit as the man who took things to such extremes that even Commission President , Mr Prodi , refused to hold any more press conferences with him , as the once pro-Flemish politician who refused to protect the Dutch language , as the man who abandoned all his principles , who was once known as the advocate of slimmed-down government and of deregulation but who became the partisan of European centralism exercised by a superstate and who turned inventing little rules into a kind of Olympic discipline .
Mr President , the Laeken Council will sadly rank amongst the less impressive meetings of its kind .
It was a missed opportunity and a serious disappointment , like the Belgian Presidency which preceded it .
Why ?
Not just because of the consistency of the Foreign Minister , Louis Michel , who for us emerges as an endearing Harry Worth-type figure on the European political stage .
We seem to have passed over his proclamation that the British-led UN peacekeeping force in Afghanistan was to become an EU body .
The key problem is that for this Presidency these last months have been a painful learning curve .
The excessive aspirations of July , often misguided like ideas for a new Euro-tax on all EU citizens or a Tobin tax on capital movements , found themselves on a collision course with reality .
At Laeken the EU 's new rapid reaction force was declared operational even though , critically , its access to NATO assets is currently blocked .
Indeed , the precise relationship between the force and NATO remains ambiguous .
The European arrest warrant enjoyed a particularly painful birth with some uncertainty about when , or if ever , it will apply in Italy .
The attempt to assign sites for various new EU bodies also descended into farce .
Little progress was made at Laeken , or indeed , throughout the Belgian Presidency , on the competitiveness agenda in Europe .
The Lisbon strategy , which has been grounded since Stockholm , now faces a moment of truth in Barcelona if we are truly to become the dynamic knowledge-based economy that is sought .
Finally let me turn to the Declaration itself .
The text acknowledges the EU 's failings in terms of democracy , transparency and closeness to people but seems to come up yet again with solutions on federal lines .
These options represent the wrong route for Europe .
The Convention should learn the lessons of the last decade , reject ambitions for a European super-state , and focus on modest and intelligent reforms which can really deliver a Europe that works .
Christmas aside , much is said in the text , but there is also much that is not said .
The Community patent , GALILEO , immigration and asylum are all absent from the chapter on decisions and Mr Lannoye has mentioned other examples .
What is perhaps more dangerous is the persistent silence on the overall budgetary implications of transforming ' community ' Europe , which herald difficult meetings with the people .
And in spite of this , the atmosphere that surrounds the Laeken Declaration is , indisputably , a positive atmosphere .
This tells you how important the positive aspects are compared to those that do not figure in the results .
Other Members , in addition to myself , have reiterated , and will once again reiterate , that the Belgian Presidency , which had ambitious objectives and was tenacious in its action , remained focused - somewhat more than the euro anyhow - both before 11 September and after .
For those who are familiar with international relations , this is incredibly significant , not only for Belgium but for the Union as a whole .
Prime Minister , we appreciate the role that you personally played in the solution found to the almost scandalous problem of the arrest warrant . It was not acceptable for the Prime Ministers and Heads of State of the Council Presidency to be exempt from this issue .
Furthermore , it is obvious that the Socialists attach particular importance to the progress made in social matters : the confirmation of the role of structural indicators in employment , the support for the European social model , particularly through cooperation in the area of pensions , the improved understanding of social exclusion and social involvement are important achievements for the people of Europe .
Lastly , let me turn to the Convention , which has already been the focus of attention of so many Members . I would simply like to say this : the statements made today illustrate the formidable task facing the Convention .
Therefore , its composition is most crucial and , except on one point , the decisions taken , and especially the innovative measures , are important achievements .
The same goes for the representation of the candidate countries .
Full participation , without the right to vote , is more in keeping with the dignity of a State , and this question has , wisely , been linked , in the texts in any case , to that of the regions with legislative power . Contrary to what was said earlier , we also recognise that these regions have the status that they deserve .
Parliament also attaches importance to the role you grant civil society .
And I wish to stress the value of the presidential troika system that you have chosen , which , in my view , meets the current needs much better , and goes far beyond the issues linked to the individuals chosen , individuals that I do not intend to discuss right now .
All three are men deserve a great deal of admiration , but the problem , Prime Minister , arises from the fact that they are all men .
And therefore , as many previous speakers have during this festive season , I would like to express the wish that the European summit will one day learn , in as many languages as you like , to understand , appreciate , state , perhaps even conjugate much better , on the threshold of the 21st Century , one little word which is no longer established in poetry alone but in politics as well . That word is ' woman ' .
Mr President , Mr Verhofstadt , at the end of your Presidency , the situation is now very different from one year ago : the atmosphere has changed completely .
We can roll up our sleeves , and you have indeed put three men in charge .
I am interested to see how many members the delegation of the European Parliament will have in the Convention .
We will count them when the time has come .
You have tabled the questions , a great many questions and the right ones , in my view .
Maybe we could add the odd question here and there . Why not ?
In my opinion , the Convention should have that flexibility .
You outlined a dream a moment ago .
In my view , it was a very fitting account , a very attractive prospect of what we ought to do , not only we Western Europeans , the Fifteen , but also Eastern Europe and the rest of the world .
However , I would like to ask one more thing , Mr President-in-Office .
You have now held the Council Presidency for six months .
We now face seven years in which the Belgian Government will not be President again . I would ask you to convince all your Ministers of the fact that , during those seven years , European work is of extreme importance , that the government should not only occupy itself with European issues during the Presidency but also mainly outside of that time , for that period is longer and , most of all , certainly as important .
Mr President , the Laeken European Council has dragged us from the dreadful quagmire which Nice had led us into .
Not only from the point of view of the concrete results achieved , but also from the psychological and morale points of view .
Of course , there were frankly discouraging moments at Laeken .
I am convinced that neither Mr Chirac nor Mr Berlusconi have learnt a thing from the experience of Nice .
Furthermore , they were not the only ones who were prepared to risk the solidarity of Community cohesion for the sake of agencies , several of which have neither a legal basis nor any real purpose .
And what a striking contrast we have seen between the stimulating content of the Laeken declaration and the haggling over agencies .
But in reality the European Union is still vacillating between these two poles : on the one hand , the lack of progress resulting from the thinking and the interests of the national States , and on the other the zeal and enthusiasm arising from the desire to complete the construction of the European Union .
The challenge represented by the Laeken declaration , and which must be taken up by the Convention , is precisely to tip the balance in favour of strengthening democracy , efficiency and cohesion on a European level .
The questions posed are good , and it is very good not to have any taboos .
It is a good thing that the Constitution was discussed in the Laeken declaration .
But it is the responses which count and we have not yet won .
Personally , I see at least two elements of concern during these days following Laeken .
The first concerns the Convention .
It is not only through corporatism that I profoundly regret that the balance between the national and European dimensions is being broken and that for 28 governments there are just 16 European parliamentarians .
I do not believe that we will be able to distinguish between the Convention and the IGC unless we manage to change national thinking .
Secondly , the membership of the praesidium .
Why continue with this system whereby only former Heads of State and Government , normally men , and some older than others , can dictate the destiny of Europe ?
I would have preferred a parliamentary way of thinking , and we would have preferred the Convention to have chosen its own President , or - better still - its own woman President .
The second element of concern is represented by the episodes of street violence and expulsions , which , though in a different way to Nice or Genoa , also took place in and around Laeken .
I am not sure whether , if there had been more consistent demonstrations in terms of the demonstrators , we would really have prevented serious problems .
The European Parliament has the task of ensuring , in a coherent and untiring fashion , that the strengthening of cooperation in the fields of terrorism and crime does not lead to a weakening of the rights of citizens .
It has to be said that the message and practice stemming from Laeken are contradictory .
However , the future will tell whether the seed sown at Laeken will bear fruit .
For the moment , we must thank the Belgian Presidency for its work and hope that subsequent presidencies will show the same commitment and coherence .
Mr President , I should first like to offer the praise I think is due .
I am extremely pleased that the Presidency has stood by enlargement and the whole programme of enlargement , that there is a continued commitment to concrete negotiations ' beginning as from 2002 and that we are aiming to admit the first new Member States in 2004 .
That praise , I think , is due .
However , I do not understand the way in which the leadership of the Convention has been put together .
The composition is incredibly one-sided , and we have a huge need for bridge-building in this project .
Where are the critics ?
We have had a ' no ' vote in Ireland ; we have had a ' no ' vote in Denmark , admittedly a number of years ago ; and we know that there is dissatisfaction among the peoples of Europe .
Where are the critics ?
What has become of young people and , especially , women where this issue is concerned ?
When Mr Prodi was asked by Danish television what had become of women and young people , he called for honesty and said that , if the EU was to talk with government leaders , it needed men over the age of 30 .
If that is the attitude towards how we are to make contact with the people of Europe , then ' thank you for nothing ' is what I say .
With regard to the anti-terrorism package , I do not understand why the aim is not to adopt an independent European stance on this issue . I do not understand why there is once again the desire to be the puppy of the United States .
I do not understand why we do not concentrate much more on preventing future terrorism instead of taking the line adopted by the United States .
Mr President , the Laeken Declaration is punctuated by question marks : a sign of the ambiguity which currently exists in relation to the future of the European Union .
Needless to say , the new Convention cannot provide answers to all those questions .
That is why , in my view , priority should be given to improving transparency and a clear demarcation of powers between the European Union and the Member States .
I was pleasantly surprised by the content of the questions concerning this latter point .
It seems that there are no taboo subjects , if even the creeping transfer of powers in the direction of Brussels can be questioned .
I was also surprised , but not pleasantly , by the composition of the Convention ' s praesidium : no fewer than twelve people are supposed to make up the total .
I wonder , then , what the role of an ordinary Convention member is .
Not a significant one , I fear .
However , this jeopardises the quality of the proposals which this body makes .
The Convention will be relying on quality . Otherwise , its ideas will simply be put away in a drawer and forgotten about .
Mr President , in defining the agenda for the Convention on the future of the Union , the Laeken Council has deviated from the conclusions of the Nice Council with regard to two points which concern us .
Firstly , whereas Nice declaration No 23 had included in the agenda a point entitled ' The role of national parliaments in the architecture of Europe ' , the Laeken Council has watered down that idea under a much vaguer title : ' More democracy , transparency and efficiency in the European Union ' .
Under this title , it first of all asks how we can increase the democratic legitimacy of the current institutions and , only in second place , whether the role of the national parliaments needs to be modified .
It is a largely biased approach , since in reality the two questions are just one : recognising a prominent role for national parliaments within the architecture of Europe is the best way to reconcile the Union with its citizens .
Second modification : whereas Nice mentioned the status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in a purely neutral way , Laeken includes another idea in the agenda , the idea of a European constitution , that is , a clearly supranational fundamental text rather than a treaty .
It therefore appears , Mr President , that between Nice and Laeken , the federalist pressure groups have taken charge .
They have managed to have modifications adopted , very significantly , which are both aimed at minimising the role of national democracies .
This approach does not correspond with the wishes of our citizens and it will have to be corrected in the years to come .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even considered rather dispassionately , it is possible that the Laeken Summit will one day appear to be a waypoint at which the Europeans stopped stumbling along , found their feet again and set out to find a way out of the blind alley of Nice .
If this proves to be the case - we are just at the beginning of this process - then this would certainly be associated with the Belgian Presidency and your name , Mr Verhofstadt , and I am quite happy to congratulate you on this now in advance , just in case !
There are two reasons for this development , and it is useful to run over them once more .
What caused this to happen ?
Certainly the strong , even damning , criticism of the outcome of Nice was a factor .
The European Parliament played a vital role here ; this House was the source of the vast majority of the criticism directed towards Nice , although we recognise and acknowledge the fact that the formal conditions for enlargement were agreed on there .
My second point is that the events of 11 September and everything which happened in their wake have made it more than clear that Europe will only be taken seriously in the future if it acts as a community and that we need to get back on track and work towards developing as a community .
These are the two reasons .
Now we have the Convention which we wanted , and we are therefore also responsible for what emerges from it .
We must not overlook this .
The outcome of the Convention will only carry political weight if it is supported by as broad a consensus as possible .
That is why we need to make our contribution in the Convention to producing a draft treaty which has broad support .
Only then will it afterwards stand a chance of also uniting the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Parliament wanted this Convention , and now we have got it .
We share in this success , and have you to thank for it having been possible .
The Convention 's flaws have been alluded to here several times , but we can and will take care that these blemishes are insignificant and will be forgotten by the time the work is done .
My second remark follows on from what Mr Nassauer said : the Convention puts Parliament , too , in a new position of responsibility .
The reform of the institutions is , for the first time , in our hands too .
We bear responsibility no longer only for the demands and visions that we develop here , but also for the compromises and results .
That is something new and we will have to get used to it .
My third point is that the Convention has been given the broad mandate we wanted it to have .
That is an opportunity and a danger in equal measure .
The Convention must not turn itself into an expanded Intergovernmental Conference , but likewise it must not reduce itself to the level of being just a forum for discussion .
It must work towards broad consensus and must concentrate its attention on those strategic proposals for reform that point the way ahead to future developments and open up the road that leads to them .
Fourthly , the word ' constitution ' is now to be found for the first time in an official Council document , which is quite something .
It is not certain whether a draft constitution will be the final result , but what we can be sure of is that the Convention must direct all its efforts at what we - borrowing the expression of that great European , the German philosopher Immanuel Kant - might call the Convention 's categorical imperative , that every one of its proposals must also be capable of becoming a basic component of a European constitution .
It is towards that goal that it must work .
Fifthly , Europe is becoming ever more important , yet of decreasing interest to its own citizens .
They are , admittedly , not yet opposed to the European Union , but they are no longer so sure why they are meant to be in favour of it .
We want Europe 's citizens to regain the knowledge of why we are uniting Europe .
The European Union must stand for a European model of society and for a European world vision .
What we are about is Europe 's self-assertion - economic , political and , not least , cultural - and the preservation of a European way of life !
This has acquired an added dimension since 11 September .
The EU could be sunk by this new challenge , but it could grow through it - indeed , I am quite sure that it will .
( Applause )
Madam President , first of all , I would like to apologise to the Members of the European Parliament since I must shortly leave for Canada .
There is another European Union-Canada Summit .
In order to get there on time , I must leave for the airport at 7.00 p.m.
It is for this reason that myself and Romano Prodi , since we are leaving for Canada together , must apologise for not being able to participate in the debate until the end .
I apologise to all the Members , especially those MEPs with whom I have had very intense contacts over recent weeks and months : Mr Brok , Mr Méndez de Vigo , the chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Napolitano .

I am sorry that I will not be able to hear them speak , but in any event I hope to continue the contacts we have established in order to prepare this Convention properly .
At the beginning of the debate - and I should like to thank various group leaders for their support and their words of praise for the Belgian Presidency - there were a few jokey comments to the effect that the Convention and its praesidium consist of nothing but Socialists and Christian Democrats , and that the only Liberal among them , namely Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , has , in fact , transferred to the Christian-Democrats .
I , for my part , am quite happy for the Socialists and Christian Democrats to dominate the Convention . It may not be strictly my place to say this , but perhaps I am allowed this leeway at the end of the Presidency .
Mr Poettering , there are currently two Liberals in the Council , as opposed to none before .
Maybe , with your help , the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission will also be Liberals .
So , in fact , we as Liberals are not too badly represented in the European institutions .
Some speakers have questioned the link between the Laeken Declaration and the Nice process .
There should not be a common link .
Nice is to be adopted ; Nice is to be ratified . This is necessary to allow enlargement to work at a practical level as from 2004 .
It would be a big mistake if we did not do this and if Nice were to be once again mixed up with the Laeken Declaration and the future of Europe .
We would then once again talk about the Nice leftovers instead of the future of Europe .
The great advantage of the Convention is that it breaks with traditional methods precisely at this moment .
The old method entailed establishing , after each treaty amendment , that agreement had not been reached on two or three points , and these two or three points would then be transferred to the next Intergovernmental Conference , which would add a few fresh points and which would try to change the Treaty in the same way .
If agreement was not reached at that stage , fresh leftovers would be created .
The past decade of the European Union has been marked by a history of constantly moving from leftover to leftover , the swill becoming lighter and lighter each time , and the fundamental questions losing weight all the time .
This mechanism is now being discontinued . This time round , fundamental questions will be put forward .
Mrs Thyssen has stated that these are merely questions that I am posing and for which Mr Dehaene will need to provide the answers .
It is actually quite simple .
Mr Dehaene has helped me draft the questions , and I will now return the favour and help him give the answers in the coming months .
This is also what will actually happen .
The Laeken group is a group of which Mr Dehaene and Mr Amato form a part .
This group will always continue to work as a group of friends and , on that basis , a number of additional incentives can be given , involving Mr Delors , Mr Geremek , Mr Miliband and the other members .
( FR ) I would also like to say to the President that it was not desire which was lacking when it came to responding immediately to the questions posed .
My colleagues have often said to me , ' no , it is not a question you can ask ' .
I would say , ' why ? '
' Because the answer is implied in the question ' .
Nevertheless , Mrs Thyssen and all the other Members who have spoken can rest assured that I am going to do my best in the Intergovernmental Conference , in the regular contacts I will have with the various members of the praesidium and the Convention , to help to find the answers to the questions posed in the declaration .
With regard to the membership of the praesidium , there has been mention of the absence of women .
I completely agree and I propose that three men and nine women now be designated by the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
All is not lost yet , since only three of the twelve places have been allocated .
I also truly hope that the European Parliament , the national parliaments and the various representatives will be able to do this .
I would like to end by saying something about the relationship between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
I believe that what is very important is that a praesidium has been created , that that praesidium consists of twelve people and that amongst those twelve people , two will be representatives of the European Parliament .
The same number will represent the national parliaments .
I believe that these two people are going to have to play an important role , because it will be this group of twelve which prepares things , which prepares the agendas .
Not all the decisions can be taken by a Convention of 113 people .
It must be prepared .
The praesidium is going to play a dominating role in this respect and in that praesidium there will naturally be two representatives of the European Parliament .
Finally , I would like to stress that I believe it is very important that for the first time there will also be representation in the Convention from the so-called constitutional regions , but the more exact term is ' regions with legislative powers ' .
I am the Prime Minister of a country with a federal structure .
It is the same in Germany , in Austria and in other countries .
Little by little , many other countries are beginning to adopt federalism within their institutional system .
And it is working well , because federalism is the only way we have to allow different communities , different cultures and populations who speak different languages to live together , without giving rise to what happens in other parts of the world , where there is conflict .
I would therefore like to stress that we should not use the word ' federalism ' in a negative sense .
I sometimes hear people say that federalism spells disaster .
Quite the opposite .
Throughout the world , federalism demonstrates that it is the only way for communities to live together without conflict , without turning to violence , as is the case in many parts of the world .
( Applause ) And it is for that reason that I personally believe it is important and an enormous step forward that the regions with legislative powers can be represented .
I have achieved this because I have also been helped by the President of the Committee of the Regions .
I do not need to tell you that around the Council table there were certain people who found it difficult to include the words ' regions with legislative powers ' in the declaration and difficult to recognise , as the European Council , that those regions may have a place and a say .
It has finally been accepted and that is thanks to the President of the Committee of the Regions , Mr Chabert , whom I had asked to send me a letter .
The letter which he had sent me said : the Committee of the Regions must be represented and we must demand that the different members of the Committee of the Regions be represented .
The regions and cities , but also the regions with administrative powers .
I have therefore been able to use the authority of the Committee of the Regions to include these regions in the text for the first time .
I wanted to stress this here this afternoon , since I feel that they have an important role to play .
There will be discussion of the distribution of competences , the new instruments , institutions and the future European constitution .
I personally believe that we must do this together , excluding nobody , and allowing every section of our European Union to express its view .
( Applause )

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be very brief , firstly because I do not want Mr Verhofstadt to go without me and I have no desire to swim to Canada , and secondly because I can say with satisfaction that this debate was a debate of great unity , a moment of satisfaction , given that , a few months ago , none of us imagined that a Convention was possible .
I also welcome the fact that the issue of reaching agreement on the agencies , although certainly a negative point , was not blown out of all proportion as it was in the mass media .
I have also noted the suggestions you have made on the subject of the Convention ; I have noted the proposals to strengthen the role of the Court of Justice : I will bear them all in mind in the future and I therefore feel that we can now genuinely get down to working hard , all together , to prepare for the forthcoming Convention .
Given that we are working in this atmosphere of cooperation , I would just like to make one request - or rather , reiterate a call that I have already made to the Council - to my friend Mr Verhofstadt , for genuine cooperation in the forthcoming months so that we can reform the institutions without amending the Treaties .
Our proposal on governance is the fruit of many months of cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , work which , in my opinion , has produced sound , tangible results .
We expect similar commitment from the Council , for the preparations for the Convention have to consist of prior work carried out together : our work on governance , which has yielded positive results and certainly cannot progress without equal input from the Council .
Lastly , I would like to wish you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year !
Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Prodi , of course we understand why you are obliged to leave the House at this point .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with Laeken we may have found an antidote to some of the poisons present in the Treaty of Nice .
The convening of a constituent Convention - constituent because this Convention will give rise to the Constitution for the new Europe - means restoring a political soul to Europe , in other words thinking about what is to be the future home of us all .
Parliament must therefore welcome the success of the Summit and make sure that the Convention ' s work reaches its appropriate conclusion in an Intergovernmental Conference , which will have to draw up the new Constitutional Treaty , to bring about the European federation .
Genuine , practical federalism , which also respects the regional level , as the Council has rightly said , which respects minority languages and all peoples , great and small , will burst into the history of this new century as part of the process of European integration , and anyone representing the people of the Valle d ' Aosta can only rejoice at that .
We have set a positive process in motion and the enemies of the European Union are already aware of this ; we must therefore step up our efforts .
Mr President , the Laeken declaration is couched in words which satisfy one and all , weighty words .
The objective and method , the Convention and political negotiation , are indeed cause for satisfaction .
However , as previous speakers have said , the declaration does not contain any convincing references to the social State , what some people somewhat sheepishly call the social model , sustainable development , viable development , autonomy and hence , if I may put it thus , a viable Union profile .
Maybe the lack of political unification is to blame for this degree of cowardice .
But it is interesting that we have said nothing of any import about the war and we have said nothing of any import about enlargement itself .
I should like to make a comment here , if I may .
Why does the purely political decision to accept ten new members exclude - politically that is - two from the Balkan peninsula , from the heart and soft underbelly of Europe ?
We have left a black hole in the Balkans .
It is unacceptable and I should like an answer .
Unfortunately , I probably will not get one now or even , I fear , from the Convention .
Mr President , the conclusions from the Laeken Summit are by no means surprising in terms either of their rhetoric or their content .
As usual , the rhetoric is high-flown and hollow at one and the same time .
For the umpteenth time , openness and proximity to the people are promised .
The words chosen falsify what really is the case in a way that , in terms of cynical demagogy , would put to shame the ideologues both of the Third Reich and of Stalinism .
The reality has proved to be completely different , for the summit ' s declared ambition that the institutions of the EU should be brought closer to the people turns out in reality to mean that the people of the Member States are ever more excluded by the closed institutions of the EU , which have fatally misunderstood the nature of democracy .
Moreover , the renewed missions are being placed in the hands of three pensioners of an age that makes Chinese statesmanship look like a youth rebellion .
There is no doubt that these three worthy men will be able to step up the dynamic of EU integration , but there are more and more of us who doubt that the EU and its ambitions to be a great power are any kind of solution . On the contrary , they constitute the very problem .
Mr President , let me say first of all that I appreciate the way we can talk to each other here in a fairly intimate atmosphere .
There is no doubt that it is easier to ask important questions than to find the answers to them .
The President 's statement notwithstanding , all of us can only wish these answers to be found , but I want to make allowances all the same for the fact that Laeken saw a very important task performed , that of getting the Convention on track with a president who is not only distinguished but whose appointment also augurs well for the future .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights was our most recent opportunity to learn that the success of such a process largely depends on who presides over it , so let me say that the youthful attire of the President-in-Office led me to fear that the Convention would be given a rather ' young ' and ' dynamic ' chair .
Unlike Mrs Frassoni and Mr Bonde , I was therefore rather pleased to learn that we were still going to give preference to the opinions of those older and wiser - something which marks out the higher cultures .
The inauguration of the Convention was , though , the only outstanding achievement .
Speaking from an Austrian point of view , I find Point 59 regrettable on the grounds that it has turned out to be very narrow and does not do justice to the need for Europe-wide safety standards .
Mr President , I would like to focus on two results of Laeken which I believe to be essential .
The first is the recognition that the consolidation of the third pillar of the European Union , the fight against terrorism in particular , has at last been developed in the way the citizens have been demanding .
The terrible attacks have led even the least aware amongst us to realise that terrorism is a problem for all of us , and that it involves all of us , not just the victims directly affected .
And that terror is not only caused by those who pull the trigger or press the detonator , but also by their accomplices , and we should therefore be pleased with the Council ' s decision to create a single list of all groups , bodies and people who support terrorism .
Secondly , the decisions adopted in relation to designing the future of the Union seem to me to be very coherent with the demands of the European Parliament .
I am convinced that the flexibility with which the agenda has been set will allow us to strengthen the instruments of the CFSP during the Convention , because the globalised world in which we live demands that Europe should play a new role and we have provided it with the necessary means to do this , such as the Community diplomatic service .
Mr President , I do not believe that the machine has worked properly , but I assume that my speaking time is over .
Mr President , Minister , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , of the huge number of problems dealt with at Laeken , I would also like to focus on the point which brings us most hope , the declaration on the future of the Union .
It is a good and strong declaration , which takes up several of the ideas to which the French Socialist delegation is very committed .
We are happy to see that the praesidium , which will play a determining role , will be reasonably large , twelve people , which is what we wanted , and it will be led by three strong political personalities whose commitment to Europe is beyond question .
And as a French person , I am delighted to see that in the end an eminent countryman of mine will preside over the group ; though an eminent countrywoman would clearly have been better perhaps .
We also approve of the fact that the Commission is represented , not by one commissioner , but by two , who as it happens are both perfectly qualified for that task .
Another good piece of news is that the timetable will be flexible , so that the Convention may enjoy greater freedom .
Finally , we welcome the broad mandate that the Heads of State and Government have granted the Convention .
And we congratulate the Belgian Prime Minister on the firmness with which he has managed to apply this open mandate to many issues which go beyond the purely mechanical institutional field .
It is to this end that I would like to request something : the Convention will have to propose institutional reforms aimed at making the mechanisms work better .
This is all very well , but it can and must also make proposals on content , in response to those questions which the citizens often ask without receiving a clear reply .
What is Europe for ?
What are its great missions , within its borders , for its inhabitants , but also in the world ?
Which policies is it responsible for leading , particularly in the social field ?
What are its competences ?
What are its duties in relation to its inhabitants and the rest of the world in terms of solidarity , prosperity and security ?
Under the guidance of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , the results relating to this declaration are good .
The Presidency has provided strong impetus , very much helped by Parliament as well , which has given it constant encouragement .
The Laeken Council has launched this Convention into orbit , and it can play a decisive role for the future of Europe .
The future will tell whether Laeken has been an historic turning point .
Mr President , Mr Verhofstadt spoke a lot about the need to improve democratic control .
But we do not need to change the Treaties to improve democratic control .
We can do that using the existing Treaties .
I am not talking about applying Article 42 to bring the third pillar matters into the first pillar , although that would be very desirable .
I am talking about instances such as that last week where Parliament was consulted for the fourth time in a year on a text of which half was missing .
We were asked to approve a regulation to freeze the assets of a list of terrorist organisations ; the list was not attached .
The regulation referred to two Council texts , neither of which is available to Parliament .
We voted on amendments covering the absent documents in view of the urgency , but if that text is not amended and , in view of this practice , Parliament really should consider recourse to the European Court of Justice unless Council is prepared to treat us in a fairer and more adult way .
Mr President , the writing on the wall states quite clearly that the Laeken Summit has bolstered a European Union in which big business takes precedence over the interests of the workers and the people in general .
The delegates in Laeken Palace did not hear the stentorian voice of the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators from all over Europe : the voice of the poor , of the unemployed , of the people with no job security and of the victims of soul-destroying exploitation who actually create our wealth .
They did not and could not hear their fight and their demand for a different Europe , a Europe of peace and friendship between nations , not a Europe of European armies , intervention and war , a Europe in which social rights and democratic freedoms are respected and strengthened , not a Europe of European arrest warrants , Eurojust and the law on terrorism which use 11 September as a pretext for classifying the social and political fight for a better tomorrow as terrorism .
That is why I believe that the Convention is not the answer ; anyway it is an advisory forum and will , I fear , just end up pulling the wool over the people 's eyes .
Continuing and developing the unprecedented wave of protest which surrounded Laeken is our only hope and our only way out .
Mr President , I am concerned that the European Constitution is going to be drafted by just 60 people , who it is to be hoped will be worthy of the task but are still a small number to represent hundreds of millions of citizens .
A constituent assembly would have been more appropriate .
In this regard , it is significant that the vice-president is to be Giuliano Amato , who is a member of the Italian and European left but , most importantly , an advocate of that oligarchic desire to have the institutions run just by a few aristocrats , by a small , unelected elite .
We hope that , at least , once the Constitution has been drafted , it will be possible for both national parliaments and this House to amend it , where necessary , unlike the situation with the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mr President , at Laeken , a number of steps forward have , at last , been taken towards the creation of a stronger Europe with wider borders .
The Convention will have to pave the way for a Constitution which establishes the respective competences of the institutions and includes the founding values underlying our Union as well , but it will also have to represent an essential stage in terms of the harmonisation of the laws of our countries , not least in judicial matters .
However , we must make haste and decide before the end of 2003 to avoid the elections getting in the way of the process and the Constitution being adopted slap-bang in the middle of the electoral campaign .
Without the Constitution , without new institutions , it will be difficult to achieve the enlargement which we all , like President Prodi , see as irreversible .
Moreover , I welcome the fact that the Laeken conclusions reserve a chapter for relations with Russia , a country which deserves increasing attention from the Union .
At Laeken , Europe , at last , spoke out authoritatively on major issues such as combating terrorism , and the decision to adopt what has been dubbed the first ' Marshall Plan ' for Palestine is confirmation of Europe ' s intention not just to wipe out terrorism through military force - as is right and proper - but also to resolve the issues by political means .
The Italian proposal on resolving the Israeli-Palestinian crisis has moved on from declarations of principle to the practical planning stage .
Moreover , we feel that the decision to establish joint control of external borders is extremely positive .
Of course , there is still a great deal left to do .
Not all the issues were resolved at Laeken : I refer to the sites of the agencies , which should be decided on the basis of the specific suitability of the applicant cities and not allocated on the basis of incomprehensible vetoes .
However , it is our duty to be optimistic : the fate of Europe depends not least on our will , on the will of the European Parliament and the national parliaments which represent the people of the Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the European Council 's Laeken Declarations express the opinion that the European project derives its legitimacy from its democratic , transparent and efficient institutions .
The Council having then put the question - which it asked the Convention to discuss - whether Parliament should play an enhanced role , it will probably not surprise you that I , as a parliamentarian , answer that unreservedly in the affirmative , for this Parliament is the only one of the institutions to be directly elected by the people .
All its sittings are in public and comprehensible - I wish the Council 's were - and the speed with which we are capable of reaching decisions - on the European arrest warrant for example - leads me to the conclusion that we are more efficient than the Council and , in many ways , even more so than the Commission .
So , when the Council at Laeken welcomes the Commission 's White Paper on European governance and the so-called Mandelkern report and expects an action plan on the subject from the Commission in the first half of 2002 , I hope that , when doing so , the Council has in mind the intention of strengthening Parliament 's role .
Quite apart from that , we would , as parliamentarians , be happy to discuss new forms of governance with the Commission and the Council .
So , for example , the Commission has proposed an interinstitutional working party , but I gather that the Council has so far found that unacceptable and has declined to take part in it .
I hope we can at least manage , before Barcelona and Seville , to have in-depth discussions with the Council and the Commission on new forms of governance , which will not even be conceivable without Parliament 's consent .
I am aware that many governments find us too independent and self-sufficient , and the Commission and the Council are sometimes disturbed by our excessive ' interference ' in details .
As a Parliament , we are also prepared to accept new ways of dividing up the work between ourselves , the Commission and the Council , for we too must prepare ourselves for an enlarged EU .
We take the view , though , that any delegation of tasks must involve a call-back mechanism , for the search for new forms of European governance and the consideration of new divisions of competences between the EU and the Member States must not be at the expense of European parliamentary life .
On the contrary , Parliament 's role must be solidly entrenched in the European constitution .
Let me make one last comment on what we call civil society .
The European Council has decided to set up a forum , something for which Mr Barnier , in his role as Commissioner , has frequently and with verve expressed his open support .
We welcome the establishment of such a forum , but , just as a forum of this sort supplements the deliberations of the Convention rather than supplanting them , so civil society and discussions within it do not replace Parliament , but add something to it .
It is in this sense that we very much desire dialogue with civil society and with our citizens , and we hope that the Council and the Commission do not see this as over against Parliament , but as an addition to it .
Mr President , the Laeken declaration set the scene for a broad public discussion about the future of Europe .
That is a good thing .
What is not , however , good enough is that three men are being employed to head up this work .
Experience all goes to show that the composition of the Convention will also be one-sided .
The Laeken declaration states , moreover , that deputies may only be allowed to step in if the right member is absent .
Yet deputising is one of the classic opportunities women have for obtaining any kind of representation when it comes to this type of work .
I must therefore call upon the Belgian and Spanish Presidencies to arrange matters in such a way that it is permitted to call in deputies and - rather more ambitiously - call upon them to arrange for everyone to be represented by a deputy of the opposite sex .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this point I would like to respond to certain comments you have made .
I must also , unfortunately , have to ask you to excuse me , but I did not imagine that we were going to overrun to this extent , and I have another commitment , also relating to this debate on the future of Europe .
I clearly do not agree with all the views expressed by Mr Krarup on the pompous rhetoric of Laeken .
On the contrary , I believe that the Convention method completely opens up the game .
I believe that one of the elements , one of our possible fears in relation to this Laeken declaration , is that it does not commit the members of the Convention to certain closed questions , or in any event does not allow all the issues which are vital to the future of Europe to be dealt with .
The same speaker spoke of a lack of democracy .
I would therefore like to reply to him , as well as to Mr Swoboda , who contrasts the representative or democratic characteristics of the Council with those of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament , Mr Swoboda , is a representative democratic institution , of course , and I respect it fully .
But to therefore reduce the representative nature of the Council is going too far .
( Protests from Mr Swoboda )
That is what I understood you to say , and , though I have misunderstood , all the same I am going to say that I think the Ministers or Prime Ministers who attend Councils can be questioned in each Member State .
There are national parliaments for that .
I can tell you that I am ill-treated in my country , because almost every week , at least when I am there , I am asked what I do in the European institutions .
I believe that this is not the right debate in which to establish a hierarchy in terms of the representativeness of the institutions .
Each institution has its place .
I willingly concede that the important thing is that we establish a balance between the institutions , that one institution does not completely dominate another .
I am very happy to say , for example , that my current experience of the European Parliament has convinced me that it must undoubtedly have more powers and play a more important specific role in the future than it does at the moment .
And in particular - and I am straying from the current debate for a second - in terms of what we can expect if the international coalition continues as it is , if it continues to play a role , if we continue to believe that it is necessary , and I believe that it is necessary in order to combat terrorism , the European Parliament must closely monitor the decisions made by European Councils and also by the Member States of the Union , because as I have said previously , and I will continue to repeat , there are several dangers in this respect .
Firstly there is the danger of corrupting the quality of democracy and of life in our countries .
The second danger , which I am very sensitive to , is that , for a certain number of political regimes , the fight , and I am not talking about European States here , but it does concern us in terms of our relations with these countries , for a certain number of countries with tough regimes , there is a temptation to confuse the fight against terrorism with a fight against the country ' s democratic opponents , against the country ' s opposition .
We must clearly take this into account .
Thirdly , Mr Lannoye has just mentioned the relationship between the European Union and the United States .
We must also be careful in this respect .
I believe that we should not be automatically led along , without debate , without discussion , without even , at times , consultation , in blind solidarity with the United States .
I believe that the European Union has the right and the duty to express its differences with the United States .
I have total respect for the United States , I believe that we undoubtedly have a special partnership with the United States , but I believe that in the coalition put together after 11 September , it was good that the European Union was there to express a slightly different approach , to express certain guarantees and assurances , and also to play the role that the European Union has played within the Arab countries , within the Islamic world .
I do not therefore think that the European Union will ever become a kind of copy of the United States of America .
I must tell you that I do not want that at all .
Of course , I respect the American model .
In many respects , it is extremely positive , but it is not transposable .
It is not desirable to transpose it .
And I believe that the European Union must retain its own character .
Many questions have concerned the Convention .
I must talk about the regrets concerning the composition of the trio heading the Convention .
I believe that all three of the personalities involved are very committed to the European project and also have an extremely modern , forward-looking and committed view of the European Union and , something which is perhaps important , enjoy great reputations and a network of relations , academic , political and others , which may ensure that if they defend a point of view , they have a good chance of being heard , even by the European Council .
This is of no small importance .
I would like to say that the Convention , which is perhaps the greatest virtue of the Laeken declaration - and I have already had the opportunity to say this in the European Parliament - , will in reality become what the members of the Convention want to make of it .
You have a praesidium which is not there pro forma , because it is a praesidium which counts .
The number of people in this praesidium will ensure that it is heard .
It is very representative of the different components of the Convention and of the European decision-making world .
I therefore believe that with the trio in question , with this praesidium , the meetings will be well-organised , the meetings and the issues will be well-developed , and above all - and this morning I heard Mr Dehaene voice his opinion on this issue on the radio - I think that what will be important is that the options presented by the Convention to the IGC be clear , that they do not leave room for too many interpretations at the IGC .
Of course , the IGC can accept them or refuse them .
But what is certain is that , if these options are well-balanced , if they are specific , if they are well-targeted and if they are strongly supported , there will be little room for the Council to ignore them , otherwise the Council will not be fulfilling its political duty , or in any event it will be taking a risk .
It will be at that point that the political responsibility of the Council will clearly be called into question .
I therefore have great confidence in the way the Convention is going to develop .
I will add another factor , which is that the Laeken declaration offers all of us who believe in a more integrated Europe a fantastic opportunity to engage in a little European pedagogy , in this respect at least .
I am thinking in particular of young people .
We must not only talk of perspectives , which is clearly very important , but at the same time we must try to educate young people in relation to Europe , to explain to them how we work , to explain to them that Europe deals much more directly with their concerns than people believe or than the press indicates .
This is another way to use this Convention .
I think that I have been clear about the Convention .
The idea of a more integrated European diplomatic service has been mentioned .
I believe that the conclusions of the summit contain a passage on consular cooperation .
This is a start .
The opening of common consulates will be a first step and I hope that we will go further .
I share Mrs Lalumière ' s view that the Convention should not only examine institutional issues but also the content of policies .
Opinion polls indicate that our citizens are in favour of more resolute European actions in various fields , such as social policy , foreign and defence policy and environmental protection .
I believe that the Convention should examine how we should respond to these expectations , by adjusting the competences and tasks of the Union if necessary .
There has been mention of a social deficit .
I think I can say - Mr Dehousse quite rightly pointed this out previously - that one of the aspects which has clearly been most successful during this Presidency is precisely the firm innovative progress made , because this is important , on a social level .
Think for example of the social indicators , of the quality of employment .
I believe that this is of importance .
Think also of the European social conciliator .
There are a whole series of completely new elements here which are genuine tools for supporting a real social policy which is more than just packaging or a facelift .
The work carried out by Mrs Onckelinks from this point of view , with Mr van den Broek , is absolutely remarkable and they have played a crucial role , in our view at least , in the success of the Belgian Presidency .
This is a fundamentally important element .
To a certain extent this relates to what Mrs Lalumière has requested , which is that we clearly concern ourselves with more than the merely institutional issues .
I said just a moment ago that I fully share that point of view .
Unfortunately I cannot stay here much longer .
I still want to say a word about governance and the reform of the Council .
I agree with Mr Martin on the need to take measures without delay in order to bring the Union closer to its citizens and improve the functioning of the European institutions .
The Convention will discuss measures which will lead to a modification of the Treaties in 2004 .
However , the Laeken European Council has highlighted measures which may be taken straight away .
In this context , we have welcomed the White Paper on European Governance , as well as the Secretary-General of the Council ' s intention to present proposals to the European Council in Barcelona aimed at improving the functioning of the Council .
The European Council in Seville will draw operational conclusions from it .
I think I have responded as fully as possible to the list of interventions which the Prime Minister has not yet been able to reply to .
I hope that you will forgive me for not being able to stay .
I am really sorry , especially since I enjoy being amongst you , because I have come to know this Parliament .
I have heard many pertinent interventions here , which show a certain tendency towards freedom of expression and autonomy , and I have also noted an element which is rarely seen in national parliaments and that is that different kinds of interventions may be heard coming from a single group .
There is a freedom and a freshness in this which I like very much .
I hope that one day - as I have already said , but I will repeat it - I will be able to return to this House to refresh my spirit .
Mr President , the President of the Council , Mr Verhofstadt , stated in his presentation that in Laeken there were no taboos whatsoever .
However , it is crystal clear that the stateless-nations-taboo is more present today than ever before .
But as Victor Hugo said , " nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time has come " .
Right now , the idea of self-determination is present in the Basque people ' s mind .
The present nation-states were born at a certain moment with an internal trend towards their transformation .
The peoples and cultures of Europe on the contrary have no known date of birth .
More importantly , there is no reason for their disappearance unless we condemn them to such a fate .
As a matter of fact , their disappearance would be not only a loss to humanity but the demolition of the best basis for the political future of Europe .
Mr President , the Representative of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Laeken European Council which concludes the Belgian Presidency of the Union has been a success .
I do not say this out of courtesy or convenience but because I profoundly believe that the Heads of State and Government , over recent days , have sent the signal that the Europeans were waiting for , one of clarity and the rejection of pretence .
The Laeken Summit has achieved its main ambition : to adopt a declaration on the future of Europe , opening the way to the future great reform of the Union .
As the President-in-Office of the Council has stressed , there was no taboo at Laeken , no issue has been avoided , and I hope that this formula will become a reality , since European construction has too often been opaque , or at least the reserve of the initiated .
Please allow me , on behalf of the French delegation of the PPE-DE Group , to express our pleasure at the nomination of Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing as president of the Convention , as well as Mr Giuliano Amato and Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene as vice-presidents .
These eminent people are renowned for their experience and their determination to persuade people to favour a Europe which fully and democratically carries out its competences , but only its competences , which would be clearly defined .
At a time when Europe has a currency , is being enlarged and is trying to provide globalisation with a soul and with values , it is high time that we reviewed our vision of public life and the relations between our citizens and their institutions at all levels .
A new era was begun at Laeken . We are delighted .
But there is still a long way to go . We must therefore continue with our efforts .
Mr President , we are bringing the Belgian Presidency to a close , and that should surely be in the presence of the Council , normally speaking .
The Belgian Presidency has been congratulated on the fact that the Ministers have attended the sittings so regularly , yet we are now evaluating their Presidency without any of the Council members being present .
I would question the validity of continuing this debate .
Whom are we actually addressing ?
Well , that is for the subsequent speakers to decide .
Mr President , after 11 September , we succeeded in cutting back on the leeway which terrorists had , by taking numerous and effective European measures .
At the same time , we have realised that the security which we promote by doing this forms part of a greater security and that we essentially touch a deeper , more fundamental issue , namely the great inequality in this world , which often serves as a breeding ground for conflicts .
If security is not shared , it has no chance of succeeding .
One in five people in this world do not have access to basic education or basic health care .
This requires a multilateral approach .
At present , we notice how the United States , which has operated more multilaterally over the past few months , has now started to act more unilaterally again over the past few days by withdrawing from the ABM Treaty , and is also taking a far more unilateral course with regard to a number of other treaties .
It is of the utmost importance for us , as Europe , to try to use this large coalition to exert pressure so that we continue to operate multilaterally : making enormous investments in new technologies and then winding up with too little funding , attention and energy to help fight poverty in the world is , of course , ultimately not the most effective way of achieving shared security .
Aid is needed for the reconstruction of Afghanistan , once again with Europe at the helm , so that not only the military aspect is highlighted , but that shared security is sought via the route of reconstruction .
The same applies , in fact , to the Middle East .
Europe must exert pressure and not be frightened of having a military presence within NATO using its own institutional forms and organisation - the Convention will need to create an institutional form for this - but must at the same time also have the courage to commit itself to this shared security .
And I wish this fundamental aspect had been slightly more underlined at the Laeken Summit .
Although reference is made to the unilateral cancellation of the ABM Treaty by the US and to Europe ' s leading role as the world ' s greatest commercial power , we could , and should , do more about shared security .
I would call on the Presidency and the Commission to continue to take initiatives in this area , also in the coming weeks , both with regard to the Middle East , the Balkans and Afghanistan .
We are on the right track .
There are tendencies towards unilateralism : let us not get drawn into this , let us persuade our allies to adopt a multilateral approach and give Europe a central role in this .
Mr President , it has not been an easy task for the Belgian Presidency .
Despite careful planning and many years of preparation , everything was brutally overturned after 11 September 2001 .
The developments in Afghanistan and the fight against terrorism have completely dominated the agenda .
I had intended to congratulate the Belgians on nonetheless having done a very good job .
Perhaps someone could pass that message on to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Where Laeken is concerned , my group is pleased that the declaration was so ambitious .
It poses the right questions and will enable the Convention to work constructively and with an open mind .
Many of the questions formulated concerning , for example , the path towards a constitution and a clearer division of competences , coincide well with the agenda of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
Despite their long experience and considerable commitment , there is nonetheless a certain amount of doubt about the three well-known statesmen appointed to the Bureau .
Will these three gentlemen of quite mature years really be able to enthuse people , especially young people , when it comes to the debate about the future ?
It would have been good to have had people of rather more mixed ages and , as many in this House have pointed out , a woman in the Bureau , for more than half of the population of the EU does in fact consist of women .
Mr President , to the outside world , particularly the Netherlands , the Laeken Summit was a meeting of Heads of Government characterised by internal strife .
Strife about who would become the president of the Convention and strife about which country would house which European agency .
These two points completely dominated the Dutch media .
Fortunately , however , something good came out of it as well .
The European Summit has decided on the Convention and not only on the President and two Vice-Presidents , which I am happy about , but also about the tasks given to the Convention .
Luckily , these are very broadly based .
The Convention will need to better distribute and define the Union ' s powers and will need to check how the system of treaties and Union legislation can be simplified and in which ways more democracy and transparency can be created in the Union .
And concerning this transparency , I can already say that I , for one , opt for the European Council of Ministers ' having the role of a senate , based on the model of the German Federal Council - a ministerial council which , by law , meets in public .
The European Summit has also asked the Convention to develop an idea of a constitution for the Union and to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into it .
This is a very fine initial package . However , I would say at the same time that , in our view , more is needed .
The Convention will also need to examine how the Second and Third Pillars can be accommodated within Community policy .
Migration policy has already more or less been accommodated in this way , and policy on internal security is now the sector which is experiencing rapid growth at Community level since the dramatic events of 11 September .
However , foreign and security policy is still intergovernmental , and Mr Solana ' s role is made almost impossible , given the way the European Union is structured .
We would also like to embed this policy , and it would be better if Mr Solana became Vice-President of the European Commission .
Finally , this time round , the Summit has chosen a president and two vice-presidents for the Convention .
The role could have been even more solid if the Convention itself had been able to choose its president on the recommendation of the Summit .
There might then perhaps even have been a woman amongst them .
As far as we are concerned , the Convention might also come up with the idea of choosing the President of the European Commission in future .
This could be done by the European Parliament .
The Belgian Presidency has faced a large number of problems , but the fact that it has brought the Convention to a conclusion ultimately makes me think positively about a Presidency that has been dogged by many problems .
Mr President , great declarations and little progress , summits come and go and they are all the same .
Apart from the expected launch of the Convention , Laeken has provided few concrete results .
Happily , at Lisbon , Europe had defined new ambitions in terms of economic growth and employment .
In relation to that essential objective , Laeken was content to reiterate the Lisbon decisions .
It is better than nothing but takes us no further .
In terms of fiscal coordination , Laeken takes us to the end of 2002 , but it is becoming clear that at Feira , fiscal Europe met with an impasse .
The Feira agreement should lead to the exchange of information between Member States .
The day when each citizen will pay the tax laid down by its own parliament , any desire for fiscal harmonisation , and healthy fiscal competition , will come to nothing .
Each Member State will redefine its own fiscal policy .
The others will have to provide the required information so that each person is taxed according to his nationality .
Certain dependent or associated territories balk at adopting the exchange of information .
Switzerland and other third countries refuse the system because they regard it as violating banking secrecy .
Like Austria , Luxembourg and perhaps some others will not implement Feira without an agreement which extends to important financial markets outside the Union .
Deadlock is still assured .
I appeal to President Prodi to propose a pay-as-you-earn system on savings revenue as a direct European tax .
Such a system would be accepted by the public if it is in full discharge , that is to say that it exempts the citizen from any other additional tax .
A pay-as-you-earn system would prevent the enormous bureaucratic system which an exchange of information would imply , but above all , such a European tax could be payable on European assets in the United States , Switzerland and other countries .
This would increase the Union ' s income and allow us to reduce the current national contributions .
Mr President , take this idea on board , and you will really bring progress to Europe .
Mainly thanks to the Belgian Presidency , the discussion on the future of Europe has been broadened to involve MEPs and it is becoming a public discussion .
This is to be welcomed , but there is also a considerable risk of the Convention acquiring Babel-like features , because it is open to all topics and all opinions .
In their Laeken Declaration , the Heads of Government have chosen fine words to say ultimately nothing .
They have presented the many questions which they themselves had not been able to answer for ten years to a Convention which is only being given a few months to come up with the answers .
It also remains to be seen whether the Convention can narrow the gulf between the EU and the people .
People are not interested in the redistribution of power between the institutions .
What people care about is the content of the decisions , rather than the level at which they are adopted .
Europe is not served by a trench war between federalists and intergovernmentalists .
More intensive cooperation in gradual steps is what is required .
It will then transpire that the Community method is the only viable route to take .
The ideological battle about Europe ' s future only has losers .
As far as I am concerned , Laeken should have stated this .
Mr President , Laeken has opened the door to the development of a draft constitution on the basis of the Community method .
The mandate is right for it , the procedure is suited to it , and whether something of the sort is achieved or not is up to the Convention itself .
Nor can I join in the criticism levelled at the composition of the praesidium , believing as I do that the people at the top will no longer be in thrall to anyone , but will have only their own conceptions of the Europe of the future .
This represents a great opportunity .
We should not find fault with a person 's age if that is a sign of an independence that can contribute much to the matter in hand .
Apart from this , I think it extraordinarily important that the right technical conditions be achieved in this matter .
It is of the essence that the secretariat is appointed by the Council , but with the possibility of consulting the Commission and Parliament .
I believe it would be generous on the part of the Council to offer the Commission and Parliament truly balanced and equal representation on the secretariat in order to achieve the right working conditions on that basis .
The technical aspects at the outset are sometimes decisive as regards the content resulting at the end .
Of all enterprises , the European Council is surely the one most in need of reform , and it is making a start by concentrating on great matters such as the creation of the European Convention , in which it has been successful .
If , though , it loses itself in detail through the General Affairs Council or Councils of Ministers not getting things straight , it makes itself look ridiculous .
We again saw this , for example , over the issue of the agencies .
So we can only recommend to future Presidencies of the Council that the precondition for success on the really big issues is that they should not deal with every triviality at a sitting of the European Council .
Mr President , I welcome the outcome of the Laeken summit .
On balance it is a very positive one .
The decision to establish a European Convention paralleled by a forum for civil society is a historic one in its proportions .
Never again will the future of Europe be decided behind closed doors , provided we do our work constructively in the Convention .
I particularly welcome the possibility of a European constitution as a possible outcome .
As has been said by Mr Verhofstadt , there should be no taboos in our debate and the idea of federalism and a constitution for Europe could guarantee the role of the citizens in small states better than any other form of governance .
I endorse wholeheartedly the decision of the European summit to give its support to Yasser Arafat as the leader of the Palestinian people and I condemn without reservation the misuse of the Security Council veto in blocking the appointment of international observers to the Middle East conflict .
These decisions , however , were tarnished by an unseemly squabble among some Member States about the location of European agencies which reflected the worst features of the old way of running Europe .
I am also disappointed the Council did not give its explicit support for a legal framework for public services in the context of competition regulations , as the European Parliament urged .
Finally , I also believe it was a serious mistake to back off from a decision to nominate a European Union peace-keeping force for Afghanistan under a UN mandate .
This unfortunately now leaves this area to the dictates of the interests of the more powerful states on the world stage and fails to provide a political presence and role for European values .
Could I finally say that we should ease up a little on the ageism in relation to the praesidium .
I am more interested in the originality or old age of the ideas of these three individuals rather than their chronological age .
I do think , however , that had we tried , we could have found an older woman who could have also made an important contribution to the praesidium .
Mr President , apart from the fact that it is only partially present in this House , I believe we must acknowledge that the Belgian Presidency has not disappointed and that it has been up to the job of dealing with these clearly very difficult circumstances .
I believe that they have thoroughly understood that the task of a Presidency is to bring together wills , to forge consensus , so that the European Union may move ahead .
The decisions taken in relation to the declaration on the future of Europe , in relation to the Convention method , in relation to making the common security and defence policy operative , the declarations on the Middle East peace process , Afghanistan , etc. and above all , in relation to the fight against terrorism , are going to allow the European Union to move forward and make progress .
What we have to do now is turn declarations into deeds , so that our actions do not remain merely rhetorical , particularly in relation to the fight against terrorism .
I believe that the views of the terrorists and their friends , who very much disliked the decisions taken at Laeken , clearly demonstrate that we are moving in the right direction .
What we now have to do , once we have consolidated the internal aspects of our project , is turn Europe into an international operator capable of comprehensive action with regard to the challenges facing the world , a world in which nations are too big to resolve their small problems and too small to resolve the big problems we are faced with on a global scale .
A European Union which is able to act with one voice and independently in different scenarios and regions and which is able to employ a wide range of political , economic , commercial , civil and military measures which will allow it to achieve its foreign policy objectives .
We therefore congratulate the Belgian Presidency , Mr President .
I believe that we are working in the right direction , and I hope that the declarations of the European Council in Laeken , which has been a good finale to a brilliant Presidency , can quickly be turned into concrete actions which , as I said at the beginning , will allow the European Union to make significant progress in its project of political consolidation .
Mr President , we can celebrate today a number of victories for the European Parliament on things which , not very long ago , we were told would never possibly be agreed at the Laeken European Council .
For a start we have a Convention - and I am particularly pleased at this because I think I was the first one to suggest nearly two years ago now , that the Convention method that was used for drafting the Charter of Rights could equally be used to prepare a revision of the Treaties .
We were told that it would be restricted to just four subjects and now it is clear that the agenda is wide open .
It will produce a single document with recommendations , not just listing every single option that anybody can think of .
It will of course come up with options when there is a division , but it will work towards reaching a broad consensus as the basis for the work of the IGC .
On all that we can be pleased .
The fly in the ointment is the curious decision on the choice of the troika for the praesidium of this Convention .
It is no secret that my group would not have chosen Mr Giscard d ' Estaing as its preferred candidate , but as you know , Mr President , we have had experiences of constitutional reports from Mr Giscard d ' Estaing in this Parliament .
He produced a report on subsidiarity a number of years ago and from that we can draw some lessons because every single paragraph in his report , if I remember correctly , was amended in committee and then in plenary , by Parliament adopting amendments tabled by yourself .
That might be a working method we might well need to employ in the Convention and is something we can draw some lessons from .
I turn now to the less positive result of the European Council - the farce over the agencies .
That too can be used to learn some lessons .
It shows us what happens when we move away from the Community method to intergovernmentalism .
Instead of a Commission proposal we have every country coming up with its own proposal , feeling forced to defend it in an intergovernmental logic and with no result in the end .
It shows the limits of the European Council which should be setting the strategic objectives for the European Union .
When it has to deal with detail like that it of course fails .
Let no government now turn around to the Parliament and criticise us for being incapable of taking decisions , accuse us of being too slow in taking decisions , when the European Council offers us a spectacle like that , which indeed discredits the European Union in the eyes of its citizens .
Mr President , I shall stop now but not without remarking that I believe this is the last time you will chairing the European Parliament before the presidential election comes and you move on to other higher things and may I wish you all the best of luck for a prosperous and successful New Year in 2002 .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , if our goal is to establish a federation of States and the constituent process is to involve the Treaties , the Laeken Declaration establishing a Convention that is to propose institutional reform to the Intergovernmental Conference before the European elections and before enlargement , is a success for Parliament and the Belgian Presidency .
However , the European Parliament must ensure this success does not become an illusion .
This democratic challenge must be supported by a great debate open to all the citizens of the Union .
As I see it , the future of Europe is in the hands , in particular , of the great political families which created the European Community and believe in integration , in the European social model , in European democracy and in European reunification .
However , on certain points of the Laeken agenda , the Community process was slowed down by a cross-fire of vetoes .
This is the weapon of the sceptics and populists .
I refer to the deferral of the financing of Galileo , which President Prodi also mentioned , and to the failure to reach agreement on the locations of the European agencies or on the Community patent .
In any case , as has just been said , these shadows reinforce the need for the Community method and majority decisions ; I refer also to the security and defence policy , in which progress has been made , and to foreign policy , which is still poorly defined .
Europe is standing shoulder to shoulder with the United States in the fight against terrorism , but it is also concentrating on combating the poverty which divides the world , while the situation in the Middle East has reached tragic dimensions .
What should we do ?
Is there no way forward ?
I support Mr Verhofstadt ' s call for a Europe whose actions are consistent with the values of freedom and solidarity , which it enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights in order to make globalisation more humane .
Mr President , when a child is born with just a father , we must not be surprised if it grows up with problems .
Europe has many fathers and we have just missed the opportunity to give it a mother .
I would like to talk about the assessment in Laeken on the subject of the application of justice and home affairs policies .
I agree with the progress made on the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions , both in the criminal field and in the civil field , though to a lesser extent .
And I must congratulate you in this respect on the content and the form of the agreement on the European arrest warrant , which affects a large number of offences and which I see as greater justice rather than greater repression .
I believe we should welcome this .
However , with regard to immigration and asylum , I must say that the Council ' s text adopts a tone of renunciation which worries me .
The analysis of the situation is sincere of course , but I do not believe that it reaches the right conclusions .
Mr President , we cannot allow fifteen different immigration policies in this borderless Europe for much longer .
I think that we should draw other conclusions from this situation ; the conclusion that these policies require greater impetus , that we should rid ourselves once and for all of the shackles of unanimity and that we should increase this Parliament ' s participation in such sensitive issues .
Mr President , I believe we have demonstrated that it is possible to work with our Parliament in this field and that we must put an end to the restrictions imposed in Amsterdam .
I hope that the Convention takes note of this and puts it right .
I would also like to end by congratulating the Presidency on the inclusion of diversity and the idea of federalism in the Treaty and on Mr Verhofstadt ' s words to this House in this regard .
Mr President , on the day after the Laeken Summit , I would like to express a few regrets and one hope .
I regret that in the field of foreign and defence policy , the Heads of State and Government meeting in Laeken have not been able to show their capacity to act .
So , while we are living through an unprecedented crisis , the European Union will not be able to decide to send a joint force to Afghanistan .
Such a decision would have sent a strong signal of the will of the Europeans , by showing that we are ready to carry out our responsibilities fully , both in a military sense and in a humanitarian or political sense .
Likewise , once again , in the field of common defence , no immediate decision has been taken .
These statements are largely virtual and the issue of automatic access by the Union to NATO ' s resources has yet to be sorted out .
The Union ' s foreign and defence policy exists more in speeches than in actions , and I regret this .
More than ever , we must build a political and democratic Europe which is capable of carrying weight and influence in the world .
That is why I would now like to express a hope .
The Laeken Summit has decided to create the Convention .
It has provided it with an excellent president and an open agenda .
I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for this , since throughout its mandate it has shown courage and vision , as well as the Commissioner responsible for these issues .
This Convention opens the way to a new future for Europe .
I wish it success , and I hope that in two years time we may have a constitution which all the citizens of the European Union can read and understand , and that we finally establish the principle of directly electing the President of the European Commission .
If we do not want to the European Union of tomorrow to be a mere free trade area , if we really want to carry weight in the world , in the new international order , this is the only possible course .
Mr President , time is short , so my only comment will be on the really historic decision to convene a constituent assembly which has already - albeit inaccurately - been called a Convention .
Ôhe European Parliament has every right to be proud because the idea of a Convention was mooted here , in this House , and took shape in the reports by the European Parliament , mainly from 1997 onwards .
Parliament has insisted ever since that institutional development is a waste of time unless someone else is given the job of drafting new Treaties , i.e. unless a political body takes over the role played hitherto by the bureaucrats .
This is not the time to judge whether or not we have finally achieved our aim ; that will depend on the degree to which the proposals tabled by the Convention find their way into the new Treaties , which is why the Convention needs to table specific institutional proposals , assuming of course that it reaches an agreement .
If the Convention tables a selection of alternatives to the Intergovernmental Conference , rather than specific proposals , then it will have little effect on the shape of the new Treaty .
Unfortunately , the instructions to come out of Laeken are rather more open-ended on this point than they should have been .
If you stop to consider that no institutional body in the European Union and no institution in any one Member State has studied or tabled more thoughts on the institutional aspects of the European Union than the European Parliament , then a contingent of 16 delegates is hardly in proportion to its contribution to date .
However , just so that our fellow citizens know where they stand , the Convention will not table a draft Treaty , it will table a draft Constitutional Treaty .
The intergovernmental method will be complemented by the Community method , rather than being abolished , which is perfectly reasonable , given that the European Union is a union of nations and a union of states .
However , the Convention takes the fight for greater democracy and greater rule of law in the European Union to a new level .
It really is a pity , Mr President , that the chairman of the Convention is appointed by the Council .
It would have been more fitting to allow a body made up mainly of members of parliament to elect its own chairman .
Mr President , from the list of speakers it would seem that the rest of you will now have to follow the PPE-DE family ' s internal debate , but of course that is perfectly in order .
In my opinion , the Belgian presidential term was a great success in difficult circumstances .
In that connection , externally there was Afghanistan , Macedonia , the Middle East and 11 September , and , internally , there were enormous expectations , which mainly focused on the Laeken Summit .
Seen in this light the results of the Laeken summit were good .
They will take the Community forward both ideologically and realistically .
Laeken was a confirmation of the political will that exists with regard to speedy enlargement , with ten new members joining in 2004 , provided that these countries themselves are determined to try to bring that about in negotiations .
The Laeken Declaration is a successful mixture of questions regarding problems to be solved and , on the other hand , faith in being able to solve them .
The Convention , which - at least as a group - the PPE-DE was the first to propose , will be starting its work soon , and one thing we know for sure is that its praesidium has experience - some 200 man years of experience in all .
Good luck - the work will not be easy !
I think the best decision taken at the Laeken Summit , however , was that by Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt , whose personal contribution certainly lies behind Belgium ' s success there , as he very quickly put a stop to the row over agencies .
When the Prime Minister of a large country starts imagining that he is at some European Food of the Year ceremony , or awarding Michelin points to some city , or when the President of another large country begins to fantasise about beautiful Swedish models , then that is really a very good reason to end the discussion before the Europeans witnessing it laugh even louder at us than they are doing at present .
Mr President , I would like to continue this internal PPE-DE debate by focussing solely on the Laeken Declaration .
It is right , as the Declaration says , that European institutions should become closer to the citizens , less intrusive , less unwieldy and more efficient and open to democratic scrutiny .
It is also right that a whole series of questions should be asked in terms of simplifying the process of legislation , on clarifying competencies of the Union and indeed restoring perhaps one or two to Member States , as is mentioned .
How to involve the national parliamentarians too is a very important aspect and lastly , it is right , as the President of the Council said , that this is a new departure for Europe as a way of amending Treaties rather than having decisions made behind closed doors and smoke-filled rooms early in the morning .
There is a real doubt , however , that these statements of principle will actually become reality .
Is the agenda , as some feel , already decided in advance ?
Will all the voices in the European political spectrum be heard ?
Will indeed , above all , the views of ordinary European citizens , be taken into account and listened to in the work of the Convention ?
There were some signs under the previous Presidency but not I am afraid under this one , that they did actually care about European citizens .
It had a website - ' Europa ' or whatever it was , - but we have not heard much about it under this Presidency .
In the conclusions of the Council relating to the Convention , one paragraph is devoted to the forum and it seems to be more about informing the network of organisations than having their contributions in the work of the Convention .
I therefore make this one appeal today that in the praesidium , and perhaps helped by the Commission , national parliamentarians and others , we really should have a real European debate in the Member States involving European citizens so that when we end up with a constitutional framework , we really have something that Europeans can support .
This is the only occasion in history , that I can think of , where citizens can be consulted before a constitution is drawn up rather than afterwards .
So please , Commissioner , ensure that everything is done to make sure this European debate will actually take place .
Mr President , Laeken has gone better than Nice did last year , and for that the Belgian Presidency is to be thanked , yet the positive outcome has to do with another matter on which Laeken was to give a decision .
Nothing had been decided by last weekend on the central topic of " The future of the Union " ; quite rightly , only questions had been asked about it .
Even a cursory analysis of the questions , though , shows that some of them are not questions at all , such as the rhetorical question as to whether it would contribute to greater transparency if the sessions of the Council - at any rate in its legislative capacity - were to be in public .
Now , it goes without saying that legislative Council sessions must be thrown open , but why did something so obvious not become legally binding at Maastricht or Amsterdam or , at the latest , at Nice ?
Another question in the catalogue of Laeken declarations makes me similarly pensive .
We have to consider whether the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be incorporated into the Basic Treaty and whether the European Community should accede to the European Convention on Human Rights .
Does this mean that the results of the last Convention are really nothing more than an option ?
I hope not .
I take an even more critical view of questions in the Declaration which were not even put at Laeken .
The question arises for me , as an elected representative from a medium-sized state , how the Convention will ensure that the big states will not dominate in the future .
There has , unfortunately , been a very definite reason for these questions to be asked in recent weeks , and let nobody believe that there will be any less hankering after top-down management in a future Europe of nineteen small and medium-sized States and a small group of large and very large ones .
One last point in the Laeken Declaration prompts me to vehement criticism here and now .
The less than impressive , indeed uncaring , way in which the Council 's General Secretariat handled the Convention on Fundamental Rights last time gives little hope for anything good from the Constitutional Convention .
I can only hope that the Council 's bureaucracy will prove us wrong by providing us with a quite outstanding service .
Mr President , at the Laeken Summit , the heads of government agreed to set up a constitutional Convention on the future of Europe which includes the possible incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , with its costly , social and economic rights , and the direct election of a European Commission President , which I oppose .
I welcome , however , calls for the EU to become more democratic , transparent and efficient , for an enhanced role for the national parliamentarians and a menu of options to choose from in 2004 .
The EU already possesses its own anthem , flag , citizenship , army , currency etc. and a whole host of quasi-federal institutions .
To pretend , as the Labour Government in Britain is already doing , that this Convention is simply an opportunity to limit the power of the Union at the expense of the states is ridiculous .
This Convention is much more reminiscent of the American nation-building exercise in Philadelphia in 1787 .
The political elites of Europe are ever more distanced from their electorates .
How representative of European opinion are Valéry Giscard D 'Estaing , Dehaene and Amato ?
If this is the court , the jury is a loaded one .
How representative will the Convention be of the peoples of Europe ?
We should be preparing urgently for enlargement by solving the Amsterdam leftovers , and reforming the CAP and the structural funds representing 80 % of the budget of the EU , not preparing for grand constitutional reform of little relevance to the concerns and aspirations of the electorate .
How will extending QMV to delicate areas like social security and taxation help ?
And what has been done to resolve the problems of the much-needed EU patent because of the obsession with multilingualism in the institutions ?
In the European Union there is idealism born out of a desire to see a Europe of peace and prosperity , an objective we can all share .
I come from a country with centuries-old , uninterrupted democratic traditions and I want to say two things to the believers in a European super-state .
Firstly , the EU is not the origin but the expression of peace in post-war Europe , which is underpinned by democracy in the nation-states and respect for the rule of law .
Secondly , idealistic political changes instituted by the political elites which do not have the broad support of the people will be like structures built on sand .
Do not run before you can walk .
When the peoples of Europe want a single European state , that will be the time to call for a European Convention , and not before .
I wish you a happy Christmas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Belgian Presidency has without doubt gone to a great deal of effort , yet the lack of a European Community spirit on the part of the fifteen governments in the European Union when it comes to important and urgent decisions is something that cannot be overcome by just one Presidency .
The brilliant analysis of the situation and the many questions listed could have come from Parliament 's reports on Nice , its aftermath , or Laeken , and they give the impression of having been written down on the spot .
These are questions to which Parliament has for years now been demanding answers for the sake of the future of the European Union .
Is everything now again being jeopardised by so much questioning ?
Let us take , for example , common suffrage .
The Council has , since July 1998 , been examining a European draft electoral law on elections to the European Parliament and has still not come to any conclusion by the end of 2001 - all of two and a half years later .
It is raising the question of whether we want European suffrage .
Looked at as a whole , there is no doubt that the Convention represents an opportunity , yet Parliament contradicts Laeken by demanding that we should negotiate and reach a decision on the basis of one unitary , coherent proposal .
It is equally regrettable that the Heads of State and of Government have again put off until Barcelona and Seville resolutions on the adaptation of the Council 's structures and work practices .
Reading the Laeken resolutions reminded me of a saying coined by one of our poets , Hans Magnus Enzensberger : ' He , seated in a common place , / thought up another commonplace . '
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Laeken Declaration on the future of the European Union is a positive step towards a European Union that is more citizen-oriented and more transparent .
A good declaration , however , must not remain mere empty words .
For example , the conclusion of the Lisbon Council that the European Union should be made the world ' s most competitive area has to an extent met with a surprising degree of reluctance on the part of Member States to do anything about it .
It is essential from the point of view of the Union ' s credibility that words and deeds go hand in hand .
The Union and its institutions have - with good reason - been criticised for being too distant from the people .
In order to promote a more citizen-oriented approach , any preparatory work for revision of the Treaties in the future must be carried out in a more transparent manner .
The European Council must observe the same principles of democracy , efficiency and consistency that we also expect of the other EU institutions .
The expected - and positive - decision of the European Council at Laeken , was to set up a Convention .
So , in this respect , I disagree with my good friend , Charles Tannock .
The problem , however , lies in the fact that three distinguished European statesmen , each with a long life ' s work behind them , have now been appointed to lead the Convention .
No women were even shortlisted for the presidency .
Experience is obviously invaluable , but in order to guarantee a citizen-oriented approach we ought now to be thinking about the sort of age and gender distribution there should be among the Convention ' s other members so that the EU can really be brought closer to its citizens and in particular the shapers of the future , that is to say , the young .
At Laeken the question of the location of the urgently needed food agency to be set up in the new year was discussed .
In view of the diseases among animals that have recently occurred in practically all Member States , Europeans have the right to expect Heads of State to do their utmost to ensure there is complete safety with regard to food .
The way the matter was dealt with by the Council , however , was more reminiscent of a farce , which , according to the German newspaper Die Welt , put even all the soap operas in the shade .
It is quite indefensible that populist objectives should be able to hamper decision-making in a matter that is crucial to the health and well-being of our citizens .
Mr President , a positive acceleration is taking place in European political integration .
The process of enlargement is a reality , just as the convening of the Convention is a reality ; countless steps forward have been taken in the field of justice , as they have in the field of foreign and defence policy .
However , this acceleration in political integration is not being matched by similar acceleration in economic integration , that is , in the creation of the markets on which political integration is based .
It is strange , but we are witnessing a veritable inversion of the Community method .
Indeed , from coal to steel , to the single currency , it has all been a succession of steps forward towards the building of a common home , starting with the foundations and working our way towards the roof .
Now , while we are rushing to build the roof , we are extremely behind in the creation of markets which are crucial for the lives of the Europeans .
There have been too many delays , too many failures , too much egotism : from electricity to gas , from telecommunications to Galileo to the Community patent .
This lack of synchronisation between the physical dimension of the markets and the metaphysical political dimension could cost the process of European integration the citizens ' support .
Indeed , the costs of losing political sovereignty are perceived to be too high and the benefits for businesses and consumers are considered to be too low , too limited .
It would be as well , in order to avoid this danger , for European integration to be resumed according to the method of our founding fathers , free from contemptible egotism and without calculated , unnecessary leaps forward .
Mr President , the words ' entrepreneur ' or ' employer ' occur only once in the Laeken final conclusions , and that in connection with the protection of workers when an employer becomes insolvent .
I believe we have missed an opportunity here .
At the European level , we are engaged in turning the internal market into a domestic market , and Europe is home , after all , to 18 million small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am the President of the European SME-Union , and it is therefore a matter of concern to me that I should point out over and over again that our primary goals should include the safeguarding of existing jobs and the creation of new ones .
At the end of the day , it is the small and medium-sized enterprises that provide two-thirds of all jobs , pay 80 % of all taxes and train 85 % of young workers .
My second point takes us away from internal affairs to the international arena .
How do we envisage the European Union 's future representation in international organisations ?
In Parliament , we have now decided on this Committee on NATO .
How are we to proceed in matters affecting the World Trade Organisation ?
There are many other areas ; how does Europe intend to take a leadership role in the future ?
The third point that concerns me is in fact the Council 's secretariat .
I believe we should set up a body composed of the best minds in the secretariat as well .
It should be possible for the European Council , the European Parliament and the Commission to be equally represented on it .
Our objective should be for the ideas produced by the best minds to eventually bring us a result at which the citizens of Europe will rejoice .
The first two sentences of the Laeken Declaration about the debilitating effects of the two World Wars confirm my belief that the European Union is a force for good in the world and Britain , like all other Member States , derives great benefit from the existence of the EU .
The remains of my grandfather , like many others , lie somewhere in Flanders on the battlefield of the Somme .
My father fought in Montgomery 's army in Flanders for the liberation of Brussels .
I am still in Flanders , the third generation of my humble family , fighting here for Britain 's interests .
Can there be any doubt as to which generation has got right the way to work out Europe 's relations ?
The simple certainties of the 20th century are less clear in the complexities of the 21st century .
As I read on in the Laeken Declaration I recall the saying we have in English that , like the curate 's egg , it is good in parts .
I particularly like the reference that we are a continent of liberty and , above all , of diversity .
Unlike the United States of America , Europe is a voluntary association of sovereign independent states .
We must never forget that .
Of course we need European-level institutions but let us also recall the wise words of Jacques Santer : " Europe must do less better " .
There needs to be a clearer definition of subsidiarity on " less " .
Only go to European level for that which can only be done at European level .
On " better " I urge Commission and Council to look closely at the call of this Parliament for a uniform and compulsory code of good administrative behaviour .
The response I received to a Parliamentary question last week from the Commission was dismissive of Parliament 's call made in September for such a uniform and compulsory code .
That is not the right attitude , nor is it the way to get the European public on side .
The case for such a code has been set up by the Ombudsman , Jacob Söderman .
I am pleased he will be an observer at the Convention but I would say to Commission and Council that you would do well to listen to him as well as to allow him to observe .
As the final speaker from the floor this year , may I wish all the staff , all the Members and all the people of Europe a very merry Christmas and a happy New Year .
Mr President , this debate began over four hours ago , and I can understand that great demands have been made on the attention of the European Parliament .
However , for my part , I have listened carefully to all the speakers , right to the end , and I must say that throughout this debate the dialogue and the speeches in this House have been of a consistently high quality .
Almost all those who have spoken have expressed their satisfaction at the end , not only of this Laeken Council , but also of six months of Belgian Presidency , and I have no problem - quite the contrary - in joining in with your thanks , not only to Guy Verhofstadt and Louis Michel , but to all the Belgian Ministers and all their colleagues .
I should also like to thank them , and why not , for the quality of the relations that have been maintained and even strengthened during the Belgian Presidency , whatever the problems or the difficulties between the Council and our colleagues and the members of the European Commission .
I should just like to say a few words about the Convention and the hopes that it inspires .
First of all , Mr Swoboda and James Elles , and others too perhaps , have raised the issue of the civil society .
I believe it is very important that this new framework is being put in place for the first time on institutional issues , after the initial successful experience of the previous Convention on fundamental rights , though that was a restricted , limited exercise , and probably less sensitive than the one that we are about to begin . I believe it is very important that this Convention should be open , and should be able to take note of what is happening outside it .
One way or another , this forum , this network of non-governmental organisations , regions and associations will have to be able to make its voice heard and , when necessary , heard by the Convention .
I have taken note of the suggestion that the website should be a two-way affair , so that it cannot only disseminate information but also pass on opinions and criticisms .
This also reminds me of an idea which I have already mentioned in this House , that this Convention should be a sort of sounding box , both for governments and for the public .
May I also say that it would be very worthwhile during a period - and I am thinking about the year 2002 - in which six or seven , or maybe more if I am not mistaken , of the countries of the Union will be holding general elections , and therefore we shall have to pay great attention to the quality of the European debate , because we are well aware that , whether national politicians like it or not , the European dimension is bound to form part of the debates in each of our countries .
That is the first point that I wanted to make .
My second point concerns the praesidium , which I shall be part of together with my friend and colleague Antonio Vitorino .
This praesidium , consisting of twelve people , will be led by a trio of the highest quality , three statesmen - and I choose that word advisedly - namely Mr Amato , Mr Dehaene and the President Mr Giscard d ' Estaing .
They are three statesmen by virtue , frankly , of their age , but some would also say by virtue of their experience or their wisdom .
I know all three of them , and what I can tell you about them , and in particular about the President of the Convention , is that when it comes to their European convictions , they all have a youthful spirit and a dynamism that I would like to see in a certain number of much more eurosceptic politicians who are in some cases twenty or thirty years younger .
That is what seems important to me , their dynamism and the youthfulness of their convictions , together with their European qualifications and their authority , which is something that we shall need .
What I would like to say , echoing Louis Michel , is that of course there will be the President and the two Vice-Presidents , but they will have to work as colleagues alongside the praesidium , and by listening to and leading the debates of the Convention as a whole .
They will not , therefore , be working alone , but rather in solidarity , which is a very different matter indeed .
The European Council at Laeken - and the Belgian Presidency did very well to achieve such a result - gave this Convention a dynamic mandate , an open mandate , thereby removing the first risk that I had imagined or feared , namely the risk of a closed mandate , a mandate blocked by the four topics of the Treaty of Nice , which would have given rise to great disappointment here , to me personally and also to public opinion , and which would have restricted our work to the legal and the technical , without any political perspective .
However , that did not happen .
The Laeken mandate is an open mandate , and it even allows us to raise almost any issue .
This means , however , that there is another risk , if I may say so . That risk is that , by being based on such a broad mandate , on such great confidence , the Convention will be transformed into a sort of academic forum producing results which are too far out of line with the mandate that has been laid down .
We must take care not to make this Convention a forum which will cease to be listened to by the European Council .
This is also why the selection of the three people who will be leading this Convention is so important , because the three people in question have the ear and the respect of the European Council .
We have to steer a course between these two dangers .
The first danger has now been removed , but the second one remains .
What I am trying to say is that we shall have to produce work that is responsible and useful , and that can be used by the European Council , which will then have to go on to make the final decisions .
Basically , I believe that this Convention , which is a great opportunity for European debate and for future stages of European integration to be carried out in a more open , more democratic and more transparent way , is itself responsible for proving that the right method has been chosen , so that we can avoid going back to the old method , which was strictly intergovernmental .
Together , we , the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council and the national parliaments , will bear that responsibility , together with the candidate countries , sitting around the same table and on an equal footing with us , plus of course the active representatives of the Committee of the Regions and of organised civil society .
We shall have the responsibility of ensuring that it works , that it succeeds , because 