Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 16 July 2009 .
Statements by the President
Just over a fortnight ago , I took part in the ceremonies at Westerplatte to commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War .
That war plunged Europe into terror , claimed millions of victims and divided our continent for nearly half a century .
We should never forget that war and violence could once again return to this Europe of ours .
I must refer to another act of violence that took place this summer .
Two officers of the Spanish Civil Guard were killed by ETA whilst performing their duties .
I am sorry to have to inform Parliament of the death of Mr Ernest Gline , a former Belgian Member of this House , who passed away on 10 August at the age of 78 .
Mr Gline was a Member of the European Parliament between 1968 and 1994 .
He also served as Chairman of the Socialist Group between 1979 and 1984 .
I regret to have to inform you also of the death of Sir Christopher Prout , a former British Member of this House , who passed away on 12 July at the age of 67 .
Sir Christopher Prout , who subsequently became Lord Kingsland , was a Member of the European Parliament between 1979 and 1994 . He also served as Chairman of the Group of European Democrats between 1987 and 1994 .
Before we move on to our discussions , I invite you to join with me in honouring the memory of those who laid down their lives in the defence of Europe , and of those others who devoted their lives to its service , working to transform it into what it now is .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Composition of committees : see Minutes
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Corrigendum ( Rule 216 ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up on Thursday 10 September 2009 by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Monday and Tuesday
No changes .
( FR ) Mr President , I shall be extremely brief .
I should like in fact to invoke the Rules of Procedure relating to the Conference of Presidents which , as you pointed out , Mr President , sets the agenda .
Our Rules of Procedure stipulate that the Conference of Presidents shall consist of yourself , obviously , of the group chairmen , and also of a representative of the non-attached Members .
To date , the representative of the non-attached Members has still not been appointed .
A number of non-attached Members have written to you on this issue and are more than willing to meet with you .
It would be good , Mr President , if you could convene a meeting of all the non-attached Members so that , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , they can elect their delegate to the Conference of Presidents and the Conference can take its decisions with a full complement of members .
Thank you for your comment .
I shall contact you and other Members during this sitting in order to make the necessary arrangements .
Wednesday
I have received a motion by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance for Wednesday .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents has voted to place the election - the appointment - of the President of the Commission on Wednesday 's agenda .
On Tuesday afternoon we will hold a debate on the President of the Commission 's proposals .
We propose postponing the vote on his appointment , for the simple reason that the referendum in Ireland is due to be held in 22 days ' time .
This referendum is crucial to the acceptance , or rejection , of the Treaty of Lisbon .
An opinion poll published today tells us that 62 % of Irish people are ready to vote in favour .
I believe that we must respect the people of Ireland 's vote , whether we are for or against the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , it seems absurd to us , for the sake of 21 days , to bring forward a vote and appoint a president under the Treaty of Nice , when we - at least , those who are for the Treaty of Lisbon - have the possibility of having a Commission and its President appointed under the Treaty of Lisbon .
In October , we will know what we are bound by .
The Polish President has solemnly declared that he will sign the Treaty of Lisbon after the Irish referendum .
The Czech Constitutional Court has solemnly declared that it will speed up decision making on the two complaints against the Treaty of Lisbon since , last time , it was unanimous in saying that the Treaty of Lisbon was constitutional .
There is therefore no option for the Czech President to say ' No ' once the Treaty has been ratified in Poland and Ireland .
I have nearly finished , but this is very important , Mr President .
It is Parliament 's identity that is at stake on this issue , and if we do not have two minutes to reflect on it then we have not done our job as MEPs .
That is an important point .
That is why I am asking you not to vote for or against Mr Barroso , but to vote after the people of Ireland and to postpone the vote today and to vote next month if necessary .
Mr President , Mr Cohn-Bendit discussed a motion put forward by my group in the Conference of Presidents last week .
We put forward the motion in question as we believe that it is not really the issue of the Irish referendum , nor the issue of the Constitutional Court in Prague , but the issue of the lack of cohesion in the opinions of the Council that is responsible for the confusion currently prevalent .
It is abundantly clear that a community based on law - and the European Union claims to be just that - must act in accordance with applicable law .
The applicable law is the Treaty of Nice .
There is therefore no alternative to working with the Treaty of Nice , and that means working with the President of the Commission and all the Commissioners .
The Council wants to elect the President on the basis of the Treaty of Nice but to then do what Mr Cohn-Bendit referred to , namely to apply the Treaty of Lisbon to Commissioners , which would mean that we would have a President of the Commission elected on a different legal basis than his Commissioners - which , by the way , is something the President of the Commission himself thinks is very regrettable .
That is why he is going around talking of the Lisbon majority that he needs but will not get .
That , on its own , shows the confusion that the Council has given rise to , something that is in no way beneficial to the EU or to the President of the Commission himself .
For this reason , we were of the opinion that the vote should be delayed until the Council has managed to agree what it wants .
We therefore support this ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
We believe that this postponement is necessary for reasons that differ little from those enunciated by Mr Cohn-Bendit , and for the reasons we have mentioned , we support the motion .
I should now like a Member to speak against the motion .
Mr Daul has asked for the floor .
You have the floor , Mr Daul .
Mr President , I always keep to my speaking time , as you know .

Firstly , I do not understand Mr Cohn-Bendit : he should have already asked for the election of the European Parliament to be postponed until such time as we had the Treaty of Lisbon .
Since , today , we have the Treaty of Nice in the European Parliament , we call for that Treaty to be applied until the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force .
I would also ask that , until we are able to vote again on Mr Barroso , we abide by the rules to the very end .
Parliament must be ready to function under the Treaty of Lisbon and , then , we will be able to vote on Mr Barroso and the Treaty of Lisbon , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
Otherwise , we will not be consistent .
That is what I wished to say to you .
In order to have a Commission - and I am going to request this tomorrow - I would ask that , after the referendum of 2 October , we put in place a Commission on the basis of the Treaty that exists , that is , Nice .
We will debate the Treaty of Lisbon when the time comes , when Mr Cohn-Bendit has convinced Mr Klaus to sign - and as he is willing to do so , he will do so very quickly .
We will place Parliament under the Treaty of Lisbon , and then we will elect our President of the Commission under the Treaty of Lisbon , because , if we want to be consistent , we have to be so from start to finish .
What we need now is a Commission that functions in the recession , a Commission that functions under Copenhagen .
However , as you know , there is still a long way to go before all of the commissioners and the Commission are up and running .
That is why I , together with my equally competent group members , ask that we vote on Wednesday for the President of the Commission .
( Applause )
1 .
Numerical strength of interparliamentary delegations ( vote )
2 .
Approval of the nomination of Mr Algirdas Šemeta as member of the European Commission (
3 .
Approval of the nomination of Paweł Samecki as member of the European Commission (
4 .
Approval of the nomination of Mr Karel De Gucht as member of the European Commission (
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution approving the nomination of Mr Algirdas Šemeta as a member of the European Commission .
I question , however , the legal aspects of this decision .
Indeed , pursuant to Article 215 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which lays down the rules in the event of a commissioner resigning , it is the Council which , acting by qualified majority , appoints the substitute commissioner .
As I see it , the European Parliament does not have any power in this particular case , and its Rules of Procedure , paragraph 2 ( 2 ) of Annex XVII of which stipulates a vote by secret ballot , are not in line with the Treaty .
This stipulation of the Rules of Procedure is certainly imperative for the European Parliament , but not for a properly appointed commissioner .
Article 214 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , curiously mentioned as the legal basis of the resolution , concerns not the nomination of a commissioner in the event of a resignation , but the vote to approve the entire Commission as a college .
It is also strange to see this resolution adopted on the basis of Rule 106 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which concerns the election of the entire Commission and not the replacement of a commissioner .
I voted in favour of Mr Šemeta , whom I would like to congratulate on the appointment he has been given , and I wish him every success .
However , I cannot but express my concern - yet again , because I have also done this in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - about the suggestion made by him that part of the funds required to finance the European economic recovery plan should be obtained through reducing the funds earmarked for direct aid to the agricultural sector .
I hope that this was just a simple misunderstanding and that such a measure , which would be impossible to accept , will not be implemented .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution approving the nomination of Mr Paweł Samecki as a member of the European Commission .
I question , however , the legal aspects of this decision .
Indeed , pursuant to Article 215 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which lays down the rules in the event of a commissioner resigning , it is the Council which , acting by qualified majority , appoints the substitute commissioner .
As I see it , the European Parliament does not have any power in this particular case , and its Rules of Procedure , paragraph 2 ( 2 ) of Annex XVII of which stipulates a vote by secret ballot , are not in line with the Treaty .
This stipulation of the Rules of Procedure is certainly imperative for the European Parliament , but not for a properly appointed commissioner .
Article 214 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , curiously mentioned as the legal basis of the resolution , concerns not the nomination of a commissioner in the event of a resignation , but the vote to approve the entire Commission as a college .
It is also strange to see this resolution adopted on the basis of Rule 106 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which concerns the election of the entire Commission and not the replacement of a commissioner .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution approving the nomination of Mr Karel De Gucht as a member of the European Commission .
I question , however , the legal aspects of this decision .
Indeed , pursuant to Article 215 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which lays down the rules in the event of a commissioner resigning , it is the Council which , acting by qualified majority , appoints the substitute commissioner .
As I see it , the European Parliament does not have any power in this particular case , and its Rules of Procedure , paragraph 2 ( 2 ) of Annex XVII of which stipulates a vote by secret ballot , are not in line with the Treaty .
This stipulation of the Rules of Procedure is certainly imperative for the European Parliament , but not for a properly appointed commissioner .
Article 214 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , curiously mentioned as the legal basis of the resolution , concerns not the nomination of a commissioner in the event of a resignation , but the vote to approve the entire Commission as a college .
It is also strange to see this resolution adopted on the basis of Rule 106 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which concerns the election of the entire Commission and not the replacement of a commissioner .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
We shall now proceed to the speeches , which must not last longer than one minute .
There is a very long list of requests .
This shows a great desire to participate , which is to the credit of this House .
However , I will be unable to give the floor to all those who wish to speak , because 100 requests would take an hour and a half , whereas we have only 30 minutes available .
( GA ) Mr President , since this is my first opportunity to speak in Parliament , I would like to begin in my native language .
As you know , the campaign for the Lisbon referendum is well underway in Ireland at the moment , and we are hopeful that there will be a positive result on 2 October .
One of the things that is making a big difference this time round is the guarantees the European Union gave to the Irish Government in relation to tax , abortion and defence .
The new capacity for sports included in the Treaty of Lisbon , something which was not mentioned at all last time round , is also very important .
As one who has been involved in sport all my life at different levels of playing and administration , I believe that the possibility under Lisbon of the EU taking sports seriously and supporting both indigenous and international sports has struck a chord with the Irish sporting public .
For that reason , and for the other more obvious reasons such as the health , social and physical benefits of sport , it is imperative that substantial funding is provided post-Lisbon to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , I believe that there are certain disparities within Romania 's agriculture sector in terms of structural problems , compared with other Member States .
I must emphasise that the European Union should use the political and economic leverage it has to focus more attention on the management of the funds allocated for agriculture to those Member States who have joined later .
I wish to express my view that supporting a sustainable agricultural sector with an appropriate budget after 2013 as well would solve this problem , offering farmers medium and long-term prospects , along with sufficient funds so that Romanian agriculture can come into line with European standards and create an opportunity for a united Europe .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , Hungary and the Hungarian minorities are constantly bringing up the issue of national minorities .
Through recourse to half-truths and sometimes even lies , they try to manipulate European public opinion in their favour .
What is the truth ?
Over the past eighty years , national minorities in Hungary have been all but wiped out , while Europe looked on in silence .
The Slovak minority has also been cut down from 300 000 to 10 000 members .
The size of the Hungarian minorities in surrounding countries , including Slovakia , has remained constant .
Over the past two years , six Roma citizens have been murdered in Hungary and dozens have been seriously wounded .
There are fears of attacks against Jews , while other forms of extremism are on the increase and are spilling across Hungary 's borders .
This aggression is not being handled properly in Hungary and it must be condemned .
European institutions should take a stronger approach to these manifestations of extremism .
( PT ) The coup that took place in Honduras on 28 June was an outrage against the Honduran people 's freedom of political expression and most basic democratic rights .
Since then , the de facto government has adopted repressive measures against the grassroots movement that has been demonstrating in the streets and has introduced a regime of media blackout , restriction of freedoms , persecution , illegal detentions , disappearances and even murders of members of the organised resistance to the coup .
We were able to witness all that during the recent visit of a delegation from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left to Honduras and Nicaragua , where we met the legitimate president of the country , Manuel Zelaya .
The European institutions ' reaction to these circumstances is ambiguous to say the least .
While some are unacceptably silent , others are appealing to both sides to do everything in their power to reach a political solution as swiftly as possible , treating things that are different as if they were the same and ignoring who is to blame , as if there were not a democratically elected president on one side and an illegal government on the other , which detained him and expelled him from the country when it unlawfully seized power .
The most basic respect for democracy requires the European institutions to issue a firm and forceful condemnation of the coup and to implement measures at an international level to increase pressure on the illegal government in power and isolate it .
They must also not recognise or support any elections that are held before democratic legality is restored in the country .
Mr President , as a new Member of this Parliament , I believe that one of the major issues facing farmers in Wales and the rest of the UK is the proposed electronic identification of sheep , which will come into effect on 1 January 2010 .
The fact is that the scanning equipment to be used is not accurate . My understanding is that it is only 79 % accurate , which will cause major problems for farmers throughout the UK .
I urge the Commission to rethink this policy and only bring it in on a voluntary basis .
My fear is that many farmers will be penalised due to inaccurate equipment and that their single farm payments will be reduced .
In the worst case scenarios , the reduction could be 100 % .
The concessions that have already been made are helpful but are not enough .
I find it quite astonishing that the Commission wants to bring in electronic identification ( EID ) with such huge flaws in the equipment .
The sensible way forward would be for EID to be introduced only on a voluntary basis from next January .
I urge Members of this Parliament to support me on this vital issue for the farming industry throughout Europe .
Mr President , I would like to call on this Parliament to take immediate and effective steps to save the small and family farmers in new Member States , especially eastern and central European Member States , and , in particular , my own country , Hungary .
What has happened to these farmers ?
As a result of joining the European Union we had to ' offer ' , so to speak , 100 % of our markets and , in exchange , we received 25 % of subsidies .
This is not just unfair and unjust , but also illegal : this was a clear violation of the Treaty of Rome .
Now , as these farmers have been trying to compete in these unjust and illegal circumstances , they had to take loans - huge loans - to be competitive .
Now they have become bankrupt , and they have to sell their lands under circumstances of colonialisation where we have to open our lands for countries that have 10 times more GDP than we do .
I call for immediate reconsideration of the Copenhagen Agreement .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , just like other fellow Members , I would have liked to raise a problem from the agricultural sector .
However , a recent article published in the Wall Street Journal attracted my attention in particular , and this is why I am making it a duty of honour to present this article to Parliament and to put forward the requests made by its authors .
The title of the article , which I feel is sufficient to be able to understand what it is about , was : ' Mr Barroso , Take Down Small Business Walls ' .
This article is nothing other than an appeal to the future European Commission to focus , at the heart of its actions , on supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , which are very vulnerable during a crisis , and not to compromise in any way on implementing the 2008 Small Business Act .
The European Parliament has a duty to ensure that these measures are implemented properly and efficiently because they are needed by the 20 million plus small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union .
( BG ) Mr President , in early August , an incredible drama unfolded in the Republic of Macedonia which shocked Bulgarian public opinion .
Spaska Mitrova , a 23-year-old Macedonian citizen and mother of a small child still being breast-fed , was forcibly taken to a police station and then transferred to the infamous Idrizovo prison , while her child was taken away from her .
The police had to drag her by the hair from the top to the bottom floor of the building because she did not want to be separated from her child .
She was sentenced to three months ' imprisonment because she was unable to provide her ex-husband with a bed in their child 's bedroom .
You can imagine the implications of this .
Mrs Mitrova was also given Bulgarian citizenship early this year .
This seems to be the main reason for her inhumane treatment , and hers is not an isolated case .
About two years ago , I asked the present Macedonian Foreign Minister : ' Why is so much hatred shown towards Macedonians who have taken Bulgarian citizenship ? ' , to which he replied : ' They are vestiges of the past ' .
As the efforts made by the Bulgarian President and Government have not yielded any result , I appeal to Commissioner Olli Rehn to familiarise himself personally with this blatant case of injustice in a country wishing to start accession negotiations .
( SL ) Italy wishes to impose an onshore gas terminal on the border with Slovenia without consultation .
However , the European Union was founded on mutual trust and good neighbourly relations .
The supply of environmentally-harmful energy sources requires special conservation of the environment but , in essence , it also requires basic honesty .
By seeking to conceal from Slovenia the harmful consequences which its actions will have on the cross-border environment , Italy is harming everyone concerned , including itself but , above all , the people who live in the vicinity of the disputed installation .
The Slovenian public and the Slovenian Government are firmly opposed to this terminal .
Lying to the cameras may well be Mr Berlusconi 's means of political survival in Italy .
However , such behaviour cannot and should not be tolerated as a deliberate practice within the European Union .
This is unacceptable .
This is a flagrant breach of the principles of the European Union and Italy is being manipulative to the detriment of human life and the environment .
It is using international deception to attempt to build an onshore terminal at Žavlje ( Aquilinia ) in the Gulf of Trieste , which is already extremely narrow .
It is degrading the environment , destroying the prospect of communal coexistence on the border and setting a very poor example to future Member States .
( PT ) Mr President , what is happening to the former German footwear factory , Rhode , in Santa Maria da Feira , now called Sociedade Luso-Alemã de Calçado , is very worrying .
This company once employed some 3 000 workers but , after the problems in Germany , it shed jobs and currently has roughly 1 000 workers .
The majority of them are women , most of whom have had their hours and wages cut .
It is now feared that when the elections in Portugal are over , the company may close .
Unemployment in this municipality is continuing to rise and now affects many thousands of workers , particularly in the footwear and cork processing industries .
In view of that , we appeal for special emergency intervention measures so as to prevent yet another serious blow to production and jobs in an area that has been so badly blighted by unemployment .
Mr President , I do not accept the validity of this Parliament or any other EU institution to make laws for the United Kingdom .
My electors have sent me here to tell you that they do not want GBP 45 million of their money every single day spent in the European Union .
We want that money spent in the UK on our schools , on our hospitals and our infrastructure , not wasted on corruption with your accounts in auditing for 14 years .
Simply , I have this message from the people who elected me to the Commission : go back to your bureaucracy and prepare for the UK 's withdrawal from the corrupt and doomed mess that is the European Union .
Mr President , this Parliament has united in recent times in the face of a global terrorist threat .
In my constituency of Northern Ireland , we know the pain of terrorism .
Yes , we have witnessed a transformation in Northern Ireland in recent years , but there are still those who would seek to cause bloodshed .
Last week , in the latest of a series of incidents , a 600 lb bomb was planted by dissident republicans and was discovered in South Armagh .
Had it not been discovered , multiple loss of life would have occurred .
In Northern Ireland , we have not forgotten the victims of our past and of terrorism and that is why I would ask this Parliament to back the campaign for compensation from Libya .
Libya supplied weapons to the IRA .
Those weapons took many lives and left others destroyed .
For this they must be held accountable .
( SK ) At the start of a new term in office , we should bear in mind our joint responsibility for the peaceful development of the continent of Europe in such a way as to ensure a peaceful and prosperous life for our citizens .
We must also show our citizens that we are here for them , that we are here to serve them .
We must constantly bear this in mind , even when there are problems between two members of our family .
The European way of sorting things out is through proper partnership dialogue aimed at a sensible solution , not through ignoring the other side and presenting issues directly to European institutions such as this one .
Rational mutual dialogue on a constant basis is also the way to deny sustenance to extremists on both sides of the border and thereby nip in the bud or severely restrict potentially dangerous activities they might undertake in the future .
( RO ) The fight against racism is being waged through strong European policies , but in less than a week , German and British politicians have been engaged in mudslinging at Romanian workers , whether out of ignorance or because they are motivated by winning sympathy and votes from the population .
Grim statements such as ' Romanians would stick a knife in you as quick as look at you ' , made during a public meeting in the UK , or comments made by a German politician stating that Romanians do not come to work for 07.00 and they do not know what they have to do , are a major sign of concern .
We are devising European policies to combat racism .
This is our common objective .
However , what do we do when these statements are made by fellow politicians from large European Union Member States ?
( ES ) Mr President , last week , three Basque tuna boats from Bermeo were threatened once again by Somalian pirates .
We are concerned about the repeated attacks on fishing boats in the area , the fact that the victims feel unsafe and that the Spanish Government is failing to act .
These attacks could get worse with the arrival of the monsoons , as the fishermen are saying .
Therefore , before it is too late , I want to say to the House that we urgently need armed military escorts on these boats .
There are European governments such as France and Italy that have done this , and it has succeeded .
The Commission should therefore recommend that all Member States take immediate , effective measures such as this .
We urgently need to extend the protection criteria that have been established for merchant navy routes to fishing areas .
This House has a problem , which it stated in the Resolution on piracy on 23 October last year .
Finally , I would like to reiterate our conviction that Europe needs a common foreign and security policy that makes the European institutions more effective and credible in response to this type of crisis .

( EL ) Mr President , the deadly attacks by the German troops which form part of the occupying army in Afghanistan , together with the United States of America , the European Union and ΝΑΤΟ , during the attack in the region of Kunduz on 4 September 2009 , turned into a massacre , with victims numbering over 135 civilians dead and dozens injured , including many children , and are war crimes against the Afghan people .
This attack was not , of course , against the Taliban ; it was against 500 civilians .
The daily bloodbath , the organisation of violent and corrupt elections to put puppets of the Afghan occupation in place and the poverty and misery which are the scourge of the Afghan people reveal that the imperialist attacks by the United States of America , the European Union and ΝΑΤΟ in this occupied country - and in a series of other countries - on the pretext of combating terrorism have disastrous consequences for the people .
Both the statements made by the new NATO Secretary General , Anders Fogh Rasmussen , and those made by European Union foreign ministers have just one objective : to continue the interventions against the people .
The people in each country and in each Member State of the European Union must demand and insist that the troops leave their countries and return to their own country .
Mr President , on 2 October , the Irish will have a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Treaty is almost identical to the European Constitution , which was rejected outright by the French and the Dutch .
The Lisbon Treaty has already been rejected by the Irish once , but ' no ' is always the wrong answer , as far as the European Union is concerned , when it comes to further political integration .
And so the Irish are forced to have yet another referendum so they can deliver the only answer that is acceptable to the European Union - which is ' yes ' .
The European Union is destroying democracy in its Member States .
The EU is founded on misrepresentation , deceit and lies .
The British are denied a referendum by our contemptible government and political class precisely because they know that the result would be a resounding ' no ' .
But whatever the result in Ireland , Britain will one day leave the European Union and restore its national independence .
I am proud to use my position of office to campaign for Britain 's unconditional withdrawal from the European Union .
Thank you , Mr Batten .
I gave you an extra 14 seconds even though you said something incorrect , namely that the Treaty of Lisbon is the same thing as the Constitution .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to talk to you today about a European project , ' Voices of Youth ' , of which I have the honour of being asked to be a patron .
The goal of this project , which young people from every Member State participate in , is for them to identify and offer solutions to social problems they face .
I ask not only you , Mr President , but also the President of the European Commission , to ensure that we pay more attention to the suggestions they make to us .
It is our responsibility during these difficult times to guarantee Europe and , above all , young European citizens , a clear opportunity .
My generation has been fortunate enough to be involved in the reconstruction of a united Europe .
Young people have the right , representing the Europe of today , but particularly the Europe of tomorrow , to turn it into how they imagine it will be .
Thank you and may God 's help be with us .
Thank you , and thank you also for being concise .
( HU ) The spectre of extreme left-wing and extreme right-wing ideology , reflecting the two dictatorships that dominated Europe in the 20th century , is returning to haunt the European Union in the 21st century .
We have an EU citizen being banned from travelling to another country .
This person 's freedom of movement is being restricted .
A state would lock up 15 citizens , accuse them of treason and ban them from leaving the country because they are going to discuss minority-related concerns with like-minded compatriots at the Forum of Hungarian MPs from the Carpathian Basin .
In the country in question , people are punished for not speaking the official language properly in hospitals , at police stations , in homes for the elderly and maternity units .
Not even immigrants are treated like this within the European Union , let alone people who have lived on this territory for a thousand years , where a new state has been formed for only 17 years .
This is why it is important to implement within the European Union a single law for the protection of minorities which is binding on every country .

Mr President , I wish to inform Parliament that last week , the UK Justice Minister gave Michael Shields , my constituent , a pardon , and he was freed from prison having served four and a half years for a crime he did not commit .
Michael was given a pardon on the basis of evidence clearly showing that he was morally and technically innocent of the crime .
He was arrested , charged and convicted of a brutal attack on Martin Georgiev , a Bulgarian waiter , in 2005 in less than eight weeks , despite the lack of forensic evidence , a flawed identification process and a signed confession to the attack by another man , Graham Sankey .
Today I want to thank Presidents Borrell and Pöttering and Parliament 's Committee on Petitions for supporting Michael 's campaign for justice .
But this is not the end of the process , and I ask the President and the Committee on Petitions to continue to support Michael 's campaign for justice and to intervene with the Bulgarian authorities immediately to review the dossier of evidence .
This is vital if we are to give every one of our citizens trust and confidence in judicial and police cooperation in Europe .
( ET ) Banking requires supervision .
That is the position of the European Council and the European Commission .
The European Commission consumer protection study published in February revealed several negative trends in banking .
As an elected representative from Estonia , I would like to present some examples from Estonia concerning two Swedish banks that are operating in Estonia .
The problem is that these banks treat consumers in Estonia differently from consumers in their home country .
Both the prices of banking services and interest rates are considerably higher for Estonian consumers .
Interest rates , for instance , vary from 0.21 % in Sweden to 12.2 % in Estonia - that is a 600-fold difference .
Using the financial crisis as a justification for unequal treatment is not in keeping with European Union values .
And I would like to ask Sweden , which currently holds the presidency of the European Union , what it has to say about this , and how long this situation with their banks will continue in Estonia .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a democratic revolution , I said , and now we face a situation that represents an untenable state of affairs for all those of us who , of our own free will , are not represented in a political group in this Parliament .
I would like to ask the Bureau to find an amicable solution to the issue of coordinators .
In this respect , we are discriminated against , as we are not permitted to take part in coordinators ' meetings in various committees and be duly active .
I would be glad to help avoid a situation where proceedings before the European Court of Justice - as previously in the wake of the discrimination case from 2001 - resulted in a finding that all the coordination decisions made thus far are unlawful .
That would not only harm Parliament tremendously , but it is also unnecessary from a political point of view .
I therefore ask the Bureau , in urgent terms , to put in place appropriate measures to end this discrimination against non-attached Members and return to the sound working methods of the last ten years .
( ES ) Mr President , this summer , the terrorist group ETA murdered three people in Spain , three people who defended law and freedom : an officer of the national police and two officers of the civil guard .
I would like to express our solidarity , support and care to their families .
ETA is a criminal group that has no place in Europe , because in the European Union there is no room for radicalism , totalitarianism or terrorist murders .
The European Parliament and all the European institutions should therefore continue to condemn the ETA terrorists and continue to work to remove and eradicate the cancer of terrorist attacks by ETA and its accomplices from our continent
I therefore want my first speech in this first ordinary plenary sitting of the European Parliament of this legislature to remember and pay tribute to all the victims of ETA terrorism , to condemn the terrorist organisation ETA in this House and to ask that , as Europeans , we all work together , with the law on our side , to smoke out ETA and its supporters , for the good of the Basque Country , Spain and Europe .
Mr President , personally I think that the time has come to make a shift in our approach to energy problems , namely by gradually shifting the emphasis from ' energy security ' - that is , trying to secure our current deliveries from volatile suppliers - to ' secure energy ' , meaning the full exploitation of the energy sources firmly under EU control .
Of course , this will require parallel action in both directions for some time until the scales tip in the direction of the latter because , indeed , if Europe really wants to become a truly credible international actor as such , it should first achieve control over its energy supply .
Otherwise , it will continue to be a collection of national actors , each pursuing its own national interests , and thus vulnerable to the divide-and-control tactics of ruthless external suppliers .
Mr President , six months ago the world was shocked by the death and destruction visited by Israel upon Gaza .
Now the cameras have gone away , yet the economic siege continues .
Less than one quarter of the materials and supplies needed by the people there are getting through the checkpoints - just 18 items in all .
Nothing for reconstruction , nothing for business , nothing that creates jobs or offers hope .
Israel is , in effect , keeping one and a half million people in a form of prison camp , surrounded by walls , patrolled by armed guards .
Mr President , I ask you to convey to the President that he should visit Gaza at the earliest opportunity to judge the situation for himself .
If he believes that such collective punishment cannot be acceptable , he should speak out on behalf of the innocent .
( DE ) Mr President , the economic crisis has hit agricultural production hard .
The situation in dairy farming , in particular , has deteriorated drastically over the last 20 months .
With prices below EUR 0.21 , farmers have to sell their milk at a price that is less than their production costs .
The survival of many family-run farms in the EU is in grave danger , and at present many of them are only able to survive by relying on their personal savings , something that is clearly not sustainable .
The Commission 's figures provide a dramatic picture of the fall in prices for milk and milk products .
The support measures for dairy farming are vital in order to prevent a collapse in agriculture .
Quality has a price , but this principle no longer seems to apply in the agricultural sector .
At present , the producer price bears no relation to the consumer price .
Our family-run farms urgently need market support measures .
This is about ensuring the security of Europe 's food supply .
Above all , we must not forget that hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe depend on agriculture functioning .

( PL ) Mr President , tomorrow , Mr Barroso is going to seek our support in his bid to secure a second term in office .
I would like to remind the House that Polish shipyard workers appealed repeatedly to the Commission , calling for a decision that would save their workplaces .
No help was forthcoming , because under Mr Barroso 's leadership , the Commission has demonstrated a total lack of concern for the problems affecting working people .
Thousands of Polish shipyard workers are still suffering the painful consequences of the Commission 's antisocial policy for their communities .
We would do well to remember that we have been elected to this House to represent the citizens , yet this is neither the kind of policy nor the kind of Union our constituents expect .
If we support Mr Barroso , nothing will change .
The Commission 's activities and its legislative initiatives will become further and further removed from Europe 's needs .
We need to appoint a President and Commissioners who will ensure that social aims take precedence over economic ones .
We need to opt for a social Europe in which the fate of working people is deemed to be just as important as profit .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must not allow ourselves to be seduced by sweet talk used as a smokescreen to conceal ruthless and inhumane right-wing policies .
Mr President , I want to raise the case of Mr John Zafiropoulos , who is in prison in Greece .
His family , who are my constituents , are convinced of his innocence .
At the beginning of this year , I wrote to the Minister of Justice in Athens raising the case .
I did not get a reply , so in a one-minute speech here in May in this Hemicycle I raised the question .
Immediately after I had spoken , the Greek Permanent Representation rushed to my office and promised me an immediate reply from the Minister in person .
Four months later : nothing .
If the Greek Permanent Representation is listening to us now in the Hemicycle , I would like to express my surprise and dismay that nothing has happened .
Would they please get me a reply from the Minister and look at the case of Mr John Zafiropoulos again ?
Mr President , during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 , a Turkish journalist photographed 14 Cypriot soldiers surrendering to the Turkish army .
This photograph became the symbol of the search for the fate of the missing persons .
The soldiers ' bodies were identified through DNA a few weeks ago after they were killed 35 years ago and thrown down a well in the occupied northern part of the island .
This demonstrates the blatant violation of the Geneva Convention by the Turkish Army , who were responsible for prisoners who surrendered to them .
I urge this Parliament to call on Turkey to cooperate with the UN Committee on Missing Persons by providing its records and by opening two recently designated plots in Lapithos , called ' restricted military areas ' , where another 800 prisoners are believed to be buried .
Mr President , this Parliament will have many important discussions , and decisions to make , on budget matters .
Currently we are , of course , looking at the 2010 budget , and there are still a lot of issues to be resolved before we can agree that .
This Parliament will also soon start discussing the new financial perspective for the period post 2013 .
But there is also the mid-term budget review , and it seems to me we have almost forgotten about that .
We should not forget about it , because this will give us great opportunities in the future .
It will give us the opportunity to look again at what our priorities are .
It will give us the opportunity , for example , to put more funds into a new economic regeneration plan for Europe .
It will also , perhaps , give us the opportunity to put extra funding into the measures which come out of Copenhagen at the end of this year .
I believe that this Parliament should not take its eye off the ball .
This Parliament should continue to press the Council and the Commission to make sure it looks again at that mid-term review and to give us the opportunity to put forward our priorities .
( HU ) Freedom of speech , Mr President , including the freedom to choose the language you wish to speak , is a fundamental human right .
A language is a symbol of paramount importance to the people who speak it , the basis for their self-identity .
Anyone who thinks this of their own language must respect the language of every other community .
However , one of the EU 's official languages , Hungarian , has recently come under attack in Slovakia , in a way which goes completely against the European mindset .
Its language law blatantly discriminates against the right of the half a million-strong Hungarian community to use its own language .
In some cases , a fine of EUR 5 000 may also be imposed .
The European Union is committed to cultural and linguistic diversity , and a commissioner for multilingualism was even appointed with this in mind .
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , which has also been ratified by Slovakia , guarantees the right of citizens to use their mother tongue at every education level , for administrative matters , in public institutions and official documents .
The only mainstay of the EU institutions cannot allow one of the Member States to blatantly contravene fundamental EU norms and launch an attack against minority rights without speaking out .
( PL ) The House debated the situation of the Polish shipbuilding industry a few months ago .
Agreement was reached .
Mr Schulz , the chairman of our political group , confirmed on behalf of the group that Parliament did not consent to doing away with tens of thousands of jobs in shipyards and at the undertakings supplying them .
Mr Schulz confirmed that the House did not agree with closing down this industry in Poland , or with the consequent reduction in Europe 's industrial capacity .
Six months have elapsed and the situation is as follows . The government has been unable to privatise the shipyards , the Commission has taken no account whatsoever of Parliament 's position , the yards are not producing , the future is uncertain , people have lost their jobs and have been left in limbo .
We must surely all agree that this Commission lacks any concept of a European industrial policy , and has failed to understand that ships were needed in the past , that they are needed now and that they will continue to be needed in the years to come .
Mr President , 23 August 2009 marked the 70th anniversary of the infamous Nazi-Soviet Pact which divided Europe .
I think that this is a shocking example of how close seemingly opposite political extremes can become .
Both Moscow and Berlin then agreed that the first task was to bring down the democratic political order in Europe ; both Moscow and Berlin sought to achieve the domination of the world .
Therefore , we should never forget that it took two dictators to launch World War Two .
Stalin , four days before signing this pact , explained the point of it to his comrades : ' It is in the interests of the Soviet Union that war breaks out between the Reich and the capitalist Anglo-French bloc .
Everything must be done so that the war lasts as long as possible in order that both sides become exhausted .
Then we would have a large arena to develop the world revolution . '
I would like to remind Members of the European Parliament resolution of last April to mark 23 August as a joint day of commemoration for victims of all totalitarian regimes .
( SK ) Both in the last session of parliament and in the current one , we have heard speeches by many Hungarian MEPs criticising the Slovak language law .
I would like to mention at the same time that you have all been sent documents containing various arguments , the majority of which , to put it plainly , amount to misinterpretations , fabrications and even deliberate lies .
The Slovak language law fully complies with all the human rights issues and with the rights protecting minority languages .
In my opinion , the Hungarian MEPs are pursuing a very dangerous policy of pointedly and directly provoking extremism , both in Hungary and in its neighbouring states .
In my opinion , they ought to realise that this is a highly dangerous policy and , as we have heard today , they should call a halt to these fabrications .
( SL ) I have received requests from a large number of Slovenian and Italian citizens asking me to draw this House 's attention to Italy 's intention to build a gas terminal in the Gulf of Trieste .
I share the concern of Slovenian and Italian environmental organisations that this gas terminal could place a major burden on what is already a very environmentally vulnerable area .
I refer here to the seas of the Gulf of Trieste and its large urban hinterland .
These organisations have also expressed doubts as to the accuracy of the documents used in the environmental impact assessment .
I also call on the governments of Italy and Slovenia to work together on this project in the spirit of the memorandum they signed in September last year .
In other words , I call on them to work together on environmental impact assessments in the northern Adriatic , and the Gulf of Trieste respectively .
I also expect that , as a result of carrying out such an assessment , the governments will be able to agree on a more appropriate site for this gas terminal than the Gulf of Trieste .
( FI ) Mr President , I agree with my Estonian colleague , Mrs Oviir , that the economic crisis is far from over .
A peculiar kind of optimism is emerging everywhere in Europe , even though unemployment is on the increase , national economies are running into debt , the population is ageing , and a sort of triple guillotine is hanging over Europe , and despite all that , the recession has been declared over .
An exit strategy is being planned , as is how we need not bother to continue with the recovery strategy .
Europe began the recovery strategy and dealing with the economic crisis very well and in an exemplary fashion , to the extent that the United States of America learned a lesson from Europe and followed its example , but after that , Europe slowed down completely .
Furthermore , this false optimism is also leading to the wrong solutions .
The economic crisis has not been beaten .
( RO ) The formation of the Alliance for European Integration , in the wake of the early elections held in July 2009 , reconfirms the pro-European commitment of the Republic of Moldova 's citizens .
An extremely important step has been taken , which Moldova and the European Union cannot afford to mishandle .
The political situation is still fragile .
This is why the success of the alliance and , by implication , of a democratic Moldova , depends hugely on the support of its European partners .
Moldova has assumed the responsibility of committing to a pro-European course .
The European Union 's responsibility is to facilitate its course on this path .
The Moldovan people 's choice of the European option is now also shown at a political level .
This is why we must give our unconditional support to the Alliance for European Integration in the Republic of Moldova , as it represents the only chance for integrating it gradually , yet quickly , into the European family .
I call on the European Commission to negotiate the signing of a new agreement with the Republic of Moldova as a matter of urgency and to use all the necessary resources to help this republic emerge from the difficult financial situation it is in .
( HU ) The European Union 's credibility is completely undermined if it only speaks out in the case of human rights violations happening outside the EU , but makes no protest in the case of a serious human rights violation like the one which has just taken place in Slovakia as a consequence of the national language law and has also triggered unparalleled tension in relations between the majority and minority communities .
The minority language has been subordinated to the majority language , as Mr Vollebaek , the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities , also put it .
I would like to point out to my colleague , Boris Zala , that we would be very happy not to have to raise the issue here in the European Parliament .
I have done so only as a consequence of the fact that a law has come into force in Slovakia which severely restricts the use of minority languages and discriminates against the Hungarian community living there .
This is why it will be the responsibility of the next Commission and Mr Barroso to set up forums where these cases can be examined , as Leonard Orban has also stated in his letter .
Slovakia must honour its international commitments , the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
( PL ) Mr President , I asked for the floor in order to refer to the mission to Afghanistan .
This subject is fraught with difficulties for all concerned .
NATO and the European Union are both affected .
In particular , I wanted to highlight the need to place greater emphasis on the requirement for humanitarian , social and economic aid for the Afghan people , who have unfortunately been subjected to the effects of war for 30 years .
I raise this matter against the background of an escalation of actions involving attacks on soldiers in the context of the presidential election .
As we are all aware , these attacks have become increasingly frequent and violent in the run up to the election .
Such aid is particularly important in the context of developing trust and reconstructing the country .
Captain Daniel Ambroziński of the Polish Armed Forces lost his life recently in Afghanistan .
It appears that his death was due essentially to the weakness of the Afghan Army and police , who succumbed to bribery .
It is well known that the Afghan Army and police force are in a difficult financial situation .
According to the media , Afghan soldiers are lucky if they earn USD 20 .
It is important for the military effort to be accompanied by social , humanitarian and economic aid .
Twenty seconds for Mr Kelly , for a very brief rejoinder .
Mr President , I just want to say very briefly that an erroneous and somewhat condescending statement was made this evening about the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland by a British colleague .
Ireland has not been forced by anybody to vote a second time on Lisbon .
It was a decision taken independently by the Irish Parliament and will be carried out independently by the Irish people .
In fact , we have not been forced to do anything since we gained our independence from Britain in 1922 .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have had 39 speeches in 45 minutes .
I believe that is a fine performance - this has been a good debate - and I offer my best wishes above all to all those who have made their first speech .
I would like to stress , in particular , the need for the Commission to take account of the comments that were made in the debate , or else our Parliament will just be a place to let off steam .
The Commission has been attentive .
I noted that our Commissioners were very attentive , and so they will doubtless follow up the comments made by all of our fellow Members .
Restructuring of the European car industry , in particular the Opel case ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the restructuring of the European car industry , in particular the Opel case .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am very grateful that you have given me the opportunity today to comment on the situation in the European car industry in order to inform you of a number of aspects of our European response to the crisis and of the developments in relation to the General Motors Group .
In so doing , I will comment on the industrial policy and social aspects , while my fellow Commissioner , Neelie Kroes , will take over when it comes to State aid law .
Twelve million workers have a job that is directly or indirectly dependent on Europe 's car makers .
That is why , back in October 2008 , the Commission met with all the parties involved - including both the Member States and the social partners - as part of the CARS-21 process , to discuss a common way to manage the crisis .
The scrapping premiums and additional financial aid from the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) were discussed at the meeting , so as to prevent this important sector , from an employment policy point of view , from foundering in the maelstrom of the crisis .
We also need to act in order to ensure that the crisis does not jeopardise the achievement of our statutory requirements to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars by 2012 . I will come back to this later on .
Out of concern about developments relating to General Motors , the Commission called a political meeting of all the Member States back in January this year in order to provide transparency and to guarantee compliance with European legislation .
Three such meetings have since taken place .
Joint political arrangements were reached amongst the 27 Member States at these meetings , and these were also made public .
The first policy agreed was that a trusteeship solution coordinated by Germany was the right way to go in order to protect General Motors Europe from the insolvency of the US-based parent company .
We are now in a position to say that this trusteeship solution prevented GM 's European car factories from being dragged into insolvency with the parent company .
The next point agreed was that the trusteeship solution did not mean any prejudging of which bidder was to take over the company .
As concerns the range of bidders , the Commission declared from the very start that it would be neutral as it would otherwise be unable to fulfil its role as guardian of the Treaties .
It was also agreed that all national protective measures would have to be fully in compliance with the provisions of the EC Treaty on State aid and the internal market .
Furthermore , State aid must not be made contingent upon political conditions such as the site of investment .
The EU Treaty leaves no room for economic nationalism .
Public money may only be used on an exceptional basis and only where future-oriented economic structures with future-safeguarded jobs result .
All decisions must follow economic logic alone but , as I said earlier , when it comes to issues of State aid , Commissioner Kroes will go into detail later on .
The fact that GM will retain 35 % of the shares is a clear indication that it is counting on the economic comeback of its former European subsidiary .
I also welcome the fact that 10 % of the shares will remain in the hands of the employees .
The Commission has been talking to all those involved , both at the working level and the political level , since January 2009 .
All the Member States - and today the Flemish Minister-President , too - welcome and support the Commission 's position on the future of General Motors Europe .
The Commission has all the tools to ensure that all the agreements are observed .
I will stress one more time that we will not allow taxpayers ' money to be used according to short-term political considerations rather than the long-term interests of sites and jobs .
In times of crisis , it is natural that many people would say that charity begins at home .
As the Commissioner responsible for social affairs , I do hope , however , that Magna , along with GM and New Opel , will find a European solution .
The debate about the future of General Motors Europe must not prevent us from seeing that the situation facing the European car market overall is a drastic one .
Even before the crisis , there were overcapacities .
This situation has been exacerbated by the crisis .
In the last quarter of 2008 , the number of registrations fell by nearly 20 % , and we are expecting a fall of 11 % for 2009 as a whole .
The scrapping premium , which 12 Member States have adopted , has ended the freefall , but only on the passenger car market .
We pointed out the extremely difficult situation in the entire goods vehicle sector back in January 2009 .
The sales figures are catastrophic .
There are no figures in sight showing a recovery .
There are serious consequences for the entire supply industry .
The primary responsibility for managing the crisis obviously lies with the automotive industry itself .
In order to protect the workers affected , the EIB , Member States and the Commission have provided financial means so as to soften the social consequences in the sector .
The European Globalisation Fund adopted by the Commission two years before the crisis has received seven applications from six countries from the automotive sector over the last two years .
With around EUR 40 million , we are helping around 7 000 workers back into the labour market .
We have also provided a forum to discuss the necessary next restructuring steps , which must be implemented in a socially responsible manner .
We welcome the fact that many car makers have been able to prevent dramatic job cuts by implementing short-time working and other forms of flexible working - mostly agreed between the social partners .
There is agreement between all those involved about the long-term prospects of the European car industry - namely that we must build the most advanced vehicles in the world in Europe , in other words , the cleanest , the most energy-efficient and the safest .
This strategy means that it is necessary to take a leap forward in terms of automotive technology .
We are helping bring this about through the EIB and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
The Commission will also continue to do all it can to provide reliable basic conditions for this key European industry and those employed in it .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the public financing of Opel / Vauxhall by one or more European governments is the issue that I will address .
As you know , last Thursday , the Opel Trust , in which General Motors ( GM ) and the German authorities have equal representation , announced that it has approved the sale by GM of a majority stake in its European Opel / Vauxhall operations to the consortium of Magna International and Sberbank .
This decision by the owners of Opel has been supported by the German Government .
The German Government promised to grant public funds of up to EUR 4.5 billion to the new Opel , with the possible participation of other European governments .
Mr President , the Commission has kept in touch with all the Member States concerned throughout the process which led to this transaction and the Commission is also aware of the controversies regarding the respective merits of the restructuring plans presented by different bidders , including the doubt publicly expressed by certain members of the Opel Trust .
Concerning the public financing of the GM / Magna transaction , we have been informed that the German Government intends to avail itself of a pre-existing approved scheme under the Commission 's temporary framework for State aid measures to support access to finance in the current financial and economic crisis .
Mr President , I intend to verify carefully whether this scheme can be used in this case and you will certainly understand that I cannot take a position at this stage since the deal is not yet finalised and , by the way , a number of aspects are still being negotiated .
However , at this moment , it is quite important that I should outline to you the most relevant considerations .
In particular , I have to underline that State aid granted under the temporary framework cannot be subject , de jure or de facto , to additional conditions concerning location of investments or the geographic distribution of restructuring efforts .
Such conditions would create - and I am quite clear on this - unacceptable distortions in the internal markets and could trigger a subsidy race which would significantly damage the European economy at the present , very delicate moment .
Moreover , if the restructuring of a European company was determined by non-commercial conditions attached to public financing , there would be a risk that a company would not be able to restore its long-term viability , and that risk to viability is all the greater due to the current weakened state of the entire European car industry .
The European car industry , as we are all aware , suffers from considerable overcapacity .
So a failed restructuring would result in great damage for the company and for its workers , in negative spillovers for the whole sector , and in a waste of taxpayer 's money .
And those principles will be my guidance in my assessment in the Opel case .
I will verify whether non-commercial protectionist conditions are attached to public funding , de jure or de facto , and the Commission will examine not only the legal conditions that may be attached to a final aid package , but also the entire context in which the aid is granted .
And I will be particularly interested to find out whether the German authorities have effectively linked the provision of aid to a single bidder and , if so , to find out why they regarded that bidder 's business plan as preferable from an industrial and commercial point of view .
In the short term , it is a sad fact that , because of the current state of overcapacity in the car industry , any plan to restore the profitability of Opel / Vauxhall will require job losses across the company as a whole and planned closures ; all the plans to save Opel / Vauxhall presented by different potential investors have foreseen both plant closures and job cuts .
However , a social restructuring is the only way to ensure viable and stable jobs for the future , and the Commission cannot , and should not , try to dictate where such cuts will fall , nor can it try to prevent them .
We will , however , be scrutinising the process very carefully to ensure that it is based on commercial considerations designed to sustain viable jobs and not protectionist motives .
Mr President , we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) very warmly welcome the fact that Commissioner Špidla has confirmed that the European authorities were involved in three areas of this long , drawn-out change of ownership process of a car company .
As a second point , I agree with Commissioner Kroes that there is a need to check carefully whether there are any non-commercial considerations .
I would ask the Commission , however , to proceed with the necessary speed .
It need not necessarily be as quick as in the take-over of Dutch and Belgian banks within 24 hours , while the same process requires 24 months for German banks , but I would still ask that this checking process be carried out rapidly and purposefully .
My third point is that it is true that there are overcapacities in the market , and indeed that these are on a stupendous scale .
In 2007 , 58 million cars were sold worldwide , while capacities were 72 million .
That means that the restructuring of the industry - including with regard to environmentally-friendly vehicles - is in full swing and the parties most affected are the manufacturers of large vehicles .
Opel is clearly not a manufacturer of large vehicles , but of energy-efficient vehicles .
Opel has had problems .
It has made losses .
Its vehicles perform well , they are technologically sophisticated and I am sure that this company - even if it will not enjoy the market presence of the giants in the marketplace as an independent company - has a chance of surviving if it can succeed in implementing this restructuring plan .
As far as restructuring is concerned , I have read in the press that only one site would be affected .
According to my information ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Langen , I am sorry but Mr Méndez de Vigo would like to take advantage of the Blue Card procedure to put a question to you , to challenge you .
If you agree we can give the floor to Mr Méndez de Vigo , otherwise you may continue .

Obviously your speaking time will be made up .
You will have an extra 30 seconds .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Langen said that the Commission study on Opel should be completed within a reasonable time .
Mr Langen , what do you consider to be a reasonable time ?
As I said , the process must be allowed to go ahead .
It must not be obstructed .
That is , ultimately , the question .
When I look at examples from the banking sector , where this process has taken years , then a shorter period than we had in some cases in Germany would certainly be appropriate .
I would , however , like to conclude by saying the following : in total , the plan - if my information is correct - envisages 10 500 out of the total of 50 000 jobs being lost , 4 500 of which would be in Germany , with the remainder across Opel 's other sites .
I believe it is justified to ask the Commission to check whether this is accurate and that it does not take place according to political criteria and , in that regard , we look forward , along with the workers , to what will hopefully be a bright future .

I would like to thank Mr Langen and Mr Méndez de Vigo because I believe that this was the first test , the first trial of this procedure .
It is a good thing ; it livens up our debates , which have been a little dull at times .
With interruptions such as this , however , the debate becomes more interesting .

Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in this situation , where , after a struggle that has gone on for months , the way is finally open to a solution in which , of the in excess of 50 000 directly-affected jobs , probably - at least according to what the new investors are telling us - around 40 000 can be saved , not counting the many jobs amongst suppliers and in dependent local businesses , it is now time to address the workforce of General Motors in Europe .
It was their dispute , they - Klaus Franz as the Chairman of the Full Works Council and all the others - became the face of Opel Europe , from a new technology group that has earned its opportunity , and in such a situation , our policy must help .
What is it that we are discussing ?
We are discussing how General Motors in the US staggered on for months .
It came within a whisker - and we know this for certain , ladies and gentlemen - of failing .
What , then , could have been more reasonable than to have seized the initiative , moved forwards and said , ' OK then .
We have to jump in here and give people a chance .
We must give not just the production sites , but also the future technologies , a chance so that Europe can remain a good place to produce cars . '
I can fully identify with the outlook that Commissioner Špidla set out for the European car industry .
Let us make it real !
Let us create an industrial policy framework with world-leading environmental standards so that employees and car makers in Europe can develop within them right here .
We managed it before with coal and steel .
Why should we not also now succeed in doing it for the industry of mobility and the future ?
Grab the ball !
The Commission has a lot of room to act here , and it can launch a lot of initiatives .
Commissioner Kroes , according to my information , of the 4.5 billion that form part of the deal that has to be reached , you have already approved 1.5 billion so that the wheels keep turning .
Naturally , you must check the law and the legislation - what is the alternative ?
Of course , all necessary steps must be taken to bring about a fair distribution of burdens in the future negotiations .
I implore you , however , to conduct your checks quickly , to consistently come to a conclusion but , given what is at stake , it is absolutely vital that this opportunity not be destroyed .
It must not fail on trivialities .
Instead , we must also note the significance of the situation and we must achieve a European solution , in the public interest , that benefits everyone .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the two Commissioners and the Commission for their statements today .
It was not self-evident .
On 3 August , I wrote a letter , as the announcement that has now been made was already in the offing then , and received a reply from the President of the Commission .
It contained nothing new .
Today , I have at least heard some clear words from the Commission , through Commissioner Kroes , who states that , no matter what , an in-depth investigation is to be carried out into all the details of this matter .
Commissioner Kroes , I should also like to request that this investigation be carried out on the basis not only of State aid but also on the basis of the rules on competition and of mergers and acquisitions .
After all , we are dealing here not only with State aid by the German Government - to the tune of EUR 4.5 billion - but also something that is both merger and acquisition .
In this field , the rules on competition are stricter than those on State aid .
Since you mainly talked about State aid in your speech , I would ask you to cover both elements in your investigation .
After all , with mergers and acquisitions , internal competition between the various plants of the company concerned also plays an extremely important role , of course , whilst State aid mainly concerns the competitive conditions between companies .
I must say , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that a dossier involving EUR 4.5 billion in State aid and a private contribution of just EUR 500 million is indeed an eye-opener .
Is this still a rescue operation , or is it what I would almost call a nationalisation operation ?
Be that as it may , there are indications - and it would be good to gather the information on this as quickly as possible - that not only economic but also political motives were decisive in the plan drawn up by Magna together with the German Government .
In any case , this should emerge clearly from the investigation .
Commissioner Kroes , I would also ask that , at all events , this investigation start quickly - I agree wholeheartedly with Mr Langen on this - and that the information not originate solely from the acquiring party , as a dossier submitted by Magna to the Commission is likely to demonstrate what Magna wants it to demonstrate .
It is hard to imagine such a dossier laying bare , as it were , that the competition rules have been breached .
Therefore , I think that the Commission must use its competences to obtain information itself from the various Member States concerned - the United Kingdom , Spain , Poland , Belgium , and of course Germany - so as to enable an objective investigation .
I also believe that the investigation now to be carried out is exceptionally important , as it will set a precedent for the great many other restructuring operations that will be seen in the coming years during this economic and financial crisis and will have to be made subject to the same conditions .
That was my first point .
My second point is that , in my personal opinion , the Commission failed to act properly by not immediately taking ownership of the dossier .
I think this should actually have happened months ago - incidentally , the first Commission communication dates from February .
Where transnational restructuring is concerned , I think that the Commission can take direct action and that it was not such a good idea to leave it to a single country .
European solutions are not developed by a single Member State ; they must be developed by Community institutions .
Therefore , I think that , in the field of industrial policy , the Commission should have played its role better and more quickly .
Thirdly , I think that it must lose no time in presenting an overall restructuring plan for the car industry , as 35 % overcapacity cannot simply be eliminated unless we adopt an overall European approach .
Mr President , Commissioners Špidla and Kroes , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , we should try to keep in mind , once again , that we in the European Parliament , even if we are arguing in the Opel case at the moment and this perhaps represents a wider disagreement about the future of the European car industry , are actually all united by our concern for the future of jobs in this sector in the European Union .
Germany 's actions should not be attacked so strongly at this point - much as they need to be examined .
Instead , the governments of the other Member States of the European Union whose production sites are affected by the GM crisis - in other words , the governments of Poland , Spain , Belgium , the United Kingdom and so on - should get together and consider , along with the Germans , how to make something out of this worst of situations and how it is possible to secure the future of the jobs of the affected people in the factories .
I think that would be a better approach to take .
As I say , I believe that we are all united by anxiety concerning the future of jobs in the car industry and I have to say that Commissioner Špidla is absolutely right to say that , despite months of discussions in Brussels and again and again here in Strasbourg and back home in the Member States , the debate is still not where it needs to be .
We talk , repeatedly , about how we have major structural overcapacities in the industry , yet we do not truly have the heart to actually set the course and put our backing behind how we want to lead this sector politically away from these structural overcapacities .
We have beginnings , which is a very good thing , I think .
In many contexts , including in the context of State interventions , we talk about future-ready cars , which is to say , cars that should be climate-friendly and efficient and which should have different , future-ready engines .
If I am honest , however , I do not believe , in view of the trends in the market , that this will be enough to secure as many jobs in the car industry in the future as we have in the industry today .
For that reason , the future must at least be discussed in terms of the future of the mobility sector and we must be bold enough to actually now , in these times of crisis , discuss transformations and also act more consistently .
It is very much right to point out , however , that there really has been no thought put into making the sector future-ready as part of the support scheme for Opel in Germany .
In theory , that means modern , future-ready cars .
What about the public transport sector , though ?
How do we get to a position where , in future , we have better , climate-friendly public transport systems ?
Who will build better buses , better trains and better lorries in future ?
Who will ensure that there is a conceptual link between this sector and the information technologies and renewable energies sector ?
These issues have been raised again and again , but never thought through to the end , let alone moulded into political concepts .
I would like to use this debate , right now , as the new Parliament begins its work , as the occasion to say that we really must tackle this .
We really must dare to do much more in this regard , or else we will make ourselves jointly responsible for unparalleled job losses that we will be completely unable to repair with public funds later on .
Brussels cannot just criticise Germany or other governments .
We have to have the courage at this point to appraise our own investment policies .
At least EUR 4.4 billion has flowed into the car industry over recent months via favourable loans from the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) .
Not a single euro that has been pumped into the car industry from this pot , Commissioner Špidla , was linked to requirements for such a transformation of the car industry or the mobility sector to make them future-ready .
Madam President , Commissioner Kroes , Commissioner Špidla , in my speech here in the European Parliament , I would like , as a member of the ECR group , to talk very briefly about the current situation in the car industry , particularly from the perspective of the future competitiveness of European producers .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Kroes for her approach to the highly complex issue we are debating today , which will create an enormously complex environment for solving such economic situations in the future .
The global economic crisis has affected many areas of the economy .
Car production is among the areas worst affected .
This may be due to the fact that the car industry is a point of convergence for many different areas , exerting huge demands for quality and incredible competitive pressures , together with pressure for technological progress and innovation .
Anyone who cannot manage the dizzying pace of modern technology is in serious trouble and that is precisely what we are seeing today .
US car makers are a case in point .
I would go so far as to say that the crisis has clearly identified those that failed to predict how cars would develop as well as those that invested wisely in the development of new competitive models when times were good .
I remain fundamentally opposed to targeted government intervention , which can only solve the short-term financial problems of individual domestic producers .
I understand politicians ' fears regarding rising unemployment levels in certain areas but I am sure that it would be very unwise to rely solely on injections of funding into a single sector , as this simply postpones the day of reckoning , often at the expense of those that are operating in a sensible way .
The global crisis can also be a major stimulus for the creation of new technologies and the use of new fuels such as compressed natural gas , hydrogen or , for example , electricity .
If the EU wants to stimulate and support European producers , it should therefore support research and simplify innovation procedures which - we must acknowledge - really are very lengthy in Europe .
I am delighted that EU Member States have headed off protectionist tendencies for now .
Financial protectionism on its own would simply extend the life of uncompetitive activities .
Just as catastrophic floods on the Nile brought fertility in ancient Egypt , the global crisis should be an impulse for the development of new European cars that are more environmentally-friendly and highly competitive on world markets .
I am truly delighted that Commissioner Kroes has taken such a serious approach to this issue , as it will have a very serious impact on all of us in the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I share much of what the Commission has put forward here on the causes and the prospects for the car industry - overcapacities , the need to change strategy , new technologies .
However , I would like to point out that there are a number of things that we do not share .
Opel will probably not be the last case in the car industry , where there is 30 % overcapacity across the globe .
We are not only talking about the approximately 12 million people who directly or indirectly live off this industry but the roughly 30 million people throughout Europe who are involved in this industry 's economic output .
In this situation , the Commission shares responsibility for ensuring that the European car industry is able to master this challenge .
The Commission also shares responsibility for ensuring that Opel does not now become the sacrificial pawn of a free-market clean-up of the crisis .
The necessary re-alignment of the management of free market forces in this Union will not automatically balance the anticipated job losses with new jobs .
On the contrary , indeed , those in jobs and European national economies will pay the price .
The general prevention of State aid will lead to the advent not only of distortions of competition but also social distortions .
These will then take a much bigger toll on the coffers of the affected countries than they can afford and , above all , much more than those coffers would be burdened by the aid currently being offered , when you include the dismantlement of social services .
The restructuring of the European car industry needs strong initiatives from the Commission , but also from the relevant national governments .
We therefore propose a European industry council on the future of mobility involving politicians , businesses , trade unions and academics .
It would have to develop possible courses of action for the necessary technical changes and define political measures and the associated funding .
Overcapacities must be converted into new work methodically and with an equal division of burdens .
That applied years ago to the steel industry , and it must now apply to Opel and to the car industry in Europe as a whole .
State aid can and , in my view , must also be linked to achieving an institutionalised employee participation with extended rights of codecision .
All affected employees in Europe need security for their sites , they need new work and new , secure future prospects across Europe .
( NL ) Madam President , this afternoon - a couple of hours ago - a Magna senior executive reaffirmed what we had already feared , or known : that the Antwerp plant is to be closed down permanently .
It is true that there is talk of a quest for alternatives , for alternative employment , for a different future for the plant , but no one knows what that actually means .
It is idle chatter , in a way , and it seems to be a tactic to appease the workers and the many others concerned in Antwerp for the time being : to keep them quiet and compliant .
I think that , for this whole dossier , the European Commission must not do what it has announced its intention to do , which is to wait a bit more , to spectate and count the blows a bit longer .
I think that the time for action is now , and that the Commission must state now , more clearly than it has just done , that its approval of this acquisition dossier will be conditional upon the acquiring party applying only objective economic criteria as and when reorganisation operations are required .
There must also be complete clarity and complete openness as to the competitiveness reports that may or may not exist for the various plants , and as to whether or not the Commission had access to such reports .
After all , it is common knowledge that the Antwerp plant is very competitive , and it would be unacceptable , in my view , for what may well be the most competitive of the plants to be hit as a result of the massive aid from the German Government .
With this dossier , the fate of very many thousands of workers in my country is at stake , as is , once again , I fear , the credibility of the European Commission - and I am not optimistic in this regard .
After all , often enough it is the same old story .
As Commissioner Špidla pointed out , European professions of faith are many and loud but , when it comes to the crunch , political leaders look after their own country 's interests first .
This was the case in the recent banking crisis and , I fear , is also the case now in the Opel crisis , with German authorities serving German interests first .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the announcement by Magna , Opel 's new owner , that it is most probably going to close the Antwerp plant is odd , to say the least .
After all , we now know that this Opel plant is one of the most profitable , one of the most efficient plants within the General Motors group - and yet they want to close it .
There is a good deal to indicate , therefore , that this decision was not based solely on purely economic criteria .
Therefore , Commissioners Špidla and Kroes , we have two requests of you today .
The first is that you might still use your rock solid competence in the field of competition to ascertain whether the massive State aid promised by some Member States is really compatible with the European rules .
Commissioner Kroes , you have rightly promised an investigation .
I hope you are given chance both to carry it out thoroughly and , in the short term , to ensure that we are not soon to be presented with a fait accompli .
I do not believe it is an exaggeration to say that the credibility of the European Commission is at stake here .
Economic nationalism and protectionism have no place in 21st century Europe , and this is a very good dossier to demonstrate that .
Commissioner Kroes , you have a reputation as a woman of steel .
We are counting on you to live up to your reputation in this dossier , too , and ensure that the authority of the European Commission is not undermined .
I say this entirely without irony .
Secondly , it is essential that Europe comes up with a new industrial project for the automobile sector .
We must not look back or focus on missed opportunities , but rather look ahead and focus on the new technology of the new electric car .
It is not yet too late .
By doing this now , we can ensure that this new electric car is produced using European technology and that we are not all driving Chinese-made electric cars in the future .
That is a scenario which it is still perfectly possible to avert .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is actually about finding a common European solution , rather than about national egotism .
Opel Europe has a significant role to play in industrial policy in Europe and this is not only about jobs at Opel , but also about jobs in many automotive supply companies in a number of European countries .
The decision in favour of Magna - and the European Works Council has confirmed this for me - achieved a consensus in the European Works Council , too , and its members are working flat out on European solutions .
The workers are ready to make sacrifices for this cause , and we expect the same from all the decision makers .
Everyone needs to work together , and to do so quickly .
Previous speakers have already talked about this .
In the interests of the workers , it also makes sense , of course , for thousands of jobs truly to be temporarily stabilised with State aid .
We will not grant validity to any competition arguments that have been put forward .
We are dealing with people and with jobs , but also with whole regions .
The path that we were put on under Germany 's auspices must now lead to the best possible result for all European workers , across all European sites .
( DE ) Madam President , I 'm delighted to be given the opportunity of taking the floor in the first meeting to be chaired by you .
I am very pleased , in fact !
Most of all , however , I would like to thank Commissioner Špidla for having spoken German , and I would like to express my heartfelt congratulations to Commissioner Kroes .
Many people believe that the Opel-Vauxhall case is a German issue .
It is not - it is a European issue !
It relates to jobs all across Europe , and special treatment here for Germany would not be right .
I am therefore particularly pleased to see that the Commission is willing to examine this case .
The issues at hand are questions under European law in relation to competition law and State aid .
We do want to save every job , but at what price ?
As counsel for the citizens and taxpayers , it is unclear in the Opel-Magna deal what long-term commitments will be laid at taxpayers ' doors .
The Opel case is also questionable from an industrial policy point of view .
It is always only the biggest who receive help .
The smallest and those in the middle are left to look after themselves , yet they are the backbone of the economy .
The fixation on one investor was clearly a wrong move .
Better and more favourable offers were turned down early on - and by politicians , in fact .
The Opel case has more to do with electioneering than with economic and industrial policy that is pure and above board from the point of view of EU law .
To restate the point , it is important the Commission now plays an active role , even if the German Government does not approve .
The Opel deal is a sham .
That is becoming ever more obvious .
It could mark the most expensive election campaign in the history of Germany .
We want Opel to survive , we want it to be healthy and we want to fight for every job , but we do not want there to be costs involved , nor do we want a solution at the expense of our European partners , on whom Germany , as the biggest exporter in the world , is also dependent .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , today I am somewhat seized by the emotions of satisfaction and fear .
Satisfaction with the statements by Commissioners Špidla and Kroes , which provide a little reassurance , but also fear , as the statements by the acquiring party , Magna , are not really conducive to any real peace of mind .
I should like to discuss a number of things that have been said in this debate .
Commissioner Kroes , Commissioner Špidla , I entreat you : do be men and women of steel , do ensure that all the rules are properly observed .
Indeed , on the subject of State aid , I must agree with Mr Verhofstadt when he says that the investigation must be extended to all aspects of competition law , to the whole body of law on mergers and acquisitions .
I think he is right about that .
I also agree with Mr Langen when he states most emphatically that this must happen quickly .
What could be done quickly for the banks must also be done quickly in the matter of this acquisition dossier , a dossier that is so important for many thousands of workers .
I should just like to take up what Commissioner Špidla said about there being overcapacity in the sector - which is true of course .
He said that a number of methods have been used to set this to rights .
He mentioned the Globalisation Fund , to which there have been seven applications .
We should also be aware , however , that this Globalisation Fund is not working very well .
Tomorrow , we shall be discussing a dossier , a report by Mr Böge , which clearly shows that , of the EUR 500 million that was at our disposal for 2009 , barely EUR 8 million has been used .
We should use such resources to help these workers , therefore , in the form of training , reorganisation and real development towards a new , green economy , one that is low-carbon and relies less heavily on fossil fuels .

( NL ) Madam President , your party leader , Mr Westerwelle , said that one of the intentions with this aid package to Opel was that it form part of the election campaign .
I hope this is not the case , of course , and I hope that the restructuring of Opel is subjected to normal rules of business conduct and that we do not end up in a situation where everyone puts their own car plant first .
I have complete confidence in Commissioner Kroes , who is going to examine every aspect of this deal .
She is known for her ability to stand firm , which she has proved time and again in the Netherlands , and she will not be afraid to make clear statements .
I do have a question for her concerning the role of Sberbank , the Russian savings bank .
I am wondering what kind of role this is and whether it will ultimately lead to the relocation of some of Opel 's production activities to the Russian Federation , since Sberbank is actually an extension of the government 's economic policy by other means .
Finally , I should like to point out to Mr Staes that he is surprised that this company is under threat , whilst advocating a vehemently anti-car policy .
Cars are becoming safer and cleaner but are still blamed for everything .
Cars are the bogeyman , and drivers are squeezed dry as taxpayers - often as a result of policies championed in this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , cars represent freedom .
For many people of modest means , Opel represents an affordable brand .
It is an unfortunate fact that , at present , these people are finding it increasingly difficult to afford a car such as an Opel , and the result is the collapse of car manufacturing .
This is why I do not think we can express surprise at these developments whilst conducting an anti-car policy in this House .
My party is in favour of cars , as Mr Verhofstadt , too , is aware .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I have three points to make .
The first is that the car industry is a key industry for Europe and - this has already been said - when you include all the upstream and downstream businesses and the whole supply industry , 12 million jobs depend on it .
I just want to emphasise this one more time as Mr Chatzimarkakis is sitting there in front of me , having just said that the German Government 's efforts were electioneering bluster .
I can only refute this definitively .
It is a mocking affront to the workers employed in this sector across numerous European countries who have to fear for their jobs day in and day out .
Secondly , rescuing Opel is in the common interests of Europe as a whole .
I think it is particularly important to stress this , irrespective of the debate today .
There are sites in the UK , Belgium , Poland , Spain , Germany and other European countries .
If Opel is rescued by the fact that there is an investor , namely Magna , that there are bridging loans , for which the German Government fought , it is not only in Germany 's interests but those of Europe as a whole .
We must all take steps to retain jobs in our home countries .
I am pleased .
Where would we be today if we had not taken steps to bring about the trusteeship solution ?
There would not be any need for further debate today in that case , as the debate would have been done and dusted in any case when General Motors drew GM Europe along with it into the mess surrounding its insolvency .
My third point is that there are strict rules for State aid .
I am confident that the Commission will examine this matter in a proper manner doing justice to the interests involved .
The crucial question will be whether Opel Europe can be profitable again in the medium term .
I am confident that the solution that has now been produced and on which Magna , too , is working , and which involves many other European States , can be implemented .
I ask the Commission to also provide the relevant authorisation and I would like to conclude by re-stating that , in this case , we have achieved something positive for the car industry in Europe as a whole !
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you to the Commission for its statement .
Unfortunately , I do not share the optimism of many of my fellow Members - and this goes for the Commission statement , too .
It is true that we have had some more bad news about the Antwerp plant today , and the fact that a highly productive plant , with a particularly good workforce , is the one earmarked for closure must raise many questions - hopefully also within the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , could it have anything to do with the fact that this plant is situated in one of the smaller Member States and in a region that , though economically strong , is particularly small ?
The Commission is now congratulating itself on the work it has done over recent months .
Unfortunately , I disagree .
You , the Commission , play a role - a necessary role , and one I support - a very formalistic role as protector of the interests of the European Union in terms of its treaties and its rules on competition and State aid .
I emphasise the necessity of this , and reiterate my support for you in the investigation you must carry out in this regard , as it will be a crucial one .
Yet why did you not do more ?
Why did you not assume a strong political role - for example , by also cooperating on ideas relating to restructuring during the talks you held with the Member States ?
The European trade unions , for example , have been working on , and still support , restructuring , which also incorporates the concept of solidarity , namely ensuring that the suffering is shared among the various plants .
For the time being , I wish to ask - and this is my most important question to the Commission - what are you going to do right now , following the worst possible news about Opel Antwerp : what steps will you be taking to ensure that the people , the workers in Antwerp , also have a future ?
Mr President , all of us with car factories in our countries or regions want to see their success , but that should not blind us to the problems and the reality of overcapacity that curbs profits and investment .
I am hugely impressed by the engineering excellence I see at plants in my region - at Ellesmere Port and at Halewood - and on that basis alone they should prosper , but I am deeply depressed by the attitude of the car industry as a whole over the 10 years that I have seen it work while I have been in this Parliament .
Judged against the potential for environmental improvement , its record has been shameful .
Of course , there are positive stories to be told .
We see examples of innovation in our newspapers each day , but the industry as a whole fought against the introduction of catalytic converters , wildly exaggerating their cost .
It made an agreement with us to reduce its CO2 emissions and then reneged on it .
Currently it is trying to wriggle out of legal requirements that it uses air-conditioning coolants with a much lower global warming potential than those used at present , and already it is lobbying to try and weaken the Commission 's proposals on CO2 emissions from vans and light commercial vehicles .
Huge sums of money have been put into propping up this industry .
I think we , the public , deserve a bit better .
We hear from the component manufacturers that the car assemblers are too low in their ambitions .
What we need is for the industry now to take a new attitude , and the industry 's representatives - ACEA - in particular .
We need the industry to recognise that it has obligations to society as a whole and that its future is inextricably linked to environmental improvement .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is clear that even the European car industry cannot escape reality and must be reorganised as a matter of urgency to eliminate overcapacity .
Yet , of course , the question arises about the credibility of Opel 's economy drive if it has pledged to retain its most expensive plant - the German one - whilst an economically well performing plant such as Opel Antwerp is to close .
Sure enough , this scenario was formally confirmed this afternoon by Magna co-CEO , Siegfried Wolf , at the Frankfurt Motor Show . As various speakers have already stated , there are serious indications that , in exchange for State aid , Magna has made concessions to the German authorities that are not exactly in the interests of the industrial plan .
I think that the European Commission must put a stop to this before it is too late .
Commissioner Kroes has already expressed her concern , but I think that more is needed .
In particular , the Commission must lose no time in stating how it intends to ensure that Germany , too , respects the European competition rules in this dossier .
As I see it , failure by the Commission to do this would set a bad precedent for all future cross-border restructuring operations , with the smaller Member States repeatedly being driven out .
Why is the Commission itself not also at the helm of the negotiations with GM and Magna instead of just Germany ?
I have also heard that , tomorrow , the German Government is to sit down at the table with the other European countries to work out how to coordinate the State aid .
This does look very cynical as far as Flanders is concerned and clearly comes too late in the day , and I should like to ask whether the Commission is also involved .
( ES ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to express , on behalf of the European Parliament , our solidarity and support for all the workers in all the Opel plants across Europe , especially for those at the Figueruelas plant , the workers and their families and those that are dependent on them in the auxiliary companies .
I would like to assure them that we are with them in this new adventure that is beginning with the creation of an independent European producer , GM Europe .
However , in order for this adventure , which stemmed from the bad news of the collapse of GM in the United States , to be an opportunity to build a solvent , modern , competitive business with a clear future from a company , economic and technological point of view , the Commission and the Commissioners themselves need to take the lead again in the current negotiations in order to ensure that we achieve a truly European solution with all possible guarantees .
We have been criticising the absence of the Commission in the preliminary negotiations and the way that it gave in to bilateral negotiations when every Member State with Opel plants was calling for unilateral solutions .
In this respect , it should be pointed out that there have even been regional governments , such as my government in Aragon , which was pioneering a year ago when it proposed a guarantee for the Figueruelas plant .
However , this shift , due to the Commission surrendering its responsibilities , has resulted in the current situation of confusion and a serious risk that election outcomes , which have no bearing on the criteria for industrial viability , will lead the new European company down a dead end in which competitiveness criteria are not a priority and a high cost in terms of jobs is inevitable .
In order to prevent this from happening , we need the solution to be a European one that is economically viable now , and in the medium and long term , in which employment is prioritised in the form of the competitiveness and productivity of emblematic plants such as Figueruelas .
We will not allow the Commission to remain neutral for another second longer .
It needs to act and ensure both employment and the future of GM Europe .
Parliament is going to demand this on behalf of all the workers of Opel Europe .
( ES ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioners for their explanations .
Throughout this entire debate , I have been concerned about the link that is being made between the elections in Germany and the situation of this company , which is affecting many plants in Europe .
I am going to focus on three of the aspects mentioned by the Commissioner .
I believe that this situation requires complete and absolute transparency in all the negotiations that are being conducted .
I agree that there needs to be monitoring of all the aspects , both from a legal point of view and from the point of view of aid .
However , the Commissioner said that she sees restructuring as inevitable , along with job losses and the closure of plants .
In response to this , which I believe is due to the business model that has been put forward so far and the level of greed that we have in Europe , I think that with this future in mind , we need to put people first .
We and the Commission need to consider and apply innovative policies , to protect people and ensure they can live with dignity and are given standard training across all European countries , in order to adapt to the future labour market and to the requirements of the new companies .
Secondly , with regard to aid to businesses , I would like to say that it needs to be aid that makes the remaining plants viable .
There also needs to be a definite commitment to innovation , especially , as other Members have mentioned , to hybrid technologies , so that motoring does not depend solely on fossil fuels .
This is therefore what we require of the Commission for the future .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to make a number of comments .
The first is that , until now , State aid for the car industry and the action taken by the Member States and the Commission have been marked , on the one hand , by what I would call a defensive approach and , on the other , by a short-term approach .
I believe , for example , that the huge scrapping premiums that we have seen have in fact anticipated and artificially inflated demand , and I believe that it is now that these premiums are coming to an end , or are going to come to an end , that we will see just how much of a false impression they create .
Demand cannot keep up with supply .
That is why we would like to encourage the Commission to be far more ambitious in its way of working .
Where State aid in particular is concerned , I believe that we need to prioritise two areas of action .
The first is that implementing sustainable mobility solutions in Europe requires the talents and skills of workers - from engineers to manual workers - from the car industry .
Thus , a first area of action is obviously to help maintain and develop these skills , in the car industry or in related industries .
Moreover , I believe that far greater conditions should be attached to State aid than is currently the case .
In other words , it is not enough to say , ' we are going to continue in the same way as before ' .
I believe that State aid should be made subject to the speeding up of change within the industry .
In this respect , I fully agree with what Mr Davies said .
I should like to conclude by responding to Mr Eppink , who is obviously claiming that we are against freedom .
What is , in fact , happening on the market is that fewer and fewer of our fellow citizens are falling into the ' my car equals my freedom ' bracket .
One need only go for a drive on the roads of Belgium or the Netherlands to realise that the system has reached its limits .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , when it was proposed that we have a debate in plenary on the future of Opel Europe , we were not yet aware of the purchase of the company by Magna and its Russian partner , Sberbank , on Thursday .
After months of uncertainty , a new phase is beginning for Opel Europe which , for some , is grounds for hope , while for others , grounds for concern .
We want the conditions of the final contract , which will be signed in the next few months , to be positive for the future of the company , and I hope that the German Government is right in thinking that this is the most reliable offer for the survival of the company .
However , as a Member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and as someone from Aragon , where the Figueruelas factory , which is currently one of the most productive plants , is located , I must express my concern regarding the fate of the workers .
There is talk that in its restructuring plan , Magna is considering making 10 560 workers redundant - currently 1 700 at the Aragon plant - to which many indirect redundancies will have to be added .
We are aware that in order to save the company , there needs to be major restructuring , and that this will affect our workers , but we hope that the plan will be made using economic and productivity criteria , seeking to arrive at the best solution for everyone .
We trust that , in the coming months , the governments of the affected countries will get involved along with Europe .
This will mean that together , using economic criteria , we can support the viability of Opel with the lowest possible cost to the workers at all its European plants .
Mr Luhan , you had a question for Mrs Lope Fontagné .
That is why you were holding up your blue card , is it not ?
( DE ) Madam President , I think it is very important that we discuss this issue .
What has not been addressed so far , however , is dealing with this subject in the context of European and regional development .
( The President cut off the speaker )
That is not a question for Mrs Lope Fontagné .
If you want to speak under the catch-the-eye procedure , you will have that opportunity at the end of the debate .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the recent events concerning Opel make me think of something more than just the acquisition of an historic European car manufacturer .
I wonder : what kind of industrial policy do we want for Europe ?
I would have preferred a European group to have acquired Opel ; it would have demonstrated cooperation and solidarity among industries in the sector , as well as a strong sense of belonging to the European Union .
At the ' Etats Généraux de l 'Automobile ' conference in January 2009 , the European Commissioner for Industry , Mr Verheugen , said that the automotive sector was crucial to the economy , society , employment and research .
I am worried about the possible repercussions in employment terms that this deal could have and I hope that there will be no cuts .
I am even more worried about State aid , which must not distort competition in the car market .
The Commission will have to ensure that the aid is not linked to site closures .
It is a shame that the proposal made by Fiat was not accepted by either the German Government or the directors of Opel .
Nowadays , Fiat is the most technically advanced vehicle manufacturer - just look at what it has done to reduce the CO2 emissions of its cars .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner Kroes , we are actually looking to you as an arbitrator in this case .
If I have understood correctly , Antwerp is soon to lose its Opel plant .
There may still be a plant that is rented out to one brand or another as a subcontractor , but of course , that is a particularly uncertain future .
As a citizen of Antwerp , what I find especially hard to take is that we have been convinced for months that the choice would be based not merely on economic arguments but on the ability of Germany , the German Government , to put a very large amount of taxpayers ' money on the table .
Therefore , we are looking to you as an arbitrator to see whether this is true , and to work out whether merely economic and commercial arguments were indeed used in this instance or whether it was a case of the survival of the economically or politically fittest .
When your investigation is complete , we should be obliged if you would set forth your findings in this House .
After all , we have yet to hear much , or at least anything clear , from the companies involved .
That is why we are counting on you to enlighten us on the arguments that were used by those involved .
I should like you to tell me why Antwerp - my city - has been hit hardest , as very many people back home will see this as a symbol of the confidence they can have in the European Commission and in the European Union itself .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I share the great concern of many in this House about the fate of Opel and the people who work there or make a living in that area .
A decision in principle has now been taken on the acquisition of Opel , but in recent days and even hours , statements have been made that have caused a great deal of confusion on several points .
This is draining for the workers and also the people in the supply sector , and clarity is needed without delay - clarity , but , above all , a serious , honest approach .
What worries me about this dossier in a European context is Magna 's announcement that only the Antwerp plant is to be closed , whilst studies have been published showing that this particular plant holds trump cards in terms of business economics .
Therefore , I cannot shake off the impression that multinationals are playing Member States off against one another , or the other way round : that Member States are using State aid to influence the selection of plants to be closed or saved , in such a way as to distort competition .
If this should be the case , on top of the economic crisis and its distressing social consequences , we shall find ourselves dealing with a crisis of the institutions - the credibility of the institutions - which will leave people without any point of reference .
For this reason , I ask with urgency something I have asked before , in a written question in February , which is that the Commission really make use of all the means at its disposal : the means to ensure the victims of Opel 's trials and tribulations are not left to their fate , and the means to really set up a formal investigation into the use of State aid .
This is in the interests of objective , transparent treatment of each and every plant and the people who depend on it .
After all , people must be able to rely on the European Union carrying out its core tasks even under difficult circumstances such as we are seeing at present , on it taking matters seriously , and on there being no place in Europe for double standards .
This is really the litmus test for the credibility of the institutions , Commissioners , and we are counting on you .
Madam President , I believe we all share the same objective - to ensure the long-term viability and competitiveness of the EU car industry and to maintain jobs in the sector .
In July , I wrote to Commissioner Verheugen and I was encouraged by receiving his commitment to ensure a level playing field in any restructuring plan for the European arm of GM .
In my region , the Vauxhall plant in Ellesmere Port is the linchpin of the local economy , employing some 2 200 direct jobs .
The site has undergone radical restructuring and is considered a lean , efficient and competitive operation , as indeed is the Luton site in the south-east of England .
Nobody wants job losses , but any decision must be based on the viability and efficiency of plants .
It must be based on fairness , not favouritism , not because one Member State has pledged more finance than any others .
And I am pleased that Commissioner Kroes recognises that there is no place for political fixes , political strings or conditions in awarding State aid .
I urge the Commission to be vigilant and to ensure that any financial support is based on State aid rules and the ability of the European operations to be commercially viable and economically fit for the future .
Maintaining a strong European car industry means taking a pan-European approach to maintaining vital and efficient infrastructure in all Member States and all regions .

( PL ) The question has arisen as to whether the provision of EUR 4.5 million by the German Government to restructure Opel , which was hailed as a success , was a political act or an economic one .
The best answer to this question was provided by representatives of the German Government when it came to choosing Magna as the entity to take over Opel .
One representative did not take part in the decisive vote , and another , Mr Wennemer , voted against , because he considered that it was a political decision .
The European Commission ought to assess the nature of the State aid granted to Opel and inform the House as to whether this was not perhaps a case of protecting the local market at the expense of factories and jobs in other European Union Member States .
I was particularly affected by the severity of the European Commission 's assessments , because the shipyard workers in Szczecin and Gdynia were not granted any opportunity to continue producing ships .
Will Commissioner Kroes ' assessment of this case of State aid be as severe and as reliable as it was in the case of the Polish shipyards ?
The citizens of Europe suspect that double standards are being applied in this area .
Finally , I should like to point out that the global financial crisis is now one year old .
In these difficult times , the European Commission ought to be ready to assist , assess , advise and to propose solutions that are not tainted by suspicions of being driven by the political or protectionist interests of individual Member States .
Unfortunately , it is my impression that the Commission has adopted a passive attitude in this case .
( SV ) Madam President , we can only conclude that the crisis that we find ourselves in is unprecedented .
It is therefore necessary for us to have a cohesive and active policy - not only to save the jobs that it is possible to save , but also to help those who become unemployed to get back into the labour market .
Training will be hugely important .
The car industry is the engine of the European economy and it is important for decisions to be taken on the basis of long-term goals for developing a sustainable European car industry .
Differing ideas have been put forward about how job losses and notice will be distributed .
If it is the case that every fifth job in the Opel group will disappear , then there will be an unbelievable strain on both the people and the societies affected , irrespective of the country concerned .
I hope , therefore , that the process has been carried out correctly and that multinational undertakings have not had to play off country against country in the bidding process and so play off the workers against each other as well .
European efforts to counter the crisis must be coordinated and balanced .
It is also important for trade unions to be involved and for them to be able to participate in the process in an active and constructive manner .
Furthermore , it is important for the Commission and Parliament to follow the developments closely .
Research and development will be crucial to the future of the car industry and that applies not only to Opel , but to all vehicle manufactures throughout Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , I greatly appreciate a subject as important as this being debated here in the European Parliament .
Personally , I worked for more than three years in the automotive supply sector .
In my home country , we give top priority to foreign investment in the automotive sector .
I therefore think that the car industry has an important role to play in connection with regional development .
As well as supporting innovation , we should also create incentives for automotive suppliers and car makers throughout Europe to restructure and expand , as one of the most important objectives of the European Commission and the European Parliament is to ensure a high degree of economic cohesion .
The Commission should do more , including with regard to awarding grants to the car industry .
For the time being , this should be regarded as a measure aimed at combating the financial and economic crisis , although it should also be seen as one of the building blocks of innovation in the car industry .
In this context , Opel is only one example of how this sector is currently on the rocks , but , of course , many car makers are in the same situation .
That is why we want the Commission to treat this sector and this area as priorities .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is , of course , not the first time that we have debated the subject of Opel and the car industry .
I am pleased that the rescue succeeded .
There were other proposals on the table , such as a structured insolvency .
In the supply industry - and I have just come from Bavaria , where I visited a supply company - people are very urgently dependent on orders .
Things have got out of control .
If Opel , too , had been driven to insolvency , things would have been very , very bad and the consequences would have been devastating .
We have just heard the Commission 's conclusions .
There was a car industry summit , in which the Commission took part , but we actually heard nothing after the summit .
Today we have heard where the problem may lie. what is not possible .
That must change in future - we need to hear from the Commission what is possible , so as to forestall nationalistic debates . The Commission needs to mediate more effectively so that we pursue a common European industrial policy .
That is also what I hope for from the next Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all , I feel I must state that I am speaking from a doubly biased position .
My wife works in the management of a car company in Germany , and in Austria people are pleased that Opel appears to have been rescued in this way .
When we look at the events more closely , however , I have great doubts about whether we are not doing exactly what we in Austria have already experienced in connection with the apparent rescue of the nationalised industry and what already happened in Germany in relation to the Holzmann company before a pivotal election .
I do not know whether there are Members in the House from Germany who would be prepared to enter into a wager with me about whether presumptive German taxpayers would be supporting Opel in this way if such an important election were not taking place in ten days ' time .
I would like the Commission to consider the sine ira et studio , to really think over whether this is reasonable .
If we are going to constantly talk of competition , then that is what we should have and it should not result in a downward spiral which takes with it those who have actually kept house better , financially speaking , than Opel !
( RO ) Madam President , we are actually talking about signs of recovery in Europe , but , unfortunately , the situation in the car industry is still alarming .
This is why I think that we need to send a clear signal to European countries , encouraging them to continue their programmes for replacing old cars heavy on fuel with new cars , while maintaining the incentive programmes from the budgets of the relevant countries .
Obviously , we must also be able to attach to these programmes certain restructuring conditions with a view to saving energy .
( NL ) Madam President , the provisional solution to the Opel dossier contains good news for some people but , above all , a great deal of bad news for the thousands of people who are to lose their jobs , and I understand from this afternoon 's announcement that these will also be from Antwerp .
This is not to mention the supply chain , where large numbers of jobs will also be lost .
These are all social tragedies , and I believe that three things are important in this regard .
Firstly , the Commission must now use all its competences to guarantee that the negative consequences of the announced restructuring take an honest , objective course .
This is essential to preserve Europe 's credibility and to prevent people from getting the feeling that all workers are not equal .
Secondly , starting now , the Commission must put all its energy into helping to offer a new future in those places where jobs are being lost .
Thirdly - and this , I think , is the main lesson to be learnt - we need a more proactive Commission , we need a European industrial policy , a perspective on the challenges , the opportunities and the way problems are tackled from a European point of view - and this for transnational industrial sectors such as the car industry .
Madam President , I apologise for my ignorance .
I am a human rights lawyer with very little expertise on economic issues , so I have two very basic questions .
The first is : is there not a fundamental problem with an economic system in which profit is privatised and the costs and the damages are nationalised and paid by taxpayers , most of whom are poor people - or a lot of them are poor people - who have to pay for the bad decisions of a narrow , rich corporate elite ?
Is there not something fundamentally wrong with this system , and should we not look at the root causes of all that we are talking about today ?
The second question is - we were talking about discrimination in providing public funds geographically or between nations and states - how about sectors ?
Is it fair that these big corporations get public funds out of taxpayers ' money while small and family entrepreneurs do not ?
Is this not a fundamental violation of the principle of equal opportunities between economic players in the European Union ?

Madam President , as the MEP that represents Luton in the East of England , I would like to join my British colleague , Arlene McCarthy , in expressing our real desire to Mr Špidla and to the Commission that they scrutinise this GM / Opel deal line by line to make sure that a deal which is about a European sell-off is a good deal for Europe as a whole .
I would also like to appeal to him to look in particular at the issues around van production , which is the production within Luton .
Firstly , because Magna 's partner is a Russian truck company , and there are fears that that company will benefit at the expense of the existing production .
Secondly , because it is expected that there must be a new model in that van market by 2012 , and unless Magna give assurances that that new model will be brought on , it does bring concerns about the future of the plant .
And finally , there are concerns that the deal will not be compatible with the joint production venture between General Motors and Renault , which is half of the production at Luton .
I ask him to do everything possible to secure that production and the jobs that are associated with it at the same time .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate has clearly shown that the automobile industry is one of the most important areas of the economy in the European Union .
In my opinion , it has also clearly shown that for the automobile industry - just as for Opel - there can only be a European solution and that it is impossible to find a long-term solution within the framework of individual countries which will stand the test of time in economic and social terms .
There was also a clear emphasis , in my opinion , on the importance of the Commission ensuring that all of the rules are applied completely consistently and in an entirely impartial manner .
There was much debate over the rules of economic competition , but I would like to stress that Europe is also equipped with a number of very substantial directives focusing on social issues and the regulation of restructuring , as well as the informing of employees and a whole range of issues which we must take into consideration as a matter of principle because every economic operation is essentially a relationship between people and we must take full account of the social consequences of all decisions .
I would like to emphasise that the Opel case clearly demonstrates all of the important components for the automobile industry in itself and , in my opinion , we can also tell what sort of future the European automobile industry will have from the way that the various European levels cooperate in solving this problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , it was suggested rather indirectly in the debate that the Commission has not been sufficiently active .
I have to say that during the course of the crisis , and particularly when it was first erupting , there were very clear manifestations of protectionist tendencies and economic nationalism .
Several months later , this was no longer an urgent topic .
In my opinion , we should acknowledge the enormous efforts made by the Commission over this issue , which brought definite results .
As far as the issue itself is concerned , my colleague , Mr Verheugen , organised two meetings to address the issue at which he brought individual Member States together and one outcome of which was that the Member States shared information , which has not always been the case in previous restructuring exercises .
In my view , the debate also clearly showed that the European automobile industry is going through a long-term restructuring process , and that this fact must be taken into consideration .
Future progress has been a central theme and I am delighted to be able to emphasise once again that support is going into innovation in the automobile industry via the European Investment Bank , in order to ensure that the crisis situation does not weaken the industry 's capacity for innovation .
Ladies and gentlemen , although the decision that was taken is very significant for the issue we have been discussing , we are nonetheless in the middle of a process and there can be no doubt that the Commission has mobilised all of its powers and resources to ensure that the process has been conducted correctly and with close attention to the social dimension .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am grateful for nearly all the remarks that have been made , for many reasons .
This is an excellent opportunity to find out where the role of the Commission is limited and where it is challenged , and what the clear purposes of the Commission 's policy are .
I also want to touch upon the time schedule .
Mr Langen was quite clear in his approach on that as well as on the role of the Commission .
We are all aware that we are living on a continent - and not just on the continent - that is not only populated with angels .
The temptation to use State aid in different situations is there , and we are all aware of that .
That is exactly why judgments on State aid lie in the hands of the Commission - a decision backed by all the Member States .
By the way , I am still impressed that the founders of Europe in the 1950s were already aware of the pitfalls of using State aid in the wrong way .
They were quite clear and that statement is still in the Treaty of Rome .
Having said that , the Commission 's role is to verify that no protectionist conditions are attached to State funding and that is exactly where our challenge lies .
Some of you ask why we cannot speed up , but we are doing our utmost .
By the way , nationality was never an issue in cooperation with banks .
We do have examples in the German banking world where the delivery was quite quick with Sachsen LB , but it depends - and in this case too - on the players .
We need the facts and figures .
The need to speed up goes without saying : there is no need even to mention it as we are aware of that .
We will go as fast as the provision of information allows us .
Having said that , we were also getting your clear line to be very careful and precise and to enter into an investigation to find proof and come back to Parliament .
I am always willing - and hopefully able - to come back to explain our results , but we have to verify what we find .
We need to be sure and be in a position to deliver this .
If Mr Verhofstadt wants us to go even further - not only State aid but taking in merger rules too - then , if Magna / Sberbank is notifiable to the Commission under the EU Merger Regulation , we will assess it carefully .
I am aware that is also what the honourable Member wants .
We need to be very careful about replacing an unhealthy but highly competitive industry with a cartel based on market-sharing and price-fixing , as what we try to rescue will end up in a worse situation .
We take the points about speed and being very careful but precise and going into great depth .
It is very important to ensure that State aid leads to a proper restructuring .
That is fundamental and what the Commission is absolutely engaged in .
The size of the Member State does not make any difference , nor does nationality or the size of the company 's dossier .
We are objective .
I assure you that I am looking forward to coming up with a proposal where we can say that we did our job , we did it in a proper way and we can assure you that it is viable and that there are stable jobs for the future .
That is one of the main things we owe to the people who are currently living in uncertainty .
The debate is closed .
Forest fires in the summer of 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the statement from the Commission on the forest fires in the summer of 2009 .
Madam President , I should like first of all to express my support for those who were affected by the recent forest fires .
This summer , the Community made an important contribution towards putting out the many difficult forest fires which broke out in various Member States .
The pilot programme of the EU forest fire tactical reserve played an important role and provided assistance to the Member States affected by the forest fires .
I should like to extend my special thanks to the European Parliament for approving funding for this pilot programme .
I must also say that this pilot programme is a small part , a partial implementation of proposals and ideas from the report by Michel Barnier , to whom I also express my thanks .
This pilot programme substantially reinforced the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection and , by extension , the facility to assist countries hit by natural disasters .
The European Community Mechanism for Civil Protection was used by France , Italy , Spain and other Member States of the European Union to provide aerial fire-fighting resources in Greece , Italy , Portugal and other countries .
In fact , for the first time , two Community fire-fighting aircraft were involved together with Greek , Portuguese and French aerial resources in fire-fighting efforts under a pilot programme to create an independent Community fire brigade .
On the occasion of these recent fires , many voices were again raised by politicians , scientists , journalists and simple citizens , calling for the creation at European level of a specialist fire-fighting force able to intervene directly and effectively when national fire-fighting resources are insufficient .
Huge efforts have been made in this direction to create an independent intervention force to fight forest fires and , as I said , the support of the European Parliament was a decisive factor .
It allowed us to secure funds to charter fire-fighting aircraft and , for the first time this summer , over the period from 1 June to 30 September , we set up and commissioned an airborne fire-fighting force under the supervision of the European Commission , the EU forest fire tactical reserve , whose aircraft were involved in fire-fighting operations in various countries .
To be precise it was mobilised in six of the nine incidents in which the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection was called upon for assistance .
In fact , the national airborne resources , be they Greek , Portuguese or Italian , and those that came from other countries , were joined by the purely Community fire-fighting aircraft , which fly under the flag of the European Union , not under the flag of a Member State .
The aim of this pilot programme was to fill gaps in the aerial capacity of the Member States , not to replace available national resources .
The reserve aircraft chartered were used this year , as I said , in Portugal , in the south of France and Corsica , in Italy and in Greece , in the area of Attica , where we had major fires .
They are based on the island of Corsica , which is equidistant for the purpose of intervention from either side of the Mediterranean .
I consider that there is now an urgent need to create an independent capacity to deal with natural disasters at Community level .
We hope that this pilot programme will form the core of a future European rapid response force to fight forest fires and other natural or man-made disasters .
Of course , there are certain differing points of view here on the question of forest fires , with some people citing the principle of subsidiarity in the forest resource management and protection sector .
However , there are also reservations about handing over more power to the Commission in the civil protection sector .
Also , there are arguments that the existence of a European fire-fighting force would give a false sense of security to many national authorities , which might neglect the necessary investment required in human resources , in fire-fighting resources and , more importantly , in the prevention of fires and other natural disasters .
Apart from these reactions , there are a number of practical problems , problems of coordination , especially on the question of forest fires .
For example , what criteria and what priorities will be used to determine how European airborne fire-fighting units are to be used where fires break out in several countries at once , for example , in Portugal and Greece at the same time .
In any event , all these issues will be analysed in a report submitted by the European Commission for debate by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament on the operation of the pilot programme this summer .
The Council , the European Parliament and the Commission will all need to be persuaded and to cooperate in the creation of this mechanism .
Of course , in the meantime , Member States must not neglect in any way whatsoever their obligations in the information , education and prevention sectors .
I shall say a few more words about the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection , which was set up in 2001 , and which made few interventions in the initial years .
Since 2005 , interventions both inside and outside the European Union , with approximately 50 % inside the European Union and 50 % outside it , have increased fivefold and we have seriously improved coordination and the assistance which we provide via the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection .
Everyone knows how important intervention was both in the case of the tsunami and during hurricane Katrina .
In fact , we were the first to send specialists to the disaster zones in both these cases .
However , as I said earlier , we have a great deal to do and anyone who reads the Barnier report will see how much we can advance civil protection for the benefit of European citizens and , of course , environmental protection .
Madam President , every year , 400 000 hectares of forest are destroyed in southern Europe .
This is a systemic disaster of massive proportions and will worsen over the next few decades .
For 30 to 40 years at least , we shall live , whatever we do from the point of view of reducing greenhouse gases , with a worsening climate which , especially in the south of Europe , where forests are vulnerable , will be a negative experience .
We will have to face bigger fires and more serious dangers in the future .
Under normal circumstances , fire fighting is the responsibility and obligation of the Member States and the Member States in southern Europe successfully deal with tens of thousands of fires a year .
However , every year , under exceptional circumstances , there are hugely destructive fires for which external assistance and solidarity are needed .
The decision proposed by the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is based on these findings and illustrates , among other things , the urgent need for an effective European rapid response force , as mentioned by Commissioner Dimas and proposed in the Barnier report .
It illustrates the need for flexible and immediate mobilisation of the resources of the European Solidarity Fund , the need to deal with forest fires in southern Europe as a priority under the EU action plan currently being processed in order to adapt to climate change , and the need for the Commission proposal on a European policy to deal with natural disasters to be submitted as quickly as possible .
For my country , and especially for the citizens affected , it is important that this decision be approved by the European Parliament .
It is important for this House to demonstrate its awareness of this crucial issue to southern Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , this year , yet again , the history of forest fires has repeated itself for the worse and every autumn we arrive after the break to debate restoration of the areas affected and relief for the victims .
Again this year in Greece , we are lamenting the hundreds of thousands of hectares burnt and an incalculable ecological and economic disaster , while Spain , Portugal , Italy and France have suffered disasters on a similar scale .
Commissioner , one thing is clear , and you hinted at it : we appear to be unable to learn from recent past mistakes .
For at least six years , we have been talking about a common European civil protection force .
This has been a constant request by the European Parliament , the importance of which , however , has been devalued by mistakes on the part of certain national governments .
Mistakes in the design and application of pre-emptive mechanisms and preventative measures , an inability or unwillingness to impose strict legislation making reforestation of destroyed areas compulsory and a failure to make use of all of the available Community resources in order to compensate victims .
At Community level , over and above the civil protection force , direct activation of Solidarity Fund resources and , more importantly , freeing them from bureaucratic mechanisms , must be the Commission 's basic priorities .
Finally , Commissioner , you know , better than all of us , that we face a new generation of fires , so-called high-intensity fires , which are directly linked to climate change and mainly affect forests in the Mediterranean and southern Europe .
We therefore need forest protection at national and Community level to be redesigned immediately by adapting fire prevention and fire fighting to the new circumstances and integrating these policies into the framework of measures to be set in motion so that Member States can meet the challenge of climate change .
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your explanations .
Indeed , I think that there needs to be a Community policy , firstly to prevent the fires that are occurring , and we have seen that this has happened throughout the summer .
I would also like to say that I wanted to begin my speech by remembering the four firemen who died in June in Horta de Sant Joan , Tarragona , and paying my respects to their families and colleagues .
We need a policy of prevention , but also a policy of coordination .
We should not forget that there is suspicion surrounding many of the fires that have occurred that they are the result of a speculative policy and development intentions .
I therefore think that we need to work in Europe as well to promote security by investigating and standardising penalties for environmental crimes .
We should also consider the possibility of pursuing them using a European arrest warrant .
The professionals need to be given the necessary resources to be able to develop innovative mechanisms for measuring the weather , winds and temperatures so that they can work under the necessary conditions , because ultimately they are protecting us all .
Madam President , how interesting that it is mainly the Greeks who are speaking on this highly important issue of concern to the whole of southern Europe , given that huge forest fires regularly destroy massive areas and affect the quality of life , biodiversity , regional development and citizens ' futures .
Often forest fires , as was recently the case in Greece , are due to poorly designed and conflicting forestry and housing policies , which encourage arson and illegal action to obtain forest land .
Unfortunately , both the main parties have tried to mitigate and reduce the constitutional protection of forests .
The constant pressure for changes to land use , the expansion of residential areas and , of course , the uncontrolled rubbish dumps which are burned or which combust spontaneously , in conjunction with climate change , and which , for some people , are simple alibis , are now increasing the potential for more natural disasters .
It is therefore important that we focus more on prevention , protection and on prompt risk management , at European level , through coordinated cooperation .
Within this framework , we must safeguard the application of a sustainable common European forest policy and ensure that funds from the Cohesion Fund , the Regional Development Fund and the Solidarity Fund which are earmarked for risk prevention and management and for the restoration of affected areas are , in fact , used in a rational and sustainable manner .
The funds disbursed in order to restore affected areas must be used on the basis of rational reforestation measures and scientific studies and we would emphasise that they must be refunded by the Member States where it is ascertained that the forest areas affected have been reclassified for residential or tourist development .
In the past , even two years ago , Parliament passed resolutions containing recommendations for the prevention of , and prompt action on , natural risks which , unfortunately , have not been implemented effectively .
We believe that long-term protection of forests and biodiversity is only feasible if viable risk prevention and management policies are applied at national , regional and local level , by actively involving local communities , by keeping people in the countryside , by creating new ' green ' professions , though lifelong learning and training , and by strengthening forestry services with the emphasis on voluntary forest fire-fighting brigades .
Finally , we need to step up efforts to develop more effective rapid response mechanisms to natural disasters by strengthening the permanent civil protection force which Mr Dimas referred to and by making greater use of the conclusions in the Barnier report .
Within this framework , we are tabling a resolution today before the European Parliament , in the hope that we shall make headway , in terms of joint action and cooperation by the Member States , towards real prevention and management of natural disasters and more effective use of European Union funds for this purpose .
We owe it to our children .
Madam President , my country , Greece , has seen massive areas destroyed by fire for the third year running .
The fires in 2007 , which were one of the worst tragedies of their kind , and the fires this year in northeast Attica , illustrate just how scant the fire safety and environmental protection system is .
I would remind the House that Athens is the European capital with the smallest ratio of green spaces to inhabitants and with the highest atmospheric pollution , and that the fires in 2007 and 2009 have exacerbated the environmental problem .
Climate change can be used to explain the disasters which have occurred in southern Europe to a degree .
However , there are also shortcomings in national policies and in the policy of the European Union , inasmuch as climate change has not been properly integrated into the environmental strategy .
Greek governments allow burned areas to be developed and for national land to be appropriated and EU funds are inelastic .
This being so , Commissioner , I should like to ask you if the European Commission intends to contribute towards the institutional safeguarding of the forests in the country by immediately mobilising the procedure for drafting and ratifying forest maps which , had they existed , might perhaps have prevented this arson ?
Does it intend to directly cofinance anti-flood and anti-erosion works to avoid new disasters in the areas affected ?
Does it intend to finance appropriate reforestation , because there is too little reforestation to replace the damage ?
Finally , does the European Commission intend to discuss with whichever new government is returned in the next elections in Greece the creation of a city park at the old Hellenikon Airport , which would bring a breath of fresh air to Attica ?
Thank you very much , and many happy returns to the Commissioner on his name day , as we say in Greece .
Madam President , Commissioner , I was very pleased to see you here and hear you speak .
I consider that what you said also answers the letter which we sent to you on the second day of the fires in which we set out a proposal for common action in southern Europe to prevent and fight fires , together with certain other detailed proposals .
I should also like to add that I am delighted to see that all the MEPs from the Greek parties and the Spanish party have responded to our call for a joint presence in the European Parliament and joint efforts to plan a European strategy to deal with natural disasters .
Commissioner , it would appear that climate change results in fires and floods and is now a major structural phenomenon , because the fires and floods we are witnessing are a structural phenomenon .
We must not think along medium-term and short-term lines .
We need to lay the foundations for a long-term strategy .
That is why the governments of the Mediterranean states should unite in efforts to convince our northern partners of the need for the mechanism you referred to , both within the framework of subsidiarity and within the framework of solidarity .
I understand , Commissioner , that you are having problems from northern Europe as far as subsidiarity is concerned .
I hope that the phenomenon of natural disasters will only affect southern Europe , but I greatly fear that climate change is proceeding at such a pace that we may have natural disasters - of a different kind - in northern Europe .
So you were quite right to propose that we plan this strategy to prevent and deal with natural disasters .
For the time being , we have this small unit based in Corsica .
It worked well this summer .
The Commissioner for the Environment urgently needs to develop and support this unit in his recommendation on this matter , both to the Commission and to the Council .
I would call on MEPs from the southern countries to cooperate with their governments and to support the recommendations made by Mr Dimas to both the Commission and the Council , as this is to the advantage of all the countries in the south .
I have seen the motion for a resolution by the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and I agree with it .
I am delighted that they have moved this resolution .
I would add something else to this motion for a resolution by the PPE .
With climate change as the beginning and fires and floods as the result , the Commission should place particular emphasis at the Copenhagen conference on preparing a strategy to prevent and deal with natural disasters , determine the budget needed to cover the prevention and avoidance of natural disasters and therefore strengthen this exemplary EU forest fire tactical reserve unit .
We expect to see the European strategy to prevent and deal with natural disasters , as a top priority , very high up on the agenda for the Copenhagen conference .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what took place in Greece this summer should never be allowed to repeat itself in Europe again .
A total of 75 fires rampaged through Greece alone , six of them completely out of control , the worst of them , as we have heard today , north of Athens , close to the capital .
It is only thanks to the courageous and selfless efforts of the primarily voluntary fire brigades and other voluntary organisations that the fires in many regions were not able to blaze in an uncontrolled manner and that human tragedies were kept to a minimum .
I therefore have a very high regard for my comrades , the voluntary fire brigades , whose equipment - put politely - was often not exactly state of the art , as we have heard .
When I use the words ' colleagues ' or ' comrades ' , I do so because I myself have been a member of a voluntary fire-fighting organisation in Austria for decades and so absolutely do feel sympathy and empathy for the efforts made .
Let me move on to the Commission 's observations .
I think it is tremendous that European action forces should help where local fire fighters cannot manage alone .
I am , however , also convinced that the old saying ' Help yourself , and God will help you ' is an important axiom , and for that reason , I also think it is very important that civil protection mechanisms be built up .
All I can do in this regard is recommend and urge that use be made of the know-how that exists , especially in central Europe , in Germany and in Austria , which is to say , the nationwide voluntary systems , voluntary fire brigades that have been tried and tested for over a century .
As a fireman myself , I would also be happy to create contacts with the regional and national voluntary fire authorities .
In such cases , it is also interesting to do something yourself and if this is seen as desirable , I can offer to carry out a pilot project with our Greek friends on the establishment of a voluntary fire brigade in a selected region or municipality .
I would also be more than happy to actively help and be involved in such a project together with my colleagues in the Upper Austrian provincial fire-fighting association .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should , of course , like to thank Commissioner Dimas for his presence and his answers and for the attention that he continues to pay to all these disasters .
We did a great deal of work together when President Barroso asked me to draft a report , which he also mentioned , on the creation of a European civil protection force .
I presented this report on 9 May 2006 .
When I re-read it , and I see all the disasters that have happened , I realise that it is still topical .
Mrs Tzavela , obviously , it is not just Greece .
Every country is affected , and I would add that there are not only natural disasters , there are also human disasters , caused by mankind .
I am thinking of maritime disasters - Erika and countless others - and of Chernobyl-type industrial accidents .
There are natural disasters other than fires .
I am thinking of the tsunami .
One day we can expect a tsunami in the Mediterranean such as the one at the start of the 20th century that totally destroyed the city of Messina .
Frankly , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the tools we are using are not up to these disasters , which are going to increase under the twin effect of global warming and transport .
Hence the reason why I think we should be more ambitious .
I am grateful to the Commission , to Commissioner Dimas and to all his teams from the Directorate-General that are putting the civil protection mechanism into operation .
I believe that we must go further .
It is conceivable to have enhanced cooperation with those Member States that want it .
If there are not 27 of us to make up this civil protection force , let us start with 12 or 15 of us .
Then you will see that this affects everyone .
When I compile the list of disasters , I can say that everyone is affected : the floods that hit Germany in 2002 , the major pandemics and also terrorism .
That , Commissioner , is why I would like the Commission to take the initiative to go further , to propose that the Member States go further .
Our Parliament , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , will support you in these proactive initiatives .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , here we are yet again talking about fires , because every year fires destroy part of Europe 's forests .
With climate change and global warming , the future does not look any brighter .
Natural disasters cannot be avoided , but they should be prevented .
We can do so straight away by reducing our greenhouse gas emissions and drawing up a suitable forestry policy that recognises the multiple environmental services performed by forests , particularly as carbon sinks .
To be fair , the European civil protection mechanism is working better , and several Member States have made great efforts and invested heavily in fire prevention and rapid response fire fighting .
For example , in my country , Portugal , a plan has been approved that includes the rezoning of the country , the creation of a specific budget for fire fighting , revision of the legislation , and a programme for the recovery of burnt areas .
Even so , we still have fires .
All the Member States affected by fires have to do more and do it better , and the European Commission must also adopt the proposals that the European Parliament has submitted in a number of resolutions .
There are several documents that point to solutions .
The Barnier document and others submitted by Parliament have already been mentioned here .
I myself was the rapporteur for a report on natural disasters in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and I have also tabled some proposals .
Those Member States that blame financial reasons for not being particularly swift in perfecting the mechanism need to be told that prevention works out cheaper than a cure .
It is also crucial that an international agreement to fight climate change - an ambitious agreement - be reached at the Copenhagen conference and , Commissioner , we are still waiting for a directive on fires , similar to the one that has been produced on flooding .
( FR ) Madam President , this summer , Corsica also fell victim to some very serious fires , just like Sardinia , Catalonia , Greece , the Canaries and so many other regions of Europe .
Regarding the stricken populations , first of all , our group would ask that European solidarity be guaranteed through implementation of the Solidarity Fund .
What is the Commission going to do in this regard ?
That is the first question that I would like to put to the commissioner .
On 23 July , in Corsica , the heat was exceptional : 44 degrees , very dry air and a very strong sirocco wind .
In conditions such as that , which will become ever more frequent as a result of global warming , the local resources were stretched to the limit , despite the fact that , in previous years , the weather was milder and Corsica had been spared .
For me , the lesson is simple : when weather conditions such as that occur , conditions that can be predicted , that can be forecast , we must be able to rely on the backup of a European civil protection force such as the one recommended by the Barnier report , and which will make it possible , in particular , to fight incipient fires before they get out of hand , because afterwards it is too late .
When fire enters a forest , it stops only when the entire forest has burned down .
Therefore , for us it is important to go much further than the pilot project that you mentioned , Commissioner .
What does the Commission plan to do to implement as quickly as possible this civil protection force that will actually rise to the major challenge facing all Europeans of protecting the environment and , in particular , of fighting fires in the Mediterranean region ?
Is it right that the 2010 budget provides nothing for this force ?
We have tabled an amendment along these lines .
Let us hope that the large groups , and Mr Barnier 's Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) in particular , will agree to help us secure the adoption of this amendment .
( EL ) Madam President , the fires are a deeply political problem which appears in a very acute form in countries such as Portugal , Spain , France , Italy and Greece , with painful consequences for both the people and the environment .
As far as our experience in Greece is concerned , the fires which raged across north-east Attica , Kithairona , Evia and other areas in Greece , causing incalculable damage , are the result of the arson policy of the EU and the alternating governments in our country , who desire the land , the forests and the mountain massifs as commodities of the capitalist economy .
This extremely dangerous policy puts weapons in the hands of the arsonists who , if the outbreaks and complaints by inhabitants of the areas affected by the fires are anything to go by , again acted in a concerted manner .
Let us be clear about one thing : unless the basic problem of the commercialisation and change in the use of land is addressed , no mechanism , however well equipped with the most up-to-date resources , will be able to stop this serious problem , which is destroying the environment and putting a price on the future of the planet in general .
The first tragic consequences of this policy were seen in Evia on 12 September 2009 - just a few days ago - with the catastrophic floods which swept through fire-ravaged Evia .
The inadequate anti-flooding works and the unsound soil as a result of the fires , in conjunction with the intensity of the rain , caused one death and massive damage to villages , roads , bridges and other infrastructure .
The sudden rainfall does not explain this level of destruction .
It is no accident that , every time there is a natural disaster , it is the workers who mourn lives and see their wretched lives and the environment destroyed .
There is an urgent need for financing for direct measures to record the damage and compensate the working-class families and arable and livestock farmers affected , without any change in land use , and for the burned areas to be reforested .
Ownership of large private estates in mountains and forests should also pass to the government and the forests and the forestry commissions should be restructured and improved ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the budget instrument with which the European Union has equipped itself to tackle such an important issue as this is useful - I am referring to the Solidarity Fund - but it is also true that we have been stressing the issue of flexibility ever since 2007 , when we felt it was right to criticise the approach used with this budget instrument .
It is important that the management of this instrument be as flexible as possible , so that it can address problems that change from one day to the next .
For instance , it is only right that the Member States be asked to provide documentation relating to the events within a short timescale - 10 weeks and no longer - but why , then , is the same timescale not stipulated for responding to them ?
At the same time , we realise that , although , in some ways , the extent of the damage is important , it must be considered in proportion to what each individual territory is having to cope with , so that we can understand and work out what the different populations need .
For precisely this reason , Parliament , together with the Committee on Budgets and other committees , has long been making comments which are , in fact , filed for the attention of the Council , but which the Council pretends not to see .
If the flexibility aspect can be reviewed , it means that the Solidarity Fund as an instrument can be improved and made even more effective , thus enabling it to resolve the huge problems that we will increasingly have to face .
The request , then , Commissioner , is for full account to be taken of paragraphs 3 and 11 of this resolution , so that the flexibility aspect is seen not as a request by the Member States to be able to do whatever they like to be more certain of receiving a response , but as a request that reads changes intelligently , thereby ensuring that this instrument really is totally effective .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , indeed there is no doubt that progress has been made in recent times , but despite all the progress that has been made , the southern part of the European Union is burning more and more .
Therefore , the resolution that Parliament has adopted cannot be one more resolution that serves to demonstrate our grave concern regarding disasters elsewhere .
Forest fires happen for a variety of reasons , but no one can deny that they are fuelled by climate change .
Irrespective of the responsibilities that may exist in some Member States or in some autonomous regions , it is certain that Parliament must clearly call on the Commission to act swiftly and make available all the resources at its disposal , which are not insignificant .
The victims , the damage suffered and the need for reforestation do not have any understanding of bureaucracy or of budget shortages .
We need to prioritise and we need to act which , in this case , means changing strategies , mobilising resources , increasing them and optimising the preventive policies .
We need to demand that Member States take responsibility if this is not the case , but assume that this is not the problem of a few Member States in southern Europe and that climate change does not only affect some Member States , it affects them all and it is a common cause .
Therefore , one of the main tasks that Parliament has is to ensure that the European Union achieves clear , firm commitments at the Copenhagen Summit to reducing greenhouse gas emissions as much as possible , because they are obviously behind the fires , behind their causes , and , in turn , behind the causes of further climate change .
Therefore , having adopted this resolution , this is undoubtedly the challenge for Parliament .
However , this challenge for the Commission needs to be met if the Commissioner truly wants to prevent the southern part of the Union , which does indeed exist , from continuing to burn .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , in this first plenary sitting of the legislature , we have to deal with this sad and now customary issue : natural disasters and , in particular , fires .
Once again we are lamenting the proliferation of fires during the summer of 2009 , which have caused human losses .
Twenty lives have been lost , all in my country .
Therefore , my first thought and my utmost sympathy is for the human suffering caused by these catastrophes .
I would like to stress the disastrous impact that this type of disaster has on the lives of the populations that are affected , on their economies , employment , natural and cultural heritage , the environment and tourism .
In my region , 22 000 hectares burned this summer , half of which were in areas that are protected due to their environmental importance .
We must respond to these problems without hesitation , the people are demanding it .
The European institutions cannot be incapable once more of finding an adequate solution for those who are affected .
We need to be able to help the victims and to pave the way for restoring the affected areas .
We need to continue to work hard on prevention and to proceed further with developing the European civil protection service .
I would like to make two calls : firstly , I would like to call on the European Commission to analyse the situation and adopt the appropriate measures to compensate for the social costs inherent in the loss of jobs and sources of income for the inhabitants of the affected regions .
Secondly , I would like to call on the Spanish Government , which will hold the Presidency of the Council from January 2010 . The Spanish Government must be capable of passing on its feeling and concern to its counterparts .
I consider it essential that it makes it a priority in its programme to unblock the reform of the European Solidarity Fund .
The Spanish Presidency must also make a clear commitment to developing a common European strategy .
It must also review prevention measures and the forestry management models that encourage large fires .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament who , even in the last few days , has watched with great sadness as one fire after another has devastated vast areas around the city of Genoa , in the Liguria region of Italy , I feel there is a truly urgent need for Europe to pay attention and to intervene in order to prevent these sadly recurring disasters .
There should be no recurring disasters .
We should work every day to ensure that there are no more cyclical disasters .
This is why I believe that Europe alone can and must intervene effectively with binding acts to preserve these precious areas which , each year , are in danger of going up in smoke and which really are the heritage of us all , because it is true that fires are breaking out more and more frequently in southern Europe , and even when it is only a tiny part of this southern Europe that is burning , in reality , it is the whole of Europe that is going up in flames .
We need to intervene with prevention policies and with suitable forestry policies - and by prevention I also mean intervening by means of a precise , thorough and targeted campaign against all forms of speculation directly or indirectly linked to these disasters - but I think that we also need to ensure broader , easier and quicker access to essential resources in order , at least , to mitigate the devastating effects of these disasters .
I am referring first and foremost to the Solidarity Fund , an instrument that should undoubtedly be employed more quickly for the areas affected .
( FR ) Madam President , it was in 2001 that we called for a European civil protection mechanism , in the wake of the 11 September disaster .
Subsequently , we set up a fund .
Then there was the Barnier report , which stressed the need to show solidarity .
Today , this solidarity works , but it has to be more effective and we have to be able to move up a gear .
Two points must be developed .
Firstly , responsiveness .
All those people who have unfortunately been affected by these fires deplore the fact that the procedures are often too lengthy and that implementing them takes far too long even though , in reality , when we are confronted with fires , we have to move very fast .
We certainly need to be more flexible , to have more flexibility to implement these procedures , because time is precious in this case .
And then , there is prevention .
We do not talk enough about prevention , because it involves the principle of subsidiarity .
We are told that it is the Member States that must decide .
Yet , when these fires harm biodiversity and the environment , when they affect the things most precious to humans , that is , their property , their possessions and their homes , and when they sadly cause the loss of human lives , we have no right not to make provision for such prevention .
That is a criminal act .
This must stop , and to stop it we also need financial resources .
It is absolutely imperative , then , to provide ourselves with the best possible budgets , so that we are far more effective within the context of this European civil protection mechanism .
Let us therefore ensure that the budget - our budget - genuinely takes account of this problem .
All of this also demands that we take a specific approach to our agricultural and forestry policies , and this is something we do not talk about enough .
Prevention , responsiveness and resources : in short , everything needs to be done to ensure that southern Europe will no longer inevitably be like a cat on hot bricks .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , yet again this year , southern Europe was impossibly hard hit by destructive fires , and fires of similar proportions also broke out in the USA and in other countries in the developed and developing world .
There can be no doubt that climate change is threatening the forests of the Mediterranean and other key areas of the planet .
However , the destruction of forests in the Mediterranean is destroying the ability of natural ecosystems to act as natural carbon dioxide sinks .
European polices to prevent and deal with forest fires are needed , as is financial support from the European Union for the countries , such as Greece , that face the worst repercussions this year .
There can be no doubt that , in certain countries , there were massive shortcomings in coordination between the forest protection and civil protection mechanisms , and in taking preventive measures , and this must never be repeated .
It would also appear that forests within three hours of large towns or tourist areas are often threatened by fire .
A lot of people feel that they can derive personal gain from destroying forests .
They can ' plant ' houses and other buildings more quickly than Member States and natural ecosystems can plant trees on burned land .
There are often national laws which cultivate such attitudes and send out the wrong messages .
A European policy on the protection of forests , on the restoration of burned land , on the forestation of areas , within the framework of European assistance in combating climate change , is absolutely necessary , as is coordinated European action to prevent and fight fires , restore forests and establish new forest areas .
We need to set this in motion immediately , especially in the run-up to the negotiations at the Copenhagen conference , which will be decisive for the future of our planet .
We shall be asking developing countries to protect the rainforests ; we shall address the key issue of how the destruction of forests accounts for 20 % of emissions of greenhouse gases .
We must therefore be the ones who set an example , by ensuring there is absolute protection for forests under threat , for our forests under threat in Europe , which are the Mediterranean forests .
( DE ) Madam President , the scale of the forest fires actually exceeds the capabilities of the smaller Member States , especially in those regions particularly affected by drought .
That , of course , is why Parliament supports the European Solidarity Fund .
We call on the Council to finally release these funds without obstacles .
The regions need the money urgently for reconstruction and for prevention .
The Solidarity Fund , in conjunction with existing environmental and agricultural programmes , could help on a truly lasting basis .
Apart from that , however , fire fighting is primarily a national competence .
Harsher punishments for those who start fires , development freezes that last for something like 30 years where arson is proven , training of fire brigades - more can and simply must be done in this regard .
Europe , too , must do more , however , above all , in terms of better coordination .
The know-how of European fire brigades must be transferred to regions with high levels of susceptibility to disasters , and we need better rules for the running of cross-border operations .
We await proposals from the Commission in this regard , but these should not interfere with the competences of the Member States . That point - not interfering in the competences of the Member States - is something that I believe is extraordinarily important .
It is definitely possible to think of European fire brigades and European aircraft , but only once all national capabilities have been optimised and financial assistance for the affected regions has finally been effectively achieved .
I think it is too early to be discussing disaster prevention as a European competence .
Let us take the first step before the second .
Let us do the most important things first , and that means measures ranging from European help to self-help , including by means of the Solidarity Fund , with training and improved European coordination .
( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would also like to express our sympathy and care for the victims and their families , because it is true that every summer we have to lament this situation .
This is why it is increasingly important that Europe finally equips itself with an efficient instrument .
We think , perhaps because I belong to the transport sector and I am an expert in road safety , that perhaps , Commissioner , we should consider something similar to the Action Plan on Road Safety .
A European action plan with objectives , with strategies , in which the improvement of fast intervention within the necessary time window , as is done in road safety , could perhaps help us and also improve working conditions and training for professionals .
I also think raising awareness and fostering a culture of prevention are fundamental .
We are gradually achieving this in road safety .
Why can we not do so in relation to offering protection against fires ?
We do , of course , welcome the fact that coordination has improved along with solidarity .
I think that by sending the necessary planes , the Spanish Government has been part of the process of raising awareness among the countries of the south , but this should also be the case between the north and the south .
We also welcome the fact that the pilot project of tactically reserving fire-fighting planes could , in future , really become an intervention body , which I do think is important .
However , we still have legislation blocked in the Council , such as the legislation on the Solidarity Fund , and also the legislation on land protection , which we think would be extremely useful .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this summer , once again , the Mediterranean forest was engulfed in flames : in Marseille and in southern Corsica , but also in Italy , in Spain and , on a larger scale , in Greece .
More than 400 000 hectares of forest and field went up in smoke , causing considerable material damage , irreparable damage to biodiversity , and the tragic loss of human lives .
Dismayed as I am by this assessment made repeatedly , year after year , and mindful as I am of the multiplier effect of global warming on fires , I call for European awareness of the need for more coordinated efforts and for the pooling of fire-fighting resources .
I should like to see a huge Euro-Mediterranean cooperation project to combat forest fires take shape under the Union for the Mediterranean .
I welcome the existing initiatives and , in particular , the European Forest Fire Information System - the pilot project .
Nevertheless , I call for a reform of the European Union Solidarity Fund so that it will become an effective tool for responding to crises .
I also call for the strengthening of the European protection force and of the ' EuropeAid ' facility devised by Mr Barnier in 2006 for intervention on the territory of the 27 Member States , as well as abroad .
I believe that one of the keys to the problem of forest fires has to do with information sharing and best practice as regards prevention , and I should like to point out the pioneering role played by the forest fire fighters in my own department .
I can , of course , provide Europe with this example , which may be of use .
( FI ) Mr President , the past year has been one of the most tragic for forest fires .
We have lost hundreds and thousands of hectares of forest , especially in the Mediterranean region .
Conjecture as to the causes of forest fires leads to heated rows as , unfortunately , everyone is aware of their consequences .
It has been proposed that climate change is responsible for the increase in the number of forest fires and that in Europe , too , we should prepare for longer forest fire seasons than just June to September , which has been the norm until now .
Summers are beginning earlier and they are warmer and drier , especially in the south , and the risk of fires is therefore growing .
It is true that , exceptionally , this year there were severe forest fires in northwest Span and in Portugal as early as March , and that conditions for forest fires are therefore favourable , but the problem itself lies not in any progressive change to natural conditions , but elsewhere .
Environmental researchers have discovered that forest fires in the EU , Australia and California are mainly explained by socio-economic factors .
They can find no direct link to climate change as yet .
The key factors in the start of forest fires are construction and the pressures associated with the need for more housing , farming , certain species of plants and trees that have been grown , a lack of knowledge and foresight , and negligence on the part of the authorities .
For example , insufficient numbers of fire-fighting teams and the inability to solve and prevent crimes that might result in fires are behind the tragedies this summer .
With climate change , natural conditions will change ; that is a fact .
It does not , however , explain environmental disasters , especially if the same phenomena recur every few years , and that is why we might need to be better prepared .
It is time the Member States of the Union took a look in the mirror , because in the future , whether or not forest fires occur will depend on us .
It is one thing to adapt to the changing environment ; it is quite another to accept rigid bad practices and be unprepared .
( Applause )
( FI ) Mr President , I agree with those here who have said that it is always cheaper to prevent damage than deal with its consequences .
Most of this financing should go to the prevention of fires and floods in southern Europe .
In addition to satellite monitoring , we need the same kind of forest fire alarm and prevention system which has worked successfully for many years now in Finland , for example .
Furthermore , at national level , we need to ensure that the equipment that fire brigades use is up to standard , so that fires can be brought under control as early on as possible .
The increase in flooding is largely due to climate change , and the best way to prevent it , therefore , is to establish a proper agreement at the Copenhagen conference .
It is also possible , however , to take action at national level to deal with the prevention of floods .
We need to practise the right sort of forest policy , forests in mountain ranges need to be protected , and forests with the right species of tree should be planted , so that their root systems can absorb water , ensuring that it does not drain away too quickly .
Embankments and reservoirs should also be built near water bodies and waterways should be dredged for more effective drainage in times of flooding .
We need to recognise that these matters are very much the responsibility of every Member State .
The EU cannot take responsibility for matters that are subject to national decisions or for any negligence that occurs .
The European Union Solidarity Fund is principally a source of emergency aid , and I hope that the various Member States will be prepared to invest in a long-term forest policy , fire prevention and protection from floods .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , a fire is always a tragedy , a tragedy for people , a tragedy for the environment , an economic and social tragedy .
I had the misfortune to live very close to this tragedy , to the fire that took place this summer on the island of La Palma in the Canaries .
I therefore welcome this resolution and I am convinced that we are going to be able to adopt it unanimously .
It is a complete resolution , which has received many contributions and which , above all , does something important .
First of all , it remembers the victims , all the victims , and pays tribute to all those who work voluntarily to put the fires out .
However , it also includes some significant reflections on the importance of drought and desertification in the spread of the fires , and the resulting disappearance of hundreds of thousands of hectares per year .
There are also important reflections on the causes that aggravate the fires , such as the gradual abandonment of the countryside , deficient maintenance of the forests and inadequate punishment for arsonists .
In this respect , we need to act and we need to act firmly .
The Commission needs to draw up a risk prevention strategy and an effective strategy for combating natural disasters , and a protocol for uniform action .
However , aid is also important , for restoration , for re-establishing production potential and for compensating for the social costs and job losses .
As the Commissioner said , coordination is vital .
However , there needs to be coordination between the different Community instruments : the Structural Funds , the Solidarity Fund - which clearly needs to be reformed - and their flexibility , and also instruments such as Aid Plus and , of course , the rapid response mechanism that we have already discussed .
We need to go further in solving these problems , and I sincerely believe that this resolution is the right way to do so .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a time for us to show solidarity , but it is also an opportunity - I would even say an obligation - for us to work on improvements , changes and also adjustments .
The adjustments needed straight away concern the European Union 's Solidarity Fund , so that it can be used - and used promptly - to address these disasters , while the improvements and changes concern forestry policy .
We need a European policy on forests that seeks both to raise their profile and to prevent fires .
In many Member States , as is the case of mine , Portugal , there is not yet even a register of all the land , and so we do not know who the landowners are .
That causes problems in land development , reforestation and fire prevention policy .
With regard to this prevention policy , I have here a question that is also a suggestion : why not include forest fire prevention measures in the EU 's economic recovery plan , the plan to revive the European economy ?
If we promoted measures to clean up our forests - and , for instance , the product of such measures could be used to produce energy through biomass power plants duly designed for the purpose - if we acted in that way , we would certainly be helping the environment by protecting it and , at the same time , we would be creating jobs which , at the current moment , is another of Europe 's aims .
( NL ) Mr President , it is good that on this , the first day of Parliament 's session , we are discussing the disasters in southern Europe , and I also thank those fellow Members who have worked on these texts in particular .
We have here a good resolution .
First of all , of course , this is a matter of interpersonal involvement , or proximity to the people - as we have always said in the context of our elections - and of solidarity .
This time it is fires in southern Europe but , who knows , this winter it may be flooding in other parts of Europe entirely .
We in the Committee on Regional Development have discussed improvements in the Solidarity Fund several times .
It is absolutely not our intention to ask for new instruments , but rather to improve the ones we already have , making them more efficient .
Now , Commissioner Dimas , what is rather strange in all this ?
We have laid this down with overwhelming support here in Parliament and have spelt out where improvements could be made , but it has been blocked by the Council .
The Council has now failed to do anything about this for two years .
My question to you is whether there is still any chance of movement on this .
You rightly report progress in connection with the pilot project and the aircraft that have been deployed , but about the underlying dossier Parliament has requested so emphatically we hear nothing at all .
Is that still on the agenda ?
What is actually happening ?
With regard to the civil protection force , I would say that , in itself , it is great that Europe is deploying its own instruments , but that the broad foundations lie in the Member States themselves .
The exchange of expertise , deployment particularly in the wider region itself , should constitute these foundations .
Finally , the rehabilitation : damage repair , replanting and everything related to this .
This is not a matter for centralised control , but must be decentralised to Member States .
However , we also have these funds - the Structural Funds , the agricultural funds - so why do we not make a start ?
It can be an economic plan , as we have just heard , but equally a rehabilitation plan that is tackled in a comprehensive way and in which the decentralised instruments play a particularly prominent role .
That is what this resolution requests , and that is why we shall be supporting it wholeheartedly tomorrow .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as accurate as the resolution entitled ' Natural disasters ' , tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , is , I would nonetheless like to draw attention to some points that have been addressed this evening but which are not addressed in the resolution , and which are the subject of my proposed amendments .
Last summer , as well as the fires , there were other disasters , the most recent of which occurred only last weekend in the south of Italy .
I myself come from a region of Italy , Veneto , which was hit in June and July by landslides and whirlwinds , and I would mention , by way of example , Vallà di Riese and Borca di Cadore .
In the resolution , we should mention the other natural disasters , too , not just the fires , because summer floods unfortunately are not a new phenomenon ; this is one of the scenarios that we will have to face in future , as a consequence , sadly , of climate change due to global warming .
We must therefore try to insist on prevention measures and on the construction of infrastructure that can prevent these events or at least contain the damage , or worse , when this infrastructure exacerbates them : I am thinking of reservoirs in mountain regions , green belt areas , rural and forest areas , and along watercourses .
Secondly , since , in the majority of cases , natural disasters are also caused by human acts , it is important to ascertain who is responsible for them , to pursue the culprits and to increase the penalties .
Lastly , I would like to say that it is a good idea to set up this independent intervention force and the associated Solidarity Fund .
It is important , however , to try to extend the intervention to other disasters also , to increase the allocation for these disasters by pooling various funds , to simplify the procedures and to ensure greater coordination and flexibility , as Mr Mauro mentioned .
Mr President , I was listening to this debate in my office .
Obviously and thankfully , in Ireland we do not experience the severity of the fires that our southern European colleagues do .
Two thoughts struck me .
One is that in this House , we tend to speak only on those issues that directly affect our own countries and , given that we are having a debate in Ireland on the Lisbon Treaty - where we are talking about solidarity across the European Union - I think it is a habit we should break .
I think more of us should speak about issues of concern in other Member States that we know of , so that there is a sense in which there is greater solidarity among Members of this House regarding the concerns of their citizens .
I would , for example , like other people to take up concerns that might arise in Ireland for my citizens .
I think it would help us to promote the idea that Europe works for all and that we are not just looking after our own .
That has been one of the failures of the European Union , and it is something we are grappling with in the debate on the Lisbon Treaty .
Let me support what you are doing here and express my solidarity for the problems in southern Europe .
Deal with those who deliberately destroy .
Look at prevention .
Much more must be done by management and , lastly , the Solidarity Funds should be released to those who need them .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Dimas , this is the first time I have been an MEP - I was elected on 7 June - but from the debate , it is clear that this matter comes back every September after the wave of devastating fires that particularly affect southern Europe : Italy , France , Greece and Spain .
Mention has already been made of the devastating fire on the island of La Palma , in the outermost region of the Canaries , a Spanish autonomous community where I was born and where I live .
What is important however , is that we are aware that , although it is particularly intense on the southern borders of Europe , here we have an opportunity to increase the affection and connection that citizens have with what Europe means : added value in terms of the response .
This means European added value in prevention and European added value in the coordination of the institutions : the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament with the resolution , in cooperation with the Member States .
However , there also needs to be European added value in the response .
This is why it is important that we move from debate to action , by making the Solidarity Fund more flexible in response to emergencies , and that we start up this European civil protection force , which is still pending , and which is what could really make a difference in the future when we are faced with these emergencies , which recur every summer as a result of climate change and global warming .

( PT ) Mr President , more than all the demonstrations of solidarity in the face of this scourge of forest fires which ravage our southern countries , including Greece , Italy , Spain and Portugal , every year , we urgently need to adopt the necessary measures to reverse this situation , since it is destroying our remaining forests , properties , livestock , biodiversity and , worse still , a number of human lives .
It is therefore time to tackle the causes of this scourge head on , and to take account of the serious , growing abandonment of rural areas .
It is time to change the common agricultural policy so as to invest in prevention , which also means investing in multifunctional agriculture , including Mediterranean forestry , by supporting family farming and by providing the conditions for small and medium-sized farmers and young people to remain in rural areas and , in that way , contribute to the measures to prevent this yearly scourge .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am satisfied by the response that Commissioner Dimas was able to give on this issue and , in particular , by his speaking of the importance of aid beyond the borders of our continent .
In addition to environmental protection of the Mediterranean Sea , might one formally propose , as part of the Union for the Mediterranean project , this emergency aid in the event of fire and the development of forestry expertise on this subject , to be shared and developed with the non-European countries of the Union for the Mediterranean ?
( RO ) This summer , Portugal , Spain , France , Italy and Greece were faced with major forest fires .
In Greece , the fires devastated an area of approximately 21 200 hectares , destroying around 2 million trees and at least 150 houses .
In a coordinated effort at European level , France , Spain and Cyprus sent Canadair planes to the Athens region to put out the fires .
The EU 's strategic backup for combating the forest fires proved , therefore , to be useful once again .
The EU Solidarity Fund can also provide assistance in this kind of situation , bearing some of the costs of the emergency measures implemented in order to restore the infrastructure , provide temporary shelter and protect the natural heritage .
I want to draw attention to the fact that we need to reduce the bureaucracy involved with accessing this fund .
Let me give you a specific example from my own country .
Romania was hit by natural disasters in June of last year .
Currently , in September 2009 , the funds have still not been distributed to the Romanian Government .
I also believe that we need in the future a sustainable forestry policy , as well as a strategy for preventing disasters of this kind .
Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable members of Parliament for their extremely constructive contributions to this evening 's debate and for the excellent ideas they have proposed .
Emergencies often involve a high human , financial and environmental cost .
In future , due to climate change , as many members emphasised , we shall probably have to deal with more and bigger disasters - not only forest fires , which will not be confined to southern Europe and will start to appear in central and even in northern Europe - and a different type of disaster , such as floods .
We therefore need to constantly strengthen and improve European disaster management resources , which have now clearly proven their added value .
This has also been confirmed by the fires this summer , which reminded us that the Community needs to improve not only its capacity to respond to natural disasters , but also its ability to prevent them , as numerous speakers emphasised this evening .
I should remind the House here that in February , the Commission presented a communication on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters in which it formulated certain proposals .
We are awaiting the European Parliament 's and the Council 's comments on this communication .
I believe that the new Parliament will not delay its response , which we expect to receive in February .
We believe that they will give us the political incentive , as will a resolution on this from the forthcoming conference , to proceed with the necessary work in this direction .
As numerous speakers , starting with Mrs Podimata , raised the issue , I should also highlight the issue of climate change and the need for adaptation and the proposed review of the Community strategy on forests , the aim of which is to address climate-related aspects .
This , too , will provide an opportunity to examine issues relating to forest fires .
I should add here that this Commission communication is very important , as is the communication we issued last week on financing for the agreement on climate change which we expect to emerge from Copenhagen , with a large sum being made available for financing adaptation to climate change in developing countries .
Funds will be directed to the works needed so that the countries which suffer the repercussions of climate change without having contributed to the greenhouse effect will be able to deal with those repercussions .
In fact , I have proposed that we should not simply wait for 2013 to start this action , but should start it at once , in 2010 .
I hope that the European Council will agree , either on 17 September or in October , that money should be provided to start works immediately , so that these countries can see that the European Union and the developed countries really mean what they propose and what they say .
A lot of other , very important points were made - and may I say that they were all right - about the role of Community financing .
The Community mechanism for rural development and the European Regional Development Fund offer the facility to support national prevention measures .
The Commission will use the facilities provided by the Community Solidarity Fund to support restoration efforts in the Member States .
Having heard that intervention by the Commission should be immediate , I should clarify the following here : there are two issues and it was not clear which of the two was being referred to .
One is mobilisation of the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection and the other is activation of the Solidarity Fund .
As far as mobilisation of the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection is concerned , I can tell you that mobilisation is immediate , in real time .
I would cite the recent example of the fires which broke out in Greece : within an hour of receiving an official request from the Greek Government , Italian aircraft had taken off in order to be on site ready for deployment the following day .
Mobilisation is therefore immediate .
As I said in my first speech , we were the first to send specialists to the scene of the disaster in the cases of the tsunami and hurricane Katrina .
We received a great deal of praise for the action taken through the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection and this confirms both the work achieved over recent years and the potential which it has , provided that it has the remit and the resources - especially the financial resources - to be able to extend its work for the benefit of the European Union , citizens , environmental protection and the property of European citizens .
As far as the Solidarity Fund is concerned , I have heard - and it is right - that it needs greater flexibility .
In fact , it needs to be able to react as quickly as possible , because the precise philosophy of the Solidarity Fund is to cover emergencies or part of the emergencies caused by disasters .
It is therefore logical that the Commission should act immediately and that the Member States , through either their central or regional administrations , should take immediate action so that monies are disbursed .
Moreover , there is also the clause in the European Solidarity Fund that works must be carried out within one year of disbursement .
This is logical , but needs greater flexibility .
To close - and I am sorry that I do not have more time to reply to the very specific issues raised - I should just like to say before I forget , because a number of speakers referred to the economic recovery programmes , that they are indeed a very good idea , because there are numerous benefits from including projects to prevent disasters which we can more or less expect to happen next year as well - as previously said , we discuss these matters every year - both because they will generate economic activity and create more jobs and because they will prevent damage costing millions of euros in restoration works .
They are therefore investments which will have a multiple return and will , of course , prevent the human cost of disasters .
Finally , I should like to point out that , while the risk of forest fires or other disasters , such as floods , earthquakes and even military intervention - because the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection has intervened for floods , earthquakes and forest fires and to move populations , such as after the conflict in Lebanon , and we have assisted here with great success - cannot be completely removed , it can nonetheless be reduced through our cooperation and a better collective response to such disasters .
The Commission undertakes to strengthen the Community contribution to prevention , readiness , response and restoration of disasters , in order to protect citizens and the environment .
May I thank Parliament once again for its active support for the need to improve disaster management for the benefit of all European citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 16 September .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am quite concerned by the magnitude assumed by these disasters in recent years , which not only have natural but human causes as well , with consequences for both the economic and social infrastructure .
Our response to this phenomenon through the European Union 's Solidarity Fund provides important support in the task of rebuilding the areas affected by disasters , along with reducing their potential cross-border effects .
However , I want to highlight the need to simplify and improve the transparency of the criteria for deploying this Fund so that the affected areas can benefit from Community support as quickly as possible .
We must also allow more regions to receive assistance by introducing a lower deployment ceiling .
Furthermore , I support the drawing up of a European strategy for combating natural disasters and for strengthening a joint European force ready to respond in the event of a disaster , in any corner of the EU .
This summer , again , there were devastating forest fires in some areas of Europe that not only caused considerable economic damage , but also claimed 11 lives .
Europe needs to show solidarity in the face of such natural disasters .
Pressing situations of this nature give the Community the opportunity to demonstrate its qualities and enable Europe 's population to experience direct added value on the part of the European Union .
In practical implementation , however , the rules of subsidiarity absolutely must be complied with .
It is the Member States who are responsible for precautionary preparations for disasters and for drawing up emergency management plans and the EU must not meddle in this important competence on the part of the individual Member States .
The Community 's Solidarity Fund is a sound and valuable financial management tool .
In the long term , the strategy to prevent fires of this nature in Europe must be improved and we must end the reliance on short-term crisis management .
In the face of the tragic fires that have once again devastated southern Europe , we must react in order to successfully put a stop to these intolerable events .
Firstly , by organising the means of intervention better : it is Mr Barnier 's idea to have a European civil protection force capable of intervening in support of the national forces .
In order to contain a fire , large-scale , fast intervention is required : European solidarity has to be more effective .
Prevention remains vitally important , however : forests must be maintained and cleared .
In the south of France , 75 % of the forest is privately owned .
It is therefore important to enlist the support of the owners and to encourage them to maintain their wooded areas .
In particular , this will mean regenerating the Mediterranean forest , the economic returns from which are too low : Structural Fund-supported initiatives must encourage the regular sampling of biomass and its use for energy purposes , and the development of sustainable forestry and responsible ecotourism .
I therefore call on the European Commission to recognise the characteristics of the Mediterranean forest and to propose an action plan designed to protect it and to make better use of its natural resources .
That is the very least that can be done to reduce the risks of fire in the long term , and to preserve and restore the fragile ecosystems of southern Europe .
Free trade agreement with South Korea : impact on European industry ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the free trade agreement with South Korea : impact on European industry .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , a large potential for new exporting opportunities lies in the Asian markets that have high growth rates but also , of course , high barriers to entry .
Apart from the multilateral talks , an important way to overcome these barriers is through the leverage available to us in free trade agreement negotiations .
That is why Member States have asked the Commission to launch a new generation of trade agreements with key Asian economies .
These free trade agreements should be ambitious in creating new exporting opportunities for many sectors .
With Korea , this is what we have achieved after two intensive years of negotiations .
This is the most ambitious free trade agreement ever negotiated by the European Union .
There is consensus in that in two of the three main sectors of our economy , the benefits from the free trade agreement are overwhelmingly in our favour : first of all , our competitive service providers will gain massively from the agreement .
For example , in areas such as telecoms , transport , construction and environmental services , doing business in Korea will be much easier in the future .
Secondly , for agricultural products , Korea will eliminate almost all of its particularly high tariffs - they average 35 % !
That will give a boost to farming exports of , amongst other things , pork , wine , whisky or dairy products .
We will also secure the protection of European geographical indications , such as Parma ham , Rioja or Tokay .
But the free trade agreement will also bring major benefits to European manufacturing exporters .
Overall , European manufacturing exporters will save some EUR 1.2 billion of tariffs annually , of which EUR 800 million are saved on day one .

For example , exporters of machineries would save EUR 450 million annually on annual duty payments while exporters of chemicals would save over EUR 150 million on duties .

Duty elimination will also allow our exporters to strengthen their foothold in the Korean market , and thus expand sales .
Korean customers buy some EUR 25 billion worth of EU goods every year .
This makes Korea one of our most important export markets in Asia .
In addition , there was a special focus on rules .
The agreement includes transparency on regulation , efficient enforcement of commitments , better protection of intellectual property rights and ' WTO-plus ' rules on subsidies which will all be to the benefit of all manufacturers selling in Korea .
Moreover , ambitious disciplines have been established on industrial technical barriers to trade , notably for cars , electronics and pharmaceuticals based on the regulatory model of Europe and they respond to longstanding demands by European business in these sectors .
Korea will need to changes its domestic regulations to comply with these commitments , whereas no such change would be needed in Europe .
Concerning the car industry specifically , I want to signal first of all that we also have an interest in enhancing market access for European cars in Korea .
Our car exporters are by far the strongest importers on the Korean market , with strong growth rates .
They can develop this further since they will benefit from the combination of elimination of tariffs - EUR 2 000 saved on a car worth EUR 25 000 - and the removal of technical obstacles .
The agreement negotiated includes the most ambitious disciplines for non-tariff barriers ever negotiated with a third country .
Korea will accept from day one that a car that conforms to international standards will be considered as complying with those Korean regulations that have been signalled by our industry as representing significant obstacles .
There are also provisions by which Korea accepts the equivalence between European and Korean environmental regulations .
Indeed , even before the agreement enters into force , Korea has agreed to apply certain transitional derogations from the Korean environmental standards important for our exporters and we are monitoring very closely discussions in Korea about new regulations to limit CO2 emissions in order to make them show that they are not an impediment to trade .
We are aware of the sensitivities of the car sector .
We defended long transition periods for the liberalisation of our most sensitive car segment , namely small cars .
Tariffs will only be eliminated in year five of the agreement , and that allows time for adjustment .
We should remember the significant Korean investment in the car sector in Europe .
Moderately , we have changed the rules of origin by increasing the permissible limit of foreign value in Korean cars from 40 % to 45 % , and we agreed a bilateral safeguard clause which lets us put up tariffs in case of a surge of imports and a threat of injury to our industries .
On duty drawback , my final point , this is nothing new .
Such policies are legitimate under the World Trade Organisation .
Duty drawback also does not create a significant competitive disadvantage for our car producers since our tariffs on car parts are generally very low and will be further reduced .
And we have negotiated a special clause that would enable us to limit duty drawback efficiently .
I underline the strength of support from European manufacturing sectors , as well as agriculture and service organisations , for this agreement .
This is important , and it is a clear signal of our determination to pursue market access interest in key emerging Asian economies .
Mr President , South Korea is the EU 's fourth largest external trading partner , with an export volume of around EUR 30 billion a year .

Concluding the free trade agreement is thus very much in the interests of European employers and European workers .
Furthermore , Commissioner , I have no intention of congratulating you today , as the agreement has not yet been signed , but if you really do manage , in these times of crisis - at a time when export rates around the world have fallen apart as never before in history - to wrap up the free trade agreement , that would be a tremendous achievement which , from the bottom of my heart , I hope you could achieve .
Trade agreements are often highly controversial , but personally I would say that South Korea is a very worthy exception .
I hear very positive feedback from nearly every area of European industry .
I am thinking of mechanical engineering , pharmaceuticals , electrical engineering , chemicals and numerous service industries .
I have never before come across an example where positive feedback about trade negotiations has been forthcoming from the agricultural sector .
That is certainly a novelty - something that I think virtually none of us have encountered before .
The results are clearly positive , even if many sectors would have liked more to have been achieved .
There is one exception , though , namely vehicle construction .
Even here , however , it is not the whole industry but just a few manufacturers who are critical of the agreement .
Other manufacturers , and many suppliers in particular , are very positively disposed towards the agreement in its current form .
I think it would be good if we were to seize the opportunity to tackle some of the points of criticism in this industry and perhaps still iron out some of the detrimental consequences of the free trade agreement through details here or there .
I am thinking , in this regard , of key areas such as the Capital Region Act Seoul , of standards for on-board diagnostics , of environmental standards , the duty drawback protection clause , etc .
We should avoid misunderstandings here or , better still , clear them up completely and , above all , press the South Koreans so that the undertakings that they have given us really are realised .
Clear monitoring of potential new non-tariff barriers to trade would certainly make sense .
I hope that the agreement enters into force very soon and that the consumers and workers of the European Union are able to benefit from it very quickly .
Thank you very much , and I wish you much continued success in the home straight .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to hear a conservative and a liberal fellow Member agree with the Commission ; it makes my job as a socialist easier .

I hope , in any case , that this evening 's debate will make it possible at last to address the many concerns regarding the impact of this free trade agreement between the European Union and Korea and , in particular , on European industry .
You spoke of a consensus but , Commissioner , I would remind you that , for some months now , certain industrial sectors - including car manufacturers and workers ' unions , which support them - have been warning you of the possible tragic consequences of this agreement .
Today , the bulk of these issues have still not been addressed .
It may be the case , however , that you have chosen to sacrifice the European car industry for the benefit of services .
Indeed , why allow Korea to have duty drawback , which is a benefit that has never been granted before , not even to developing countries such as the countries of the Mediterranean ?
What is the logic behind flexible rules of origin , the impact of which is to be feared , not only for the car industry , but also for the European textile industry ?
Why allow such distortions of competition and , above all , why set this precedent ?
In the face of these risks , and , unfortunately , of others , which I cannot expand on here but the details of which you know - you have just mentioned them - the Commission has proposed a last resort , the inclusion of a safeguard clause .
However , you know , Commissioner , that the safeguard clause is not automatic and that it will be very difficult to implement and impossible to activate for five years .
I will cite just one example to illustrate our fears .
If the free trade agreement allows Korea to export 100 000 additional vehicles to Europe - it already exports 600 000 of them annually - 6 000 jobs will be lost .
Conversely , Europe is terribly restricted , with each manufacturer being able to export just 1 000 vehicles to Korea , as part of a total European quota of 6 000 vehicles .
At this time of crisis , which is having a particular effect on car workers , how do you explain Europe 's committing itself to such an agreement ?
Do you envisage a renegotiation of the controversial points that I have just mentioned ?
This is what a number of Member States and industrial sectors that I have just mentioned are calling for , anyway .
Will you commit yourself at last , Commissioner , to ensuring greater transparency and to involving us MEPs to a greater extent ?
We , and the Commission , created the conditions for a negative image of the Polish plumber ; let us not create a negative image of the Korean coach builder .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank you , Commissioner Ashton , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , for the information that you have given us this evening in the extraordinary committee meeting and here in plenary .
Clearly , the free trade agreement with South Korea is close to being concluded .
From a Liberal viewpoint , and particularly from the point of view of my own German Free Democratic Party , the objective of free and fair world trade is of great importance , particularly right now , as , in the course of the economic and financial crisis , we see tendencies towards protectionism , tendencies which must be resolutely countered in the interests of prosperity and jobs in the European Union .
In this context , the question arises of what significance the Commission attaches to the free trade agreement with South Korea , as there has , for a long time , been a focus on progress in the Doha development round , without any agreement being reached so far .
That is the reason behind my question , Commissioner Ashton : do you see concluding the free trade agreement with South Korea as a first step towards further bilateral free trade agreements , and does that , in your view , mean a move away from Doha ?
Or are such bilateral agreements merely a supplement to or expansion of the European Union 's free trade policy ?
As you know , furthermore , the clause on the refunding of duties is a cause of concern in a number of Member States and sectors of industry - in particular , in the car industry .
This clause could lead to supporting business in low-cost countries such as India and China , thereby threatening European manufacturing .
Can you see a way that these concerns on the part of a number of Member States in respect of such refunding of duties can still be addressed ?
The Commissioner 's statement makes it clear that there are economic and financial groups and sectors in the European Union that are going to gain from this agreement with South Korea .
There is also the other side of the coin , however , which you have not considered here , Commissioner .
I refer specifically to certain more sensitive sectors , such as textiles and clothing , and worker 's jobs .
Therefore , as they concern industries and workers ' organisations in our countries , it is worrying that the European Commission continues to ignore the serious difficulties facing the textile and clothing industries .
I must highlight the situation in my country , Portugal , where unemployment has reached alarming levels , precisely in the regions where these industries predominate : in the north and certain parts of central Portugal .
That is why we stress the need for a consistent , concerted strategy to support industry in the European Union , particularly those sectors that depend on intensive labour , whether through urgent regulation of world markets or by means of public policies that support investment , innovation , differentiation , vocational training and the creation of jobs with rights .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this is my first , or maiden , speech in this Parliament .
As a UKIP MEP for the East of England , you will expect me to be a rebel and I will try not to disappoint you or my voters .
We are discussing today EU trade agreements and , in particular , that with South Korea , due to be signed this year .
As we do not have much of the detail on this particular agreement , other than the fact , I believe , that two thirds of the benefits will accrue to South Korea and one third to the EU , I would like to make some more general points .
Many people are not aware that there are over a hundred separate bilateral EU trade agreements like this one ; 116 is one estimate .
There are trade agreements with countries such as the USA , Canada , Mexico , Brazil , India , China , Japan and South Africa .
In Europe , there are trade agreements with Russia , Ukraine , Turkey and Liechtenstein .
There are also trade agreements with non-EU EEA and EFTA countries such as Switzerland and Norway .
Norway 's trade agreement religiously protects both its fishing and farming , and Norway is not a minnow .
It is the EU 's fourth largest import partner and sixth largest export market .
What should a trade agreement like South Korea 's really contain , then ?
Switzerland , I believe , is a strong example .
There are provisions abolishing customs duties and trade quotas on industrial and agricultural products .
There are provisions to allow Swiss citizens the right to live and work in EU countries and for EU citizens to live and work in Switzerland .
There are provisions for Switzerland to be part of the Schengen passport-free area .
The Swiss can be in the European Environment Agency , if they wish , in the EU 's film and education programmes , and they can apply for EU research grants .
There is cooperation on airlines , asylum and judicial matters .
In short , they have all the claimed benefits of EU membership , but without the cost .

It is true that Switzerland must pay CHF 600 million per year for access , but the Swiss Government reports savings for not being a member of the EU amounting to CHF 3.4 billion , a net saving of CHF 2.8 billion a year .

Nor is Switzerland an insignificant trading partner either : 80 % of Swiss exports go to the EU , and it is the EU 's fourth largest trading partner .
My point is that trade agreements can achieve the benefits of EU trade without the burden of high regulatory costs , loss of sovereignty and of resources .
Even the Commission website admits ' Switzerland can develop and retain its own regulations in other areas which deviate from EU rulings .
It is in its own interests , such as in financial and in labour markets . '
How Britain would love to deviate in a similar way over the Working Time Directive , Temporary Workers ' Directive or the new Fund Managers ' Directive !
So I conclude in asking , why not Britain ?
Why cannot Britain have a similar , friendly trade agreement with the EU like South Korea instead of full EU membership ?
Britain on its own is the largest single trading partner with the EU with a GBP 40 billion deficit a year .
We , too , can have the kind of assurances the Swiss enjoy .
We could , and I believe we should , be an independent free trading nation once again such as Norway , Switzerland and even South Korea .
Mr President , as one of the rapporteurs on the FTA with South Korea and a strong FTA protagonist , I am hoping for a balanced and level-playing-field agreement that benefits both sides - a true win-win situation .
One of our core industries is not really happy with the current status of negotiations , and they have many friends in their camp , including some Member States , industries and MEPs .
They all see the playing field unfairly tilted to benefit South Korea in this agreement .
The European Commission and the European Council should look hard into areas of friction , namely the DDB safeguard clause , non-tariff barriers and rules of origin .
If some progress could be achieved to bring more satisfaction to the EU car industry , then employment levels , strong GDP and expected standards of living would really benefit and be preserved .
However , a level playing field will not be a disadvantage .
A strong precedent may be established for other FTAs waiting in line and coming up soon in the near future .
It is clear to me that this agreement overall brings other benefits to the EU and to some of the EU 's different industries .
In the small picture , there will always be some winners and losers : it is the nature of any bilateral agreement .
In the big picture , we could be close to real balance .
However , with such a crucial industry as the automobile industry in a fairly unhappy mode , there is a need to try for more .
Only when achieving some additional progress can we speak of a truly balanced FTA that is acceptable and has a real and positive impact as a precedent for future FTAs .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have welcomed the work done during this period in which Mrs Ashton has been carrying out her role as Commissioner .
I must say that we have had a better relationship with her than we had with her predecessor , despite their common political affiliation , which we too share , and their common nationality .
However , this time I do not share the Commissioner 's enthusiasm on this issue , because too often in recent years , the Commission has taken the floor here and talked up certain initiatives , only to then pursue a different path .
We are going through a particular moment in time , a major economic and financial crisis , which is also the result of a lack of reciprocity in the world , not only with developing countries - which has its own logic , its own explanation - but with the new global players and the traditional global players .
Too often I seem to sense a lack of awareness within the Commission , by its President and its Commissioners , of which initiatives should be implemented to aid the recovery of European industry , the recovery of the European manufacturing industry .
It seems to me that this agreement - which , admittedly , is a positive agreement and has extremely positive content - has more of an academic value ; it is almost a textbook treaty , but one that is not in touch with reality .


We export USD 30 billion to Korea , only USD 20 billion come back in the form of cars exported from Korea to Europe , and USD 1.5 billion will be the indirect aid that accrues to Korean cars in Europe , without mentioning the textile and other sectors .
That is a definite imbalance , which I believe must be highlighted and must be corrected , before the green light is given to a free trade agreement that penalises European industry .
Ours is a quality industry that has committed itself to the new requirements that innovation calls for , certainly not a bankrupt industry that cannot get to grips with the need for innovation that exists within the economy .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , I too am not happy about the curious changes to the agreement , such as refunds of customs charges on imported components in the case of products for export to the Union and a reduction in the 60 % threshold for determining the country of origin .
This amounts to favouring Korean imports at the expense of the competitiveness of European industry and at the expense of unemployment .
The lion 's share in this respect already goes to imported goods from Asia , where labour costs are uncompetitively low , due to poor or non-existent social and environmental standards .
The trade talks should therefore have focused on raising these standards , rather than on the prosperity of Asian industry at the expense of Europe .
The Commission has long owed this to the citizens of Europe .
Does the Commission have any awareness of the negative impact of the agreement on European competitiveness and on employment in the automobile and textile industries ?
Secondly , is it aware that the agreement sets an unfortunate precedent for future trade agreements ?
Thirdly , does the Commission intend to ignore the fundamental objections raised by European engineering unions ?
Fourthly , how is it that the Korean media are already celebrating a victory for their automobile industry when the agreement has not even been discussed by the College of the Commission ?
Or is the Commission prepared to revise the draft and to negotiate a balanced agreement ?
Does the Commission have the will to put pressure on Korea to adopt international obligations in respect of social and environmental standards and will it do so before Korea gains all of the benefits of free trade with the European Union ?
Thank you for your answer .
I trust that common sense will prevail .
Mr President , I must say I am rather concerned about the tone of this debate .
With the exception , perhaps , of Daniel Caspary 's contribution , it has been rather negative .
I was Parliament 's rapporteur on the Korean Free Trade Agreement .
In advance of this debate , I looked back on what we had decided to ask for - what we asked the Commission to go into in these negotiations and achieve on our behalf - and I actually think the Commission has achieved what we asked them to achieve .
I would like to pay tribute to the chief negotiator , who I see sitting next to Baroness Ashton , and to Baroness Ashton herself , for the way they have delivered this agreement .
Clearly , in any free trade agreement - by definition - and in any negotiation , there are winners and losers , but if you look at the global impact of this agreement , there are big winners in Europe and there are big winners in Korea .
Therefore , there are big winners in keeping world trade moving .
At this current time , in this present crisis , anything that sends a positive signal about two units as big as Korea and as big as the European Union that we want to keep trade moving and we want to keep trade open has to be a good thing .
I have to say that , if the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers cannot move this agreement to a final signed agreement between Korea and the EU , we might as well send a note to DG Trade to stop negotiating all other free trade agreements because , if we do not deliver on Korea , forget ASEAN , forget the Gulf States , forget the whole other raft of FTAs we are trying to negotiate , and , frankly , forget Doha .
This is an important agreement , where Europe has achieved its strategic objectives .
Let us send a positive signal to the rest of the world that Europe is open for business and that , in the teeth of this recession , we are keen to keep our markets as open as possible .

Mr President , just very briefly , this is all new to me and I found the discussion very stimulating and educational .
When Lady Ashton first spoke , I thought this was a fantastic deal for the European Union and I wondered if there were any benefits in it for Korea .

Then speaker after speaker gave the opposite view , so I hope that the questions put and the points made by Mr Arif , Mr Theurer , Mr Campbell Bannerman and other speakers could be answered specifically by Lady Ashton when she replies and also she might tell us if there are any other negotiations going on right now with specific Asian countries for bilateral agreements and also how far they have progressed .
Mr President , I would like to speak in support of the contention made by my colleague , Mr Campbell Bannerman .
In 2006 , the Swiss Federal Government commissioned a report on all aspects of existing and possible relationships with the European Union .
They concluded that full membership of the EU would cost them up to six times their current bilateral arrangements .
The Swiss being the Swiss decided that they were better off by not joining or achieving full EU membership .
If that is true for the Swiss , it is certainly true for the British , and , if only our Government had as sensible and pragmatic a view of Britain 's economy as the Swiss have of Switzerland 's , then we would leave , just as the Swiss would not join .
Mr President , you are a very tolerant chair , but it is very clear in our rules that interventions under the ' catch the eye ' procedure have to relate to the subject under discussion .
That was nothing to do with Korea , and it was nothing to do with free trade agreements .

( FI ) Mr President , in his speech just now , Mr Martin said that it is extremely important to conclude agreements that will speed up economic growth and employment and remove trade barriers generally , especially in this economic crisis .
We have to remember , however , that today we have also just had a very serious discussion about the crisis in Europe 's car industry , and this week we will also be dealing with problems in the textile industry and European Globalisation Adjustment Fund aid as compensation for the massive layoffs in that sector in Spain and Portugal .
So , ladies and gentlemen , we have to take seriously the concern of Europeans regarding how we respond to this loss of jobs in Europe and examine what the Commission 's cures actually are .
Although free trade must be good for employment and economic growth at a general level , how do we prevent the loss of jobs in these traditional European industries ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to say that the debate did not , in a sense , at all surprise me , because the concerns that colleagues have raised have indeed been raised over the months .
I want to pay tribute to David Martin , just to begin with , for the work that he has done in the committee .
It is very important that I recognise how much the Committee on International Trade has worked with me over the months that have proceeded it , and of course I am very well aware that colleagues have not had the benefit of seeing the detail of the agreement so far .
So I will try and address the concerns .
But , more importantly , we will make sure that we give you more and more detail , because it is important that you look at the facts rather than the assertions that will have been made .
Let me just make some general points about the approach on this deal first .
This deal was put in play in order to achieve the best for European industry - including , I would say to colleagues from the UKIP , British industry .
It is absolutely in the interests of Europe , in my view , to move forward with this deal - otherwise I would not be standing here suggesting that we move forward in the way that I have .
Now , in doing so , there was a clear modus operandi , a clear approach that the Commission took which , as has been said , was supported by Parliament , by the Commission and by the Council , and that is indeed the way we have gone forward .
My colleague , Mr Arif , will not mind , I think , if I say that to suggest that I would sacrifice any industry , I find alarming or perhaps a little depressing , because that is certainly not the approach that I would take .
Do I think that if you want a serious trade deal you have to recognise that actually it is a deal where both sides benefit ?
Yes , I do .
If you want to have trade agreements , if we do believe - which I think we do - that trade is the engine that will take us out of recession , then it means you have serious , tough negotiations with industries and with countries that we care about having a deal with .
Otherwise , we can just do deals all day long with countries we do not much care about , and we can open markets because we are not really interested .
Korea is a serious market . It provides real opportunities for chemicals , pharmaceuticals , other industries .
We need to recognise the value and importance of doing this if we want serious trade agreements .
We are , in fact , an economic superpower .
I could not disagree more with my colleagues from the United Kingdom when they talk about Switzerland and try and equate that , somehow , with the relationship that we are trying to form in Europe with Korea - or maybe I just missed the point .
This is about serious negotiations to get a serious outcome and , as the details of this unfold , I hope that colleagues will look at it in the spirit that we have tried to set it up .
The car industry gave us at the beginning a list of things that they wished us to achieve .
They were genuinely very concerned to keep the market in Korea open , and we have achieved all that they asked at the beginning .
The textile industry : I am confident that there is little to worry about .
The textile industry safeguards that we have will indeed make sure that we retain European jobs .
I am not interested in closing down jobs or industries in Europe at all , and this deal does not do that .
And those of you who think that you have evidence to prove it , I ask you to supply it to me , because the rhetoric is one thing , the reality is a different thing , and we really have got to get beyond the rhetoric and into the reality of what this deal provides .
Indeed , I would argue that what we have got before us is very important for all the industrial sectors .
The question about duty drawback is , for me , a very simple one .
Duty drawback is designed so that our response to it will prevent a particular problem .
The question is , is it the only way of solving a problem ?
If there are other ways that equally solve the problem but , in fact , invite us to get a better trade agreement , then I will explore them .
But I still want to solve the same problem , and I believe the mechanisms we have in place in this agreement do precisely that .
It is not some thing that we hold up as being for ever enshrined as the only way of achieving what we want to achieve - to prevent , effectively , imports via the back door - and I believe we have resolved the problem in a different way .
So I am not going to make apologies - politically , economically or in any other way - to Parliament for having gone out and invested in negotiating this important trade deal .
I make no apology for that , and I make no apology for putting forward to this Parliament what I believe is a serious , 21st century free trade agreement of enormous benefit across the economy of the European Union .
I especially make no apology for doing it at a time of economic crisis because , if ever there was a time when my responsibility was to provide as much support for the businesses and the workers of Europe , I believe that time is now , and that is what this deal does .
I do urge colleagues , as I said earlier on , to look at the reality of the deal .
You will be lobbied - I have been lobbied - but actually , when you look at what we have achieved , I believe it is a very concrete result that will hugely benefit the economy of Europe .
That , in the end , is what we set out to do , and that , in the end , is what we have achieved .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The free trade agreement ( FTA ) between the European Union and South Korea , which should be concluded by mid-October , raises a number of concerns among European industries .
Regarded by the European Trade Commissioner as the most ambitious ever negotiated by the EU , this agreement seemed to car manufacturers , in particular , to be very unbalanced .
These manufacturers fear a massive influx of Korean vehicles on the European market as a consequence of the tariff preferences granted by the European Commission .
There is no doubt that maintaining certain customs clauses such as duty drawback would be unfair and would create a distortion of competition that would be very harmful to the European car industry .
This is all the more true given that the European Union 's generosity does not seem to have been paid back with a lowering of the non-tariff barriers put up by the Korean authorities ( import quotas on European petrol engine vehicles ) .
The Commission therefore has a duty , from today , to review the terms of this agreement so as to restore the conditions of fair and equitable competition and to ensure the long-term survival of our industry and our jobs in Europe .
The effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission - B7-0209 / 2009 ) by Eva Joly , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , while I have the pleasure of putting this oral question to you on behalf of the Committee on Development , sadly I do not have the pleasure of presenting you with the resolution on the same subject , adopted unanimously by this committee .
My colleagues from the Committee on Development and I worked tirelessly to ensure that the resolution was voted on and debated in plenary before the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh .
However , apart from my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , no other political group supported our request to put this resolution on the agenda , and yet it is vital if we want the European Parliament to play more of a part in defining the European Union 's external policy and to have real strength behind its proposals .
Ladies and gentlemen , of what benefit will it be to us to vote on this resolution , which was to put the European Parliament 's requests and proposals to the members of the G20 and , more specifically , to those of our Member States who sit on it , as well as to the European Commission , at the October plenary session , that is , after the Pittsburgh Summit ?
Besides the fact that this devalues the work accomplished , we cannot be content with this role of current affairs commentator either .
That is not our job .
Let us leave it to those whose job it is and who do it with professionalism : journalists .
Developing countries need us now more than ever .
While our fellow citizens have not been spared , the global economic and financial crisis has had a far more lasting effect on the populations of developing countries .
However , the financial institutions have not made these populations the main beneficiaries of the emergency loans , since very few of them satisfy the required conditions .
The countries of Africa have thus received only 1.6 % of the loans granted by the IMF since the last G20 meeting in London and the increase in the IMF 's resources .
The rest has gone to developed countries , European ones in particular .
Maintaining the European economic system was imperative of course , but this must not make us forget the extreme poverty that is raging at our borders ; extreme poverty made worse by a crisis for which we carry the burden of responsibility .
Public development aid must be increased as a matter of urgency .
Already , most of the Member States do not meet the conditions required by the OECD since 1970 , and we are facing new emergencies without having new funds .
We must therefore find new sources of funding , not least by reforming the current system .
The Committee on Development is asking you to take action to eradicate tax haven abuses , tax evasion and the illegal flows of capital from developing countries .
According to a Norwegian report published in June , the figures of which have been verified , the illegal flows leaving developing countries are ten times the amount of our development aid .
This shows just how much is at stake .
There is a need to implement a new binding financial agreement that will force transnational companies to declare the profits they make and the taxes they pay , on a country by country basis , in order to ensure transparency in respect of what they pay in each of the countries in which they operate .
Moreover , a radical reform of the system must take place involving , in particular , the introduction of new democratic and transparent regulations for trade and the international financial systems .
The responsibilities are huge , the challenges many , and the task arduous , but , now more than ever , the European Union must step up to the plate and lead these reforms .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission in its role as the EU 's representative in the G20 , together with the Presidency , strongly advocates increased support to low-income countries , particularly the poorest , as one of the critical priorities of the G20 commitments .
In this regard , it is important that low income countries receive appropriate funding to meet the needs emerging especially from the backlash of the financial crisis .
That is why we advocate the need to enhance access by poor and fragile countries , often without institutional administrative capacities , to the facilities and credits made available by the international financial institutions and other donors .
Personally , I will defend this approach at the November Development Affairs Council , and the global financial crisis will be at the centre of my political concerns during the weeks ahead .
I hope I can count on your support throughout .
In this context our ' Vulnerability FLEX ' instrument is of particular relevance .
The Commission has worked with the World Bank and the IMF to identify the most crisis-vulnerable countries and to complement the loan-based assistance provided by these two institutions with timely and targeted grant aid under the Vulnerability FLEX .
Between 2009 and 2010 , up to EUR 500 million will be spent on those ACP countries requesting assistance to ensure priority public spending , including in the social sectors .
Let me reassure you that the frontloading of budget support through the Vulnerability FLEX mechanism will not lead to a funding gap insofar as the Commission is using non-earmarked reserves .
Countries not eligible under the Vulnerability FLEX will also benefit from other measures proposed by the Commission in its April communication , for example , reallocations following ad hoc country reviews and the advanced mid-term review , support under the traditional FLEX , frontloading where feasible , etc .
Concerning the targeting of the budget support , I am convinced that the flexibility inherent in this instrument already allows recipient countries to use the funds in the manner which they judge will best help them respond to economic and social problems .
In addition , the advanced mid-term review of the 10th EDF will provide a good opportunity to identify new needs and assess whether these would be better addressed through general or sectoral budget support .
The advanced medium-term review will also provide an additional opportunity to look again at budget support profiles in each ACP country and consider amendments , reallocation or additional funds from the reserve .
Concerning the reform of the Bretton Woods institutions , our role in promoting their reform is , of course , limited .
The issue of voice and representation will be discussed at the IMF World Bank annual meetings in Istanbul , which Commissioner Almunia and I will attend this October .
In this respect , we welcome the addition of a third seat for sub-Saharan African countries on the World Bank 's Board of Governors , and are looking with interest at proposals on the table for further reforms .
Concerning illicit financial flows , I would like to reassure Mrs Joly that I have already given instructions to the Commission services to explore ways of improving fiscal and financial governance in developing countries in order to curb illicit financial flows .
This crisis has also shown that we have to strengthen the mechanisms for delivering ODA .
The international aid effectiveness agenda embodied in the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action is now more important than ever .
In these difficult economic times , we have a particular responsibility towards the world 's poor to make sure our development assistance is being channelled effectively .
In its 8 April communication , the Commission also underlined the useful contribution of innovative funding mechanisms as a complementary and mutually reinforcing instrument with ODA .
We have urged Member States to use their full tool kit and to leverage non-ODA with ODA , for example , by building on ongoing voluntary solidarity levies such as the airline ticket taxes to finance health programmes .
There will be high-level discussions on this subject , including a major conference in 2010 organised by the French , which will involve the Commission upstream .
Mr President , Commissioner , it was exactly a year ago today that we witnessed the collapse of the financial institution Lehman Brothers .
Then , according to the experts , we were on the verge of a financial collapse , and we were on the threshold of another great depression .
The financial crisis intensified and extended to the real economy , and we have lived through a period in which we have had negative economic growth and job losses .
However , developed countries are beginning to come out of the crisis .
France and Germany have done so , for example , and the Commission presented its economic forecasts today , which show that in the second half of the year , the European Union will come out of the recession .
However , the less developed countries are in the midst of the crisis and will continue to be there for a long time .
They did not cause the crisis , but they are suffering the consequences of it more than anyone .
They are suffering the consequences with less growth , faster growing unemployment , less direct investment , less foreign credit , less money sent back by emigrants , less official development aid and , of course , more trade restrictions .
We have lived through a period during which our stability has declined and our comfortable situation has declined in a limited time , but they are in danger of losing a decade in the fight against poverty , and a decade means that an entire generation is lost .
We can do a great deal for them on many aspects , and I would like to specifically focus on confronting protectionism .
Last week , the Commission presented its fourth report on trade restriction measures , which shows that many countries are adopting new restrictive measures , which is disastrous for developing countries .
Also , many developed countries will not fulfil their commitments to official development aid at the very time when we need fresh resources more than ever to confront the seriousness of the crisis .
I therefore propose that we increase the coordination of this development aid with a broader agreement between donor countries , financial institutions and partners , and manage it more efficiently and transparently so that it does not generate costs and is not a bureaucratic burden .
I urge the Commission , I urge the Commissioner , to implement the plan that it has presented to us , which I am sure Commissioner Almunia will agree with .

Mr President , Mr De Gucht , Mrs Joly , I am , of course , very aware that , in this type of debate , we will inevitably hear a series of speeches all saying the same thing .
That does not bother me , however .
I believe that it is important to repeat again and again this strong consensus that the European Parliament has a duty to build and , moreover , this needs to be done along with the Commission .
This is because , despite having claimed that developing countries would be scarcely affected by the financial crisis , all the experts are in agreement today that , on the contrary , the effects of this crisis will be disastrous for most developing countries .
All the social sectors of poor countries are going to find themselves faced with a sharp rise in social needs , in particular , and in needs for services , and with a very significant fall in growth .
Moreover , from this perspective , I very much appreciated your alluding , Commissioner , to the importance of responding to these needs in a far more flexible way , and I think that you know that , where it was possible to be so - obviously in the context of sufficient monitoring - I have always been a great supporter of State aid and direct aid , whether direct or sectoral aid , but of budgetary aid , in any case .
I believe that there is an appropriation effect and another , far greater effect , to do with respect , and that gives the Member States powers .
In spite of all that , I note that the G20 has not tackled the reform of the international financial institutions - I am referring to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank - in order to give greater weight to the interests of the poor countries of the South .
As Mrs Joly said , 80 % of the recent loans from the IMF went to European countries and only 1.6 % of these new loans were granted , for example , to African countries .
The resources pledged to developing countries in the G20 package will not be enough - we know this too - and will not be sufficiently focused on the weakest countries .
Worse still , these resources will not arrive quickly enough .
The real challenge , as you have obviously realised , Commissioner , will be to force the Member States to honour their 2005 commitments .
Nothing justifies a reduction in public development aid .
However , as has already been said , several European countries have announced drastic cuts .
I am thinking of Ireland ( -10 % ) , Italy ( -50 % ) and Latvia ( -100 % ) .
This attitude is clearly totally unacceptable .
Moreover , it is irresponsible .
I should like to hear your opinion on a whole series of points .
I heard your positive reaction regarding the vulnerability fund that the World Bank is proposing to create .
You also responded in favour of combating tax havens .
The countries of the South lose USD 1 000 billion each year in funds transferred illegally to the North , USD 350 billion of which pass through tax havens .
The issue of international governance has already been discussed .
Another issue that I believe should be highlighted is , of course , trade-related assistance .
I am an enthusiastic supporter - unlike some , I know - of economic partnership agreements , provided , of course , that the specific situation is taken into account and transitional periods are introduced and , above all , provided that the Member States honour their commitment to provide this infamous EUR 1 billion sum each year to help trade .
To my mind , this is obviously important , as others have said .
What is needed today is to denounce the dual messages from certain Member States that talk in glowing terms about developing countries and make huge promises but which , at the same time , are cynically reducing their public development aid .
Mr President , the question tabled by Mrs Joly on behalf of the Committee on Development brings up the issue of what we , as development policy makers , are actually trying to achieve in this debate .
The promises of the last G8 and G20 summits ultimately never made it off the page .
They are amongst the promises that are trotted out again and again but that have never led to adequate , tangible assistance .
In this regard , I really cannot comprehend why we are not debating Parliament 's resolution before Pittsburgh in order to apply appropriate political pressure .
In light of the Commissioner 's accurate analyses and of Mr Michel 's observations , it seems clear to me that we know what is at hand here .
Yet we are not in a position to apply political pressure in order to force the Member States to finally move away from this policy of ' charity begins at home ' .
Looking forward to Pittsburgh , that would seem to me to be the big danger .
If we do not succeed in applying pressure and making it clear that we need new institutions specifically in order to support the poorest countries in the world , then we will still be sitting here after Pittsburgh pointing out that , ultimately , nothing has changed .
That is also my request to you , Commissioner .
I ask you , here in Parliament right now , to comment again specifically on the results and to tell us what can actually be demanded with the support of which Member States and to what extent we have actually made progress here .
What we need is rapid and effective action because people are dying before our very eyes and they are doing so as a result of circumstances that we have helped bring about .
I call on us all to act together !

Mr President , emergency fund contributions , as you know , recorded a decrease of EUR 4.8 billion in the amount intended for the regulation of humanitarian crises in the poorest countries .
This is the highest recorded historical gap between the funds needed and the funds collected from donor governments and , seeing these figures , we cannot help but think about the huge amount of money spent on bank bailouts .
Each government is responsible for solving its own country 's problems but , at the same time , it is unfair and indecent to overlook the fact that the developing countries are hardest hit by the economic crisis , even though these countries are less responsible for that crisis .
The world around us teaches us not to expect too much from humanitarian appeals , especially during periods of recession .
I would therefore like to draw your attention to the risk of neglecting the developing countries and of accelerating the growth in poverty and obtaining a boomerang effect in the shape of increased internal tension , bloody conflicts , humanitarian tragedies and massive migration , yet again debated by developed countries .
Considering these circumstances , I believe that efforts are required in one direction to assume our responsibilities .
This requires boosting international aid and the need for more efficient development aid .
I also believe we should focus on decreasing dependence on humanitarian aid for some of the beneficiaries .
I would also like to ask the Commissioner - taking into account what former Commissioner Michel previously said about the need to step up the involvement of the World Bank and the IMF - whether he intends to come up with a proposal for this Istanbul Summit .
I do not want to close this speech without stating my appreciation for the start of your Commission mandate .
I have in mind the US-South Africa Summit , your visit to Zimbabwe at the end of this week , and the emergency assistance provided in recent days for the 100 000 victims of the floods in West Africa .
At the same time , I wish to point out that not only Burkina Faso faces natural disasters , but Niger also needs international support .
Human lives are not just threatened by floods , but also by the insidious and permanent threat of drought .
I also appreciate that you allocated EUR 53 million last week to respond to the drought in sub-Saharan countries .
These are encouraging indicators which I hope will influence the talks at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh and the Copenhagen conference , as these meetings are critical nowadays with the millennium development goals facing a major risk of failure .
( CS ) Commissioner , I too would like to say how disappointed I am that the promises of the G20 concerning assistance for the poorest countries during the economic crisis were clearly not meant seriously .
The reality is that IMF assistance has so far been negligible .
I would also like to call for a reform of the decision-making process so that the poorest countries can have a greater say in decision making , particularly within the Bretton Woods system .
At the same time , I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether it has been possible to maintain , in particular , health assistance and education in ACP countries at least at pre-crisis levels ?
I am asking mainly because there has been a drastic reduction in financial aid from many countries , including European ones .
That said , Commissioner , I wish you success in your new role .
( SK ) Commissioner , the issue we are discussing is highly important and topical , not only because the EU needs to have a clear idea about development policy at the moment but also because we need to explain it clearly and intelligibly to our fellow citizens .
More than ever before , the level of development aid can now influence illegal immigration , public order , epidemics and also - as the IMF has pointed out - the increase in private sector debt in developing countries .
I would like to emphasise the regular control of finances both by donors and recipients of funding .
We live in our various countries and we hear criticisms of the EU 's development policy .
The consensus in the European Parliament which Mr Michel spoke of is not always so evident in the countries of the EU .
It is only through the effectiveness and transparency of development aid that we can convince people that it is justified and limit any cut-backs .
( FI ) Mr President , it is extremely important that , at this stage , Europe shows moral leadership , and Member States must honour all their commitments as well as the Millennium Development Goals .
Of course , we are suffering from relative poverty during this present economic downturn , but we need to remember that in the developing countries , they are suffering from absolute poverty , and people are dying of hunger and disease .
More than 10 Member States in the Union , however , have said they will cut their development cooperation contributions or slow down the rate at which they are set to increase .
Obviously , we should remember that , important as it is to increase payments , it is equally important to ensure that they are used more effectively .
There are various tools in place for this coordination of aid .
One is the Official Development Assistance computer program , which has been trialled very successfully in Mozambique , and I hope that there will be investment in time and effort in this type of coordination in particular .
That way , it will be very easy for us to improve our success in such a situation as this , where the amount of aid available is falling .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , yes , a crisis has hit the poorest countries the hardest and there is in fact not much that we can do about it .
We can only talk about the remedies to get them back on track , and obviously this will take more time than it will take in the developed world because the mechanisms to produce new economic growth are much less developed in those countries .
One of the remarks that have been made by several members is about the fact that a lot of Member States are in fact backtracking on their Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) engagements .
The EU Member States agreed in 2005 individual minimum aid targets of 0.51 % for EU-15 and 0.17 % for EU-12 , for the new Member States to be reached by 2010 and respectively 0.7 % and 0.33 % by 2015 .
The countries that had already achieved aid levels higher than these targets promised to maintain .
Based on these confirmations and higher national pledges of some Member States , the EU should collectively reach 0.56 % of ODA by 2010 .
I believe that the crisis should not be an excuse to water down donors ' aid promises , and I will insist on remaining committed to delivering the promised aid levels , both for EU Member States as well as other donors .

In 2008 , the EU ODA has increased by around EUR 4 billion to a level of 0.40 % of ODA and the collective EU ODA is forecast to continue increasing .
On the basis of the information gathered from Member States , we foresee the EU collective ODA increasing to EUR 53.4 billion in 2009 , which represents 0.44 % , and EUR 58.7 billion , representing 0.48 % , in 2010 .

This also means that , without additional steps by Member States to fulfil their individual targets , the collective targets for 2010 will not be achieved .
The forecasted trend of a continuing increase in EU ODA relies on those Member States that are trying to respect their commitments , but efforts are required by all Member States , and I will continue to insist on that with the respective Member Sates .
It is their responsibility .
This is an engagement that they have taken up , and the crisis should not be an excuse to water down their engagements .
I would even say , to the contrary .
Several Members have also insisted on the reform of the international financial institutions .
This is a target that I can fully subscribe to .
The G20 has set out a precise timetable for governance reforms of the Bretton Woods institutions urging them to accelerate the implementation of their own plans for reform which predate the London Summit .
Some deliverables are expected as early as April next year and I am confident that solutions can be found on outstanding issues .
Given the current momentum in IMF reform created by the G20 , the Commission underlines the importance of advancing the second phase of reform at the World Bank with a view to concluding it by spring 2010 .
The London Summit of 2 April 2009 will go down in the history of the G20 as one where development issues were handled in their own right and in the presence of developing countries ' representatives .
In preparation for the next G20 , these last months have seen intense activity by the institution tasked with following up .

In August , the IMF Board of Governors approved a USD 250 billion general allocation of IMF special drawing rights , of which USD 18 billion will go to low income countries , and the IMF will be called to account in Pittsburgh on other measures for low income countries .
So this is , I think , a positive evolution .
Louis Michel , my predecessor , has also insisted on the flexibility , claiming that the budgetary support mechanism is the most flexible we have , and this is obviously true but , of course , this also means that we need a counterpart with the developing countries and we need to be in a position to have political dialogue with them and also monitoring mechanisms , so it presupposes a minimum cooperation on their behalf , but , once that is in place , I also believe that , especially , sectoral budgetary support is a very adequate procedure .
I do not quite understand why this resolution that has been introduced by the Committee on Development and refers to the G20 meeting of Pittsburgh is not being voted on before the G20 meeting .
I do not grasp that .
There will probably be one or another technical explanation for that but I think it gives the wrong signal from this newly elected Parliament that we are going to debate such a resolution after the G20 meeting in Pittsburgh , which is due to happen , if I remember correctly , from 22 to 24 September , before our next meeting in Strasbourg in October .
This is not within my discretion but I must say that , together with Members who have advocated this , I very much deplore that we have not been able to vote upon this resolution during this part-session .
Let me just mention that the decision to vote during the first October part-session was taken by the Conference of Presidents because , during that part-session , there will also be a debate on the G20 meeting .
That is my explanation to your question .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first October part-session .
Parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.10 )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for the 2010 financial year ( debate )
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for the 2010 financial year .
Mr President , it is a tremendous privilege for me to be here today .
It makes me feel very humble and I am delighted to have the chance to present the Council 's draft general budget to you .
Europe is facing considerable challenges .
The economic situation looked significantly more worrying six months ago , but it seems to have stabilised .
The risk scenario is more balanced and the risk of being drawn deeper into a downward spiral has reduced .
However , we face significant problems in the form of rising unemployment , growing budgetary deficits and increasing debt .
In the light of this , there is a great need to maintain public finances that are sustainable in the long term .
Many countries have a long way to go to balance their public finances .
Demographics will exert huge pressure on public finances .
The challenges we face with regard to the climate will require new resources and the redistribution of existing resources .
Overall , this means , in our opinion , that the budget that we are to agree on should reflect a high degree of restraint in order to leave room for future needs , with the emphasis on European added value and investments which , in the short term , can bring us out of the economic crisis and , in the long term , can also strengthen our competitiveness .
The Council 's draft , which was adopted unanimously , deals with and contributes to meeting these challenges .
It is a disciplined budget and a sound one from the point of view of state finances .
It will promote research , education , competitiveness , innovation and the building of infrastructures , and it will promote cohesion .
The Council 's draft also contains margins for coping with unforeseen events .
The logic behind our draft general budget is quite simple .
If we want to stimulate growth , employment and prosperity , the textbooks say that we should pursue a sustainable , credible and cautious policy , but with investment in education , research and infrastructure and in levelling out wage differences throughout the EU .
This is precisely what we have attempted to do .
The Council 's draft is balanced , while still being ambitious .
Compared with the 2009 budget , our commitments have increased by 1.1 % and the payment appropriations by nearly 4 % .
Our draft and the agreement that we want to reach must meet the following fundamental requirements , which were also applied during the Council 's first reading .
The budget must ensure that the EU 's various political priorities for 2010 are adequately financed .
We in the EU must be able to react quickly to the challenges that await us .
There must be an emphasis on providing European added value .
Budgetary discipline and sound economic management are required .
Otherwise , we will not be able to take the gradual steps towards balancing public finances once again .
It is important to respect the ceilings .
The EU must have sufficient flexibility to cope with future needs and unforeseen events .
It is vital for the EU budget to have adequate margins .
The draft general budget that we are tabling represents EUR 138 billion in commitment appropriations and EUR 121 billion in payment appropriations .
The reductions that the Council has made in relation to the preliminary draft budget presented by the Commission are based on a detailed analysis of the budget implementation , the budget forecast alerts and activity declarations , and we are looking at the capacity available to implement programmes and measures .
The degree of implementation and the absorption capacity have been key factors in our analysis .
I will now take a brief look at the individual headings .
Sub-heading 1A , research and innovation , is the most important element , and adequate funds have been secured in our draft budget .
Another area to which more resources will be directed is projects within the energy and infrastructure sectors .
If we adjust for the accounting effects of the economic recovery plan , the increase in this area amounts to around 8 % .
Eight percent !
That is a lot , and as you all know , the financing of the European Economic Recovery Plan will be one of those topics that we will need to discuss during the autumn .
Under sub-heading 1B , the Council accepted the commitment appropriations proposed by the Commission .
As regards payments , the Council believes that certain reductions can be made in relation to the preliminary draft budget , but I would like to stress that our draft nevertheless represents an increase in payment appropriations of 3.2 % compared to 2009 .
Under heading 2 , the Council is proposing substantial increases with regard to both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations compared with 2009 , by 4.5 % and 9.5 % , respectively , if we adjust for the accounting effects of the recovery plan .
With regard to heading 3 , the Council made only a few small adjustments to the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
Sufficient resources will be available for migration policy , including Frontex .
As regards heading 4 , it is extremely important to leave a substantial margin to the ceiling under this heading in order to be able to cope with unforeseen needs in the best possible way .
The Council therefore secured a margin of around EUR 310 million in its first reading .
This is particularly justified in light of the letter of amendment , which includes additional needs in this area .
As regards the Emergency Aid Reserve , the Council accepted the Commission 's proposal regarding commitment appropriations .
The common foreign and security policy is increasing in importance and the Council will therefore ensure that adequate funds are available for this .
With regard to administration , the Council made certain targeted reductions in view of the economic situation and the specificities of each institution .
The aim is to ensure that administrative expenditure does not increase faster than inflation .
The institutions ' requests for additional posts for new activities were not accepted , except for the new agencies that are planned for 2010 and for Frontex .
At our conciliation meeting in July , it was highlighted once again how important it is for the recruitment associated with the enlargements of 2004 and 2007 to be carried out , and we agreed on a joint statement .
On the same occasion , your representatives indicated that they were willing to try to find a common approach in respect of the building policy of the EU institutions and bodies .
I am sure that such a statement will , fortunately , be forthcoming later in the autumn .
Before I close , I would like to mention , and indeed to emphasise , the positive atmosphere that prevailed in our meetings with the European Parliament .
I believe that constructive cooperation is the only way to achieve a sound budget .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is a great pleasure for me to have an opportunity to speak to you this morning .
I know that the first stages of this budgetary procedure - in particular the July conciliation - took place in a very positive atmosphere , and I hope we can build on this cooperation in the coming weeks .
We still have some way to go in the 2010 budget procedures , and there are other important issues to agree on , such as the second phase of the European Economic Recovery Plan , so it is crucial that all three institutions work closely together .
Turning to the actual situation following the Council 's first reading and the establishment of the draft budget for 2010 , the Commission acknowledges that the cuts proposed by the Council are less severe than in previous years .
However , there are some particular concerns which I would like to highlight .
The Commission regrets the Council 's cut of EUR 1.8 billion in payment appropriations .
These cuts are proportionately more significant for Headings 1A and 4 , and sent a negative message in the priority areas of growth in jobs and the EU 's international role , not least in relation to pre-accession assistance .
The cuts proposed to the administrative support expenditure allowance , the administrative allowance for research and the agencies are particularly harsh .
Rather than taking into account the specific situation of each agency , the cuts - with few exceptions - have been general , regardless of the stage of development or tasks of the agency concerned .
The cuts in administrative support expenditure will hamper the implementation of programmes , particularly in the field of research and for external actions .
I am hopeful that , in preparing its first reading , Parliament will seek to redress this situation .
Although the cuts in Headings 1B and 2 are regrettable , I am partly reassured by the Council 's proposed declaration on payments and by the second opportunity to examine the needs for agriculture in the upcoming letter of amendment which the Commission will present at the end of October .
As announced , the Commission has now presented the budgetary authority with an amending letter to update the needs for Heading 4 .
The key elements of this concern : an additional EUR 95 million in commitment and EUR 60 million in payment appropriations to support the Palestinian Authority and reconstruction efforts in Gaza ; and the need to consider the establishment of Bananas Accompanying Measures in view of the possible trade agreement that will affect the preferential regime of ACP banana-supplying countries .

There is also an additional EUR 50 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 20 million in payment appropriations to assist developing countries in combating climate change , which should help to promote a successful outcome to the December Copenhagen Climate Change Conference .
Under Heading 5 ( Administration ) , the Commission was particularly modest in its PDB requests with a proposed increase in the Commission 's administrative expenditure of only 0.9 % compared to 2009 .
While this point has been acknowledged by the Presidency , it is rather disappointing that the Council has introduced further cuts to the Commission 's administrative budget .
In conclusion I am hopeful that the European Parliament will restore the appropriations cut by the Council and I am confident that our ongoing negotiations between the three institutions will be constructive and that we will achieve a satisfactory outcome to this budget procedure .
Thank you , Mr Šemeta , for presenting the position of the Commission , and also for keeping to time , which is very important .
I would like to say that this is an initial discussion .
We are now going to discuss this in the Committee on Budgets and in other committees , and the main discussion will take place in a few weeks .
I am going to speak in my mother tongue because I am hoping for a Europe where this act is a natural right in every parliament , not to mention in other areas of public life as well .
In that Europe , there is no law preventing anyone from using their mother tongue , not even in Slovakia .
I also expected that the current financial crisis would not only reduce production and increase unemployment , but also provide us with an opportunity to improve the European Union 's budget through reform measures .
Parliament already expressed its point of view in February .
It was encouraging that the European Commission and Council expressed their agreement with it .
Based on what I know about the draft , I am sad to say that the attempt to translate the fine words into the language of numbers was not a complete success .
It is time to face up to the fact that no one is happy with the European Union 's budget .
The budget 's revenue side is a serious burden for Member States , but the sum available is not sufficient for them to achieve their objectives .
We are far away from achieving both full employment and a knowledge-based society .
We spend large sums on agriculture , but dairy farmers , for instance , are affected by an unmanageable crisis .
The biggest item on the expenditure side is the cohesion policy , but the gaps between regions are growing instead of decreasing .
Researchers born and trained in Europe are working outside the European Union .
We are therefore lagging behind when it comes to innovation as well .
We hoped that the crisis would also provide an opportunity for us to have a shake-up and make the European Union 's budget more successful and tangible for its citizens .
We also hoped to use the budget not only in compliance with the rules and without any corruption , but also to take a look at the expenses and consider which programmes actually provide value and success for our money .
What can we do now ?
Parliament will endeavour to shape the budget in such a way that its message will be clearer to the EU 's citizens .
We want to increase those items which help tackle the crisis .
With this in mind , we are putting forward our thoughts on implementing the economic stimulus plan .
We want to tackle head on the challenges posed by climate change as well .
What we would like is for the financial crisis to be tackled effectively , not only using a couple of billion euros from the plan earmarked for this purpose , but also with every item in the budget , so that Europeans realise that the European Union is not a superfluous expense , but an effective tool for solving their problems .
I call on my fellow Members , the Council and Commission to support this .
Mr President , Secretary of State , Commissioner , we can surely agree that when drawing up the European Parliament 's budget , we must focus on our core mission , which is legislative work .
Issues unconnected with this must be excluded from the budget as much as possible .
We will discuss the final form of the budget today in an arbitration process involving the Presidency of the European Parliament and the Committee on Budgets .
At this point , I would like to thank the representatives of the political groupings .
In the meeting of the Committee on Budgets yesterday , they backed proposals to reduce the budget and measures which will lead to the better use of financial resources .
We are constantly confronted with numerous shortcomings that prevent us from using our resources in a fully efficient manner .
One example of this is the security for the buildings in which we are conducting these debates today .
As you know , we spend four days a month in Strasbourg .
Despite this , there were security guards stationed at both entrances 365 days a year until recently .
The new Secretary General of the European Parliament and his colleagues discovered this and implemented measures which will bring annual savings of more than EUR 2 million .
Another example is the Court of Auditors ' reports on translations .
Insufficient planning and insufficient communication or a complete absence of communication regarding the availability of translation resources prevents these resources being used effectively .
The organisation which is supposed to provide translations often instructs external translators automatically without even checking whether there is any spare capacity available in the internal organisation .
It is for this reason that we are proposing a reserve of 5 % against the resources earmarked for translation in the budgets of the various institutions .
We shall release this reserve when they show that they have tried to make full use of the resources of the internal organisation .
In the area of translations alone , we can save around EUR 11 million annually .
There are many similar examples .
Most of them have a common denominator : we are making little use of independent studies into the use of resources and the organisation of work .
I believe that the political will shown yesterday by the representatives of the various political groupings in the discussions of the Committee on Budgets will bear fruit .
Expenses for the purchase , upkeep and rental of buildings form one of the main administrative expense items of EU institutions .
There have been various cases in the past where institutions have purchased or rented property using methods that were not entirely efficient .
According to the Court of Auditors , the institutions do not cooperate in these areas or even fail to assess their own policies .
We have therefore asked the European Parliament administration to draw up a medium-term strategic document on buildings .
We wanted to adopt a sensible decision on this matter in the first reading .
There is a need to draw up a joint policy on buildings , not only in the European Parliament , but also within the framework of all institutions , and to ensure better cooperation in this area .
Secretary of State , I am delighted that , like us , the Council has adopted this as a priority objective and I would like to express my thanks for that .

Mr President , may I first of all congratulate Mr Šemeta on the confirmation obtained yesterday of his appointment as Commissioner responsible for the budget .
We are convinced that we will enjoy the same quality of relations with him as those which we established with his predecessor , and we wish him a political career that is as brilliant as that of Mrs Grybauskaitė .
Mr President , we are going through a period of global crisis , of preparation for major diplomatic events and of institutional uncertainty within the Union itself .
In a period such as this , the Committee on Budgets will seek to adopt a cooperative attitude .
As our rapporteur said , we regret the cuts made by the Council in the Commission 's proposals but , at the same time , we understand that the state of the Member States ' public finances prevents them from going much further this year .
For the 2010 budget , as has been said , we have an obligation to produce results : namely , balancing the financing of the 2010 section of the recovery plan .
We know that redeployments will be necessary , but they must not focus on other political priorities previously decided on together by Parliament and by the Council .
Beyond 2010 , Parliament will hope to undertake work jointly with the Commission , the Council , the Swedish Presidency and the future Spanish Presidency on three major issues for the future .
If , of course , things turn out as we hope in Ireland , the first issue will be the implementation of the procedure , schedule and working methods required by the application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The second issue will be the mid-term review of the financial perspective .
Between the joint decision on the multiannual financial framework taken in May 2006 and now , there has been the financial crisis , the very strong pressures on the price of energy , raw materials and even foodstuffs , and the negotiations on climate change .
There has also been - I am sorry to say - the failure of the Lisbon Strategy , as is plain to see today .
It is therefore a thorough review of our multiannual guidelines that we need .
This will be the first task of the new Commission .
Lastly , the third and final issue will be the reform of the resources that make up the European budget .
We knew before the crisis that none of the Member States wanted to pay for Europe 's spending any more .
Since the crisis , none of the Member States can pay for this spending any more .
Our financial contribution to the economic recovery will represent scarcely 0.03 % of the Union 's GDP .
We are fully aware of the extreme difficulty of the issue , but the European Parliament started work on it four years ago with the national parliaments , and it intends to put itself in a position to propose some areas of work so as to launch the debate next year .
Mr President , we have heard from both the Commission and the European Parliament that we will have several difficult issues to deal with during the autumn .
Hopefully , we will have some easy ones to deal with , too .
One of the most difficult issues is going to be the recovery plan and how it is to be financed .
At the same time , I am very hopeful that we will succeed .
I know that we will succeed .
There is no alternative .
Another issue that we face , both in the short term and in the long term , is , of course , the climate and the financing of climate policy .
Finally , I would like to take the opportunity to thank you for allowing me to speak here today .
The debate is closed .
I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his appointment .
Commissioner , great careers await commissioners from Lithuania .
We wish you much success , both in the Commission and in the future .
Your predecessor is , today , the Head of State in Lithuania .
Immigration , the role of Frontex and cooperation among Member States ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on immigration , the role of Frontex , and cooperation among Member States .
Mr President , issues concerning migration are always topical in the EU 's work .
An important element in dealing with migratory flows is border control .
Free movement for people within the EU and the absence of controls at internal borders bring a shared responsibility and an increased requirement for proper and effective management of our external borders .
The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) is responsible for coordinating and supporting Member States ' efforts to monitor and control the EU 's external borders .
Frontex is an important element in the EU 's integrated border management strategy .
Since its launch in 2005 , Frontex 's capacity has been progressively expanded .
In line with an increased budget , Frontex now plays an even greater role in managing the operational cooperation between Member States in connection with the control of the EU 's external borders .
The Agency is currently coordinating a number of joint operations and pilot projects at maritime , land and air borders with a view to combating illegal immigration , with a particular emphasis on certain high-risk areas such as the southern maritime borders of the EU , although the northern and eastern borders are also covered .
In the Council , we have , on several occasions , emphasised the need to develop and strengthen Frontex .
The Council 's conclusions from 2008 give the political priorities for the continued development of the Agency .
In the short term , it was stressed that Frontex must be allocated the necessary resources and that maximum use must be made of the equipment provided by the Member States within the framework of the Centralised Record of Available Technical Equipment ( CRATE ) .
The Council also urged Frontex to foster cooperation with other border control authorities , including customs authorities , and with third countries with regard to border control .
In the long term , it was emphasised that the future development of Frontex operations should still continue to be carried out in stages .
The Council welcomed the Commission 's plan to examine how Frontex 's mandate can be extended to enable increased cooperation with third countries .
An evaluation of the Frontex Regulation is currently being carried out and the Commission will present a proposal for possible amendments at the beginning of 2010 .
The Council is looking forward to adopting a position on the Commission 's proposed amendments together with the European Parliament .
It was also emphasised in the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which was adopted by the European Council in October 2008 , that the Agency 's role and resources for cooperation need to be strengthened .
The Pact also referred to the possibility of establishing separate divisions within Frontex , as conditions differ so markedly , for example , at the land border in the east compared with the maritime border in the south .
In the light of the events in the Mediterranean , the European Council , in its conclusions from June 2009 , also emphasised the need to increase efforts to prevent and combat illegal immigration and to prevent any future human tragedies at the EU 's southern maritime border .
The need to tighten up border controls and the need for clear rules for joint patrols and the landing of those that are rescued , as well as the increased use of joint repatriation flights , were given particular emphasis .
In conclusion , I would like to clarify the fact that the situation in the Mediterranean does not only involve taking action in the area of border control .
This situation requires a broad spectrum of both short-term and long-term measures .
The starting point in this regard should be the EU 's global approach to migration , which includes cooperation and measures within the entire migration policy area .
Enhanced cooperation with the countries of origin and transit is fundamental and the dialogue with third countries should be intensified in areas such as legal immigration , migration and development , capacity building and the repatriation of people who have no need of protection .
This dialogue must be based on the principles of solidarity and shared responsibility .
Mr President , migration is a priority issue that will be keeping the institution very busy , and I wish to thank Mr Tobias Billström , who is well acquainted with this problem .
We are in the process of drafting an immigration policy based on three pillars : respect for the right of asylum , the fight against illegal immigration , and European coordination to provide for legal migration .
Access to EU territory must be gained in accordance with certain rules , in compliance with national policies and with common standards that the Union implements , and not illegally , often at the cost of human lives .
The Mediterranean must remain the link between our civilisations rather than a place of misery and desolation .
The challenge of illegal immigration cannot be solved exclusively by those Member States that are more particularly exposed because their borders coincide with the external border of the Union .
It really is important for all of the EU Member States to show solidarity in the face of this challenge .
The Union has already adopted common rules , has devoted resources to this and has developed significant means of action .
That said , it is true that new initiatives will be necessary given the scale of the illegal migratory flows .
The challenge of illegal migration does , of course , require an effective prevention strategy , implemented in partnership with all of the countries located along the migratory routes .
The European Union is doing all it can to develop these dialogues and this cooperation .
The aim of this global approach is to deal with all of the main dimensions of immigration together and in a balanced way .
As Mr Billström just said , this approach guides our work in the Mediterranean , which is the meeting point of the migratory flows coming from the different regions and passing through various countries in Asia and Africa .
The Commission has made a firm commitment to promote the appropriate bilateral regional cooperation frameworks .
Faced with the proliferation of unacceptable human tragedies , I travelled to these European access points : Lampedusa , Malta , the Canary Islands and Greece .
I started a debate within the Commission and I referred suggestions of a more united and effective European policy to my ministerial colleagues within the Council .
The work subsequently carried out formed the basis of a series of decisions taken by the June European Council .
Since then , the Commission has been working on three major themes .
Firstly , asylum : the European Council called for the coordination of voluntary measures concerning the internal distribution of recipients of international protection who reside in the Member States most exposed to these pressures .
The Commission responded to this appeal by launching , in July , a pilot project to help Malta .
It has made provision for Community funding opportunities for Member States that will be willing to show solidarity with Malta .
To date , France has agreed to resettle almost 100 refugees on its territory .
I should like this gesture , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , to be repeated by other Member States .
On 2 September , I also presented the European Parliament and the Council with a communication proposing a common European programme on the resettlement of refugees from third countries .
I know , Mr Billström , that this programme is close to your heart .
It outlines common annual priorities in relation to resettlement , together with proposals on how to make more effective use of the financial aid granted to the Member States under the European Refugee Fund .
The European Asylum Support Office must be able to play a dominant role in the effective implementation of these initiatives .
The Commission 's proposal for a regulation on the creation of this Office is currently being examined within the Community institutions .
I should really like it if Parliament and the Council could come to an agreement under the Swedish Presidency in order to make this Support Office operational in 2010 , and I am very much counting on our Commission and on the Swedish Presidency .
That is all as regards asylum .
The second theme is that of the external borders .
As Mr Billström explained very well , the European Council wanted the border control operations coordinated by Frontex to be strengthened .
It asked us to lay down clear rules of engagement for the joint patrols , and precise provisions for the disembarkation of rescued persons and for the organisation of common return flights .
We must also examine how Frontex can cooperate with third countries .
The budget for financing Frontex operations in 2009 has been increased to EUR 36 million , and we are currently looking into how Frontex can organise the repatriation of illegal migrants .
It should be pointed out that the border control operations are conducted in accordance with Community law , in particular with the Schengen Borders Code .
Fundamental rights and the prohibition of return must be respected .
In maritime areas , these operations must also be conducted in accordance with international maritime law .
However , these rules are not interpreted or applied uniformly by the Member States .
That is why we are going to try to see how these rules can be developed and clarified so that Community law and international law can be applied better within the context of these operations .
We are also busy preparing a proposal that will allow changes to the regulation establishing the Frontex agency and its working methods .
This proposal will be submitted in early 2010 .
It will cover the European Parliament 's report and the assessment that will have been carried out by the agency in accordance with Article 33 of the Frontex regulation .
The aim is to optimise and strengthen the role of Frontex in border cooperation matters .
I now come to the third theme .
The European Council stressed the need for enhanced cooperation with the main countries of origin and of transit and asked the Commission to look at possible ways of cooperating in practice with these countries .
To follow up on this request , the Commission has put a great deal of effort into stepping up the dialogue and cooperation with Libya and Turkey , which are the two key countries on the illegal migration routes in the Mediterranean .
With regard to Libya , Mr Billström and I sent a letter in July proposing to our Libyan partners that we cooperate in a number of areas to ensure the joint and balanced management of migratory flows from Libya .
We explained to the Libyan authorities that we were willing to help them not only to strengthen their capacities to prevent migrants from illegally entering and leaving their territory , but also to improve the treatment of migrants in accordance with human rights and with international rules and to identify and assist migrants who need international protection .
The Commission already cofinances pilot measures through the United Nations HCR , the International Organisation for Migration and the Italian Ministry of the Interior .
However , the only way in which we will be able to give the required scope to our action is with a clear commitment from the Libyan authorities .
I make no secret of the fact , Mr Billström , that I am somewhat eagerly awaiting the reply to our letter .
With regard to Turkey , the Director-General of the Directorate-General for Justice , Freedom and Security , Jonathan Faull , is today on an assignment in Ankara to investigate the extent to which , and the means by which , an increase in cooperation could encourage the Turkish authorities to become more involved in a more responsible form of migration management , with the aim both of re-admitting illegal immigrants and , above all , of providing international protection for refugees .
If Turkey and Libya are willing to take up our offers , we and Mr Billström will be able to visit these two countries before the end of the year .
Finally , I should like to mention the Stockholm programme , which must lay the foundations for a more effective common policy and which will enable us to promote coordinated immigration in the spirit of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
We submitted our proposals in June , and they were given a favourable reception at the informal ministerial debate held in July by the Swedish Presidency .
I shall not repeat what I said just now , that is , the three major themes of this policy , a common asylum system in line with our humanitarian traditions , more effective control of illegal immigration through more integrated management of our internal borders and our visa policy , and then , of course , the increased effectiveness of our fight against human trafficking and the implementation of a specific return policy aimed at the long-term reintegration of migrants into their community of origin , as well as the opening up to legal migration within a framework that guarantees that the needs of host countries are accommodated , without forgetting the needs of countries of origin or respect for the rights of migrants .
There you have it .
I have overrun slightly , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , but I wanted to follow on from Mr Billström 's very sound explanations by highlighting the major themes of a policy , of a European strategy that I believe is now beginning to take shape .
Our Member States still need to show the full solidarity and the determination necessary to implement this strategy .
I am very much counting on the European Parliament to help us in this matter .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( MT ) Thank you , Mr President , I would also like to welcome Minister Billström and , in particular , the Vice-President of the European Commission , Jacques Barrot .
Allow me Mr President , to congratulate and thank the Vice-President of the European Commission for the considerable and genuine efforts that he has undertaken in the field of immigration and asylum .
I would like to extend my appreciation and gratitude to Mr Barrot for the passion with which he has chosen to carry out this work , and for the concrete initiatives which he has launched in this difficult , controversial and sensitive area .
This brings me on to the first point I would like to raise , Mr President , regarding the complexity of this subject .
It is easy to point fingers at one country or other : however , we have to analyse the situation seriously and thoroughly .
Otherwise we run the risk of falling prey to the absurd .
Allow me to give an example . Lately , there has been criticism levelled at the Italian Government because they promptly sent arriving immigrants back to Libya .
However , we have to understand that as a result of Italy 's actions , the number of immigrants that have chosen to brave the hazardous journey and risk their lives have decreased considerably this year .
It is important to realise that this return system has dealt a big blow to organised crime and human traffickers .
This means that while it is doubtlessly necessary to respect immigrants ' right to asylum , it is likewise imperative to persevere in our efforts to put a stop once and for all to this tragedy which is taking place in the Mediterranean .
What is just as important is to go on battling human traffickers who are exploiting the misery and difficulties that immigrants wishing to cross over to Europe are experiencing .
Therefore , we must keep the complexity of the subject in mind at all times .
I would like to mention some other points .
We must improve upon Frontex , especially with regard to the potential cooperation that could take place between countries , and which include concrete issues such as those tied to return policies involving more than one country .
Unfortunately , in this field , Frontex has not yet made enough effort .
The initiatives cited by Vice-President Barrot also merit attention , such as the general resettlement programme , the pilot project for countries like Malta and the establishment of an asylum office .
These are initiatives that need to be put into place instantly .
To conclude , another equally important factor that requires attention is cooperation with Libya and other third countries which are the departure points for immigrants .
Without the cooperation of these countries we will get nowhere .

Mr President , Mr Billström , Commissioner Barrot , I agree with the importance and support the emphasis that both the Presidency and the Commission have placed on identifying this as one of the most influential dimensions of globalisation that needs a European response .
This is an area in which Europe can make sense , by adding value to the management of one of the most unequivocal dimensions of globalisation , namely the unprecedented dimension taken on by migration , and therefore migratory flows and their impact in all areas of importance to European integration .
This phenomenon cannot be tackled by any of the Member States on their own , based on their individual capacities .
As a result , we need a common policy , which has still not been developed .
Everything that has been done to develop this common policy , which must be developed , should have occurred under the European Constitution and under the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , this policy has still not been developed .
Everything that has been done is in anticipation of what must be done and is still in the very early stages .
However , it is clear that the response must be coherent with the European identity .
As a result , commitment to the correction of inequalities at source , by reinforcing development cooperation , is the first point .
Secondly , we need to reinforce the fight against the political and criminal dimensions of this phenomenon , by also tackling those organisations which traffic human beings .
At the same time , we must improve information on the risks of illegal immigration and on illegal trafficking , training at source and illegal employment .
The response must involve legal migration , as an alternative to illegal immigration .
Finally , we must make a serious commitment to human rights .
That involves the dimensions of asylum and refugees , and also compliance with the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which was signed in October 2008 .
However , in the meantime , we must reinforce the European external border , in terms of both its control and our joint responsibility for it .
The impact of illegal immigration in Italy , Spain or Greece - as evident in Spain in relation to the southern Mediterranean border , and also in the Canary Islands , with the canoes that arrive full of desperate people - is not purely a Spanish or an Italian matter .
It is a European matter , which does not simply require solidarity with Spain or Italy , or even less a hope that Spain and Italy will comply with the European model in their bilateral relations with African countries .
No , it is a joint responsibility , which requires a joint response .
That is why the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has supported the strengthening of Frontex and also the increase of its budget , which we hope will be supported in this House , because we support the emphasis and importance placed on this matter by the Swedish Presidency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you Mr Barrot and Mr Billström .
Back on 31 August , I tabled a priority question to the Commission .
It is true that the number of migrants reaching Italian and Libyan shores has fallen , but this is because the number of dead which the Mediterranean Sea continues to receive has risen .
Alas , the Mediterranean has now become a mass grave and the Berlusconi Government , to wit , the Italian Government , has signed an agreement with Libya which unfortunately allows Italy to refuse entry not only to migrants , but also refugees from countries where there is persecution or civil war , such as Somalia and Eritrea , and denies these poor people the right to seek asylum , thereby breaching every international rule and the Geneva Convention in particular .
I would remind you that non-refoulement is a principle which knows no geographical boundaries and which cannot be haggled over or negotiated under any circumstances .
We do not want to continue thinking that ultimately , this Italy-Libya agreement boils down to economic interests worth around EUR 5 000 billion .
I demand that the Commission does not - if this is its intention - conclude an EU-Libya agreement similar to the Italian one , as we have seen the results of that despicable agreement .
I repeat , alas this agreement forces these people to undergo torture , because this is what we are dealing with : the detention centres to which they are taken in Libya are torture , according to press reports and also photographs , for example , photographs which show many of these immigrants in Ganfuda prison , 10 kilometres from Benghazi .
This is torture , which I do not believe is accounted for in any friendship or institutional agreements .
As highlighted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , the non-refoulement principle prevents people being returned to territories where their lives could be considered to be in danger or their freedom could be threatened .
Sending these people back to Libya which , I would again remind you , has neither signed nor ratified the Geneva Convention , seems truly unbelievable .
Moreover , to add insult to injury , illegal immigration is a criminal offence in Italy so , for example , after the dramatic landing at the end of August in which many Somalis lost their lives , those few , I think four or five Somalis who managed to reach their destination have , among other things , been accused of immigration and are therefore now being prosecuted under Italian law .
I call on the Commission now to take real action , to assess whether the Italy-Libya agreement complies with international law and finally bring about a decisive change of course by not supporting the Italian Government 's nefarious policy .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the Commission 's joint EU resettlement programme certainly has noble ambitions , which aim to encourage greater cooperation between national governments regarding the resettlement of refugees and asylum seekers .
However , as a British Conservative , I do remain worried about its implementation .
We do not want to see the continuation of problems like those we have had at Sangatte in France .
I think that cooperation and solidarity across the European Union is , of course , important when discussing the burdens that nations face but we must better distinguish economic migrants from asylum seekers .
They obviously have every right to seek sanctuary , but we must also have legislation that does not tie individual nations ' hands regarding who is accepted and who gets asylum .
A collective approach such as the one the Commission is proposing might undermine each EU nation 's ability to decide this .
Meanwhile , though , I think a major priority should be securing the southern borders .
Frontex must play a more prominent part in this regard in order to act as a strong deterrent to economic migrants wishing to make the hazardous trip across the Mediterranean .
We must act more strongly against the various third countries that irresponsibly encourage those activities .
The Commission says it will be national governments that ultimately decide the number of people they accept , and that Britain and other countries will not be forced to accept large numbers of economic migrants that it cannot cope with or cannot support in these economically challenging times .
That is necessary and right .
Countries like Britain need guarantees that our asylum and immigration policy remains for us to decide and guarantees also that the EU 's approach will remain one of open cooperation and not one of compulsion .

Mr President , Mr Billström , Commissioner Barrot , the start of this legislative term offers us an excellent opportunity to rethink our immigration policy .
We currently have an immigration policy that is based on manifest hypocrisy and cynicism .
We say that the European project would be impossible without migrant workers , and yet we are criminalising them with legislation such as the Return Directive , which has been aptly named the ' Directive of Shame ' , and which fails to comply with the principles and values of the European Union .
This policy of trying to make Europe into a fortress at this time of crisis , which is a triple crisis in terms of food , finance and energy , is not understood by everyone , because our work is poor and heading in the wrong direction .
If Europe is needed and , in particular , if Europe is needed thanks to migrant workers , then we must respect all their rights and not make them into criminals , as the European Union is doing .
This is simply bringing more pain to families that are just trying to escape war or hunger .
As a result , the best calling card at next spring 's summit of Heads of State or Government in Madrid , between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean , would be to repeal this ' Directive of Shame ' , which does not comply with our principles and values and which is not understood by any government , particularly in Latin America and the Caribbean , from where thousands of migrant workers come to the European Union .
I therefore call for serious consideration to be given to repealing this ' Directive of Shame ' .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the measures under discussion are part of the existing so-called area of justice , freedom and security , of which immigration is a part .
This is about a common immigration and asylum policy and , however much the British Government may lie to the British people , we know that they intend that Britain should eventually be bound by it .
But a ' one-size-fits-all ' immigration policy will not work for Britain .
Britain is one of the most densely populated countries in the world , more densely populated , surprisingly , than India , China or Japan .
Net immigration to Britain is now running at about 230 000 people per annum , adding over a million new people to the population every five years .
The population will rise from its current 61.4 million , an all-time high , to about 70 million plus in 2031 , and then spiral ever upwards .
All this growth is due to immigration and births to immigrants .
The UK Independence Party is not opposed to some immigration , but this should be strictly controlled and for the benefit of Britain and not the European Union or anybody else .
Britain does not need a common European immigration policy .
What we need to do is end mass immigration now and introduce a strictly limited and controlled immigration policy .
We should apply the terms of the 1951 Convention on Refugees , which requires them to seek sanctuary in the first designated safe country they come to - which is not a little island off the coast of Europe called Britain .
We should end the promotion of multiculturalism , which is divisive and a recipe for conflict , and assimilate and integrate existing migrants into a common culture with respect for a common set of political and legal institutions .
There should be no place in Britain - and , I suggest , anywhere in Europe - for Sharia law .
( NL ) Mr President , Frontex is not working .
The budget for Poseidon , the operation currently under way , is EUR 11 million .
This is pointless .
It is money down the drain .
Direct returns and a crackdown on the countries that make this immigration possible is the only solution .
The common asylum and immigration policy is not in the interests of the Dutch people .
The Dutch Party for Freedom , on whose behalf I am speaking , is vehemently opposed to this policy .
It will result in even more people with no prospects entering Europe .
The Dutch people do not need solidarity , what they need is for us to stand up here for Dutch interests .
Let there be an end to it then .
I should like to give a further reaction to the Swedish Presidency .
This Presidency takes the view that Europe should further open its borders to mass immigration for the sake of its labour market .
The Party for Freedom rejects this out of hand .
It is a smoke screen to enable mass immigration .
Look at what is happening in the big cities - look at the enormous problems they face .
Think about your own people , think about your own country , think about your own culture .
We shall be doing so , in any case .
I should like to add that enough is enough .
Let there be an end to mass immigration ; it has gone far enough .
( ES ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , the challenges in terms of migration remain the same , as too does our commitment to overcome them .
These challenges are as follows : the first is to move towards a common migration policy ; the second is to greatly improve the organisation of legal migration ; the third is to improve integration procedures ; the fourth is to combat illegal or clandestine immigration with absolute determination ; the fifth is to develop Frontex further ; the sixth is to improve procedures , conventions and agreements with countries of origin and transit ; and the seventh is to make progress with a common asylum policy .
The European Asylum Support Office must , in 2010 , become a fair , genuine and egalitarian office , which shares out the responsibility in a way that ensures solidarity and which offers international or subsidiary protection going forward .
As regards Frontex , it is a matter of coordination and cooperation ; under no circumstances is it a replacement for national competences .
The need to increase Frontex missions to the south of our borders , in southern Europe , particularly in the Mediterranean and on the Atlantic front , is not just the European Union 's response to the migratory pressure developing in Greece , Malta , Italy or Spain ; it is also a humanitarian response to prevent death and avoid drama .
Just look at what has happened with the Frontex budget : it has gone from EUR 6 million in 2005 to EUR 78 or 83 million in 2010 .
However , Mr President , our concern is that Frontex is incapable of managing the budget that Parliament has given it .
This would be unacceptable , because there are many challenges and missions to be tackled .
It is vital that Frontex breathes life into CRATE , the Centralised Record of Available Technical Equipment .
It is also vital that the Member States ' commitment to CRATE becomes effective .
We need to have more and better coordination with Europol .
We need to manage Iconex and , Mr President , in terms of safeguarding human rights , we need to have more and better coordination between Frontex and the International Organisation for Migration and also the UNHCR .
These are the challenges and these are our commitments .
Mr President , no one underestimates the enormous difficulties of creating the balance mentioned by the chair of our committee , and of the migration pressures which face the European Union and the pressures that we face in the Mediterranean .
Yet again this summer , we have been reminded of the harsh reality faced by migrants and asylum seekers facing persecution and fleeing poverty .
Frontex undoubtedly plays a key role in Europe 's approach to migration .
As we build a more coordinated EU system for managing our external borders , the importance of Frontex increases .
Therefore , my group believes that it is crucial to get the balance right : the balance between , on the one hand , resourcing Frontex - as many colleagues have mentioned - and , on the other hand , ensuring that Frontex has a stronger appreciation of the humanitarian aspects of its work .
For example , how can Frontex help bring down the tragic number of deaths at sea , over 12 000 in the last 10 years ?
Sea rescue operations have therefore to be included in its remit .
The devil is in the detail .
Many of these policies need to work on the ground , and I know that Parliament , Commission and Council are trying to do this .
We must ensure that Frontex does not simply become a mechanism for keeping people out of Europe .
Those who are legitimately in need of protection must be granted access to EU territory .
Commissioner , you spoke about the principle of non-refoulement .
It is important that you restated it .
The situation for Italy and Libya is , of course , something which my colleagues from Italy will speak more about , but this principle must not be violated by anyone or any country .
We are in a situation where non-refoulement will happen even with countries which have not signed the 1951 Convention .
It is important that we uphold these human rights .
We must not shy away from our responsibilities to provide protection to those who need it .
Frontex therefore needs to be part of a fair and balanced approach to migration and asylum .
We must ensure that the asylum package is implemented , and we must ensure that legal migration and the protection of refugees are held in balance .
Mr President , the British press , assisted to such a conclusion by paranoid and Euro-sceptic MEPs , has scaremongered that a future Commissioner for Fundamental Rights , which Mr Barroso has accepted at the proposal of the ALDE Group , will force the UK to accept more asylum seekers from across Europe .
This is not true .
As Vice-President Barrot has confirmed , the pilot project to assist Malta is voluntary and the proposed scheme to resettle UNHCR-approved refugees directly from outside Europe would also be non-compulsory .
No element of EU policy has ever involved quotas or compulsion on national acceptance of migrants .
However , what we do try and get is voluntary solidarity , and I do hope that a future Fundamental Rights Commissioner will make a contribution to stopping migrants meeting their death in the Mediterranean .
Ten years ago next month , the EU set the goal of a common asylum system and coordinated migration policies .
Despite some considerable efforts , especially by the European Commission with the support of MEPs , we are clearly a long way from that .
The top priority is to get some proper management of the flows , which are usually what are called ' mixed flows ' of refugees and job-seeking migrants , so as to distinguish between the two .
This is to give confidence to the European public of proper management as well as to stop loss of life and to ensure protection for those qualifying for it .
If people in frail boats are pushed back out to sea and never assessed for protection , none of those goals is achieved .
I am shocked to hear from Commissioner Barrot that Member States do not apply maritime law uniformly .
Such disarray is unacceptable .
Frontex must be properly resourced and respect human rights of individuals .
Those individuals must be allowed to land and be assessed for asylum status and sorted into refugees and those not qualified to stay .
EU Member States must , if necessary , be taken to the European Court of Justice for failing to do so , and the idea , as my colleague Sonia Alfano has said , that Libya is capable of doing that job instead is completely outrageous given its gross human rights abuses .
A rational European immigration policy would involve some common framework of criteria for economic migration within which Member States accepting such migrants can operate under their own decisions on the numbers they take .
What we need is the coordination , the common standards , the common framework and then the solidarity as well .
Mr President , I do not really share your enthusiasm about Frontex .
We have heard reports from Frontex as well as from Member States that they have violated human rights , the right to non-refoulement and given no possibility for refugees to apply for asylum , and those violations of human rights are done in the name of the European Union .
Minister Billström , you have said that we need some checks and balances on our external borders but , I ask you , why cannot we have some checks and balances on those people who are working and defending our external borders ?
Why cannot we have some transparency and clarity about Frontex and what they are doing ?
We need clarity and transparency in this House , in the European Parliament , about Frontex 's deeds .
We need clarity about what is the stage of the procedure of the new rules of Frontex that you mentioned , Commissioner , and we need some clarification about how refugees can obtain international protection when they are intercepted at sea .
We also need transparency about the deals that are being made with third countries and what happens exactly to the EU money that is being put into Libya , for example .
I doubt whether what you called Libya 's assistance to refugees is actually helpful to refugees but here again , we are just lacking transparency and if , as you said , not even Member States interpret the rights of migrants the same way as you do , then how are you going to make sure that third countries such as Libya are going to follow your sort of interpretation ?
I would like to remind you that Parliament has always supported the idea of making the sharing of responsibility to deal with asylum applications obligatory , and I think your report of the pilot project where only France took a very , very small , almost ridiculous , number of 100 refugees from Malta shows that we are not getting far with the voluntary solidarity .
We need some obligation here .
( PL ) We want to fight immigration .
It is a great problem .
In the meantime , our notice board and computer are going wrong .
Let us tackle the things which we can really tackle effectively .
Migration is , of course , one of the greatest problems facing Europe today .
What is more , it is a problem not just for us politicians , but it is also a problem for the people of the European Union 's Member States .
It is , perhaps , one of the main challenges currently facing the political class in Europe , and one of the main problems of our electors .
Immigration has more than one name , because my esteemed fellow Members have spoken today about immigration from Africa , which mainly affects the countries of the Mediterranean Basin , and what they said is , in a certain sense , justified .
I represent a country - Poland - where this illegal immigration is , of course , smaller , but people come to us from the countries of the former Soviet Union , and some from Asia .
We are faced with a question about the philosophy of the EU 's fight against illegal immigration , and - let us put it simply - also against restrictions on legal immigration .
Does Frontex have to bear the brunt of this fight ?
Is this really advisable ?
Would it not be more effective for the extra money which we want to give Frontex to be allocated to the countries which have the greatest problem with illegal immigration , and also to EU Member States whose borders are part of the EU 's external borders ?
Mr President , it seems to me , as I finish , that this would be more advisable .

( PT ) Mr Billström , Mr Barrot , we have no choice regarding the Geneva Convention and human rights .
Our only option is to comply with the conventions that we have signed .
The law is clear : sending refugees who arrive on European shores to countries that have not signed the Geneva Convention on refugees is a violation of the Geneva Convention .
This is not an abstract point of law ; it is a real argument .
When , through Frontex or the Member States , we send refugees to Libya , we are in breach of the convention , not least because we know from the Italian Government 's own figures that 75 % of the people who reach European shores apply for asylum , and 50 % of those - about 38 % , or a third of the total - are entitled to humanitarian protection .
Political choices lead to moral choices , and right now we are faced with a moral choice .
Is it right , is it really moral , that more than 14 000 people have died trying to reach the coast of Europe in recent years ?
Is it really moral that a large proportion of those people who risk their lives should be entitled to asylum in the first place ?
Is it really necessary that they should have to risk their lives ?
No , they should not have to do so .
We have been saying for a long time that a purely repressive immigration policy , such as the one that has been followed , presents us with these life or death choices for people 's lives and makes us all jointly responsible for each life or death choice .
It is not by throwing money at Frontex now , at the beginning of its mandate - money that Frontex cannot spend and that the Commission says it is inadvisable to give to Frontex at this time - it is not by doing this that we will solve the problem .
The way in which we can solve the problem is by re-examining Frontex 's mandate , and then Frontex might need more money .
For that to happen , Frontex would have to cooperate and provide the UNHCR with full information ; for that to happen , Frontex would have to include humanitarian concerns in its policies , which it does not do at the moment .
Just as serious , ladies and gentlemen , is the proposal regarding refugee funds : while we are investing more in Frontex , these funds are being cut back .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , frankly I am annoyed that certain Italian fellow Members have not wasted the opportunity to reopen the same old controversy , with the sole aim of attacking the Italian Government .
When it comes to immigration , we should no longer engage in ideological manipulation , but go to the heart of the guidelines set out by the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which is based on the values of integration and solidarity .
I genuinely appreciate the Commission 's efforts in recent years , but Commissioner Barrot will agree with me when I say that we need to speed things up to create a true European strategy on immigration , which prioritises the uncompromising fight against illegal immigration and the trafficking and exploitation of human beings .
We must take firm action against all those who profit from this trafficking , including employers who use illegal labour .
Certainly , it is no longer acceptable to allow immigration to be a problem shouldered only by the border countries of the Mediterranean basin .
The Commission 's recent proposal for a joint reintegration programme is a step forward in terms of political and practical cooperation between Member States , but we urgently need to implement a series of initiatives to develop more effective intra-Community solidarity .
That is why we are waiting for the announcement made by the President-in-Office of the European Union to become reality soon , an announcement echoing , among other things , a heartfelt plea by the Italian Minister , Franco Frattini , to launch a debate so that we can find a way to share fairly among Member States the burdens and responsibilities associated with the flows of illegal immigrants and political asylum seekers .
This is the key point , in my view , because otherwise we end up in the paradoxical situation whereby some Member States , including Italy , Malta , Greece and Spain , are obliged to receive illegal immigrants , whereas others hide behind the discretional concept of solidarity on a voluntary basis .
They cannot hide from this any longer .
I would like to thank France which has offered to accept 100 people , 100 asylum seekers : 100 people , but that is out of the thousands , tens of thousands of asylum seekers .
I therefore thank France , but it is a drop in the ocean .
I will conclude by saying that , among other things , we can no longer view immigration as a panacea .
In the absence of a serious cooperation policy for development , where Europe must take a leading role , we will be condemning part of the world to a certain and inevitable future of poverty and despair .
( EL ) Minister , Commissioner , Parliament has urgently called for cooperation at European level with immigrants ' countries of origin and transit .
These countries do not only include Libya .
They also include Turkey .
Apart from being a country of origin and transit within this framework , Turkey is also a candidate country .
In other words , one could say that it has a dual obligation to respect the political principles and the institutions of the European Union .
In at least four cases recently , Frontex helicopters were jammed by Turkish radar in Greek airspace while performing their duties .
In fact , yesterday , a Turkish fighter plane threatened to force a Frontex helicopter to turn back .
What do you intend to do and how will you react on behalf of the European Union to this harassment during action by a European institution such as Frontex ?
Also , compulsory solidarity cannot only take the form of Frontex-type policing measures in the southern states .
There must also be solidarity in terms of accepting immigrants arriving in our countries , which cannot sustain such large numbers every time .
Here , the Commission and Council are promoting voluntary solidarity , which is not worth the paper it is written on .
Can you tell us why you are not introducing compulsory solidarity here too ?
Finally , the pilot programme between Italy , Malta and Libya should not be the only pilot programme .
Why is there no pilot programme for turning immigrants back in Turkey , which is a gaping wound in terms of this particular problem ?
Has the Greek Government ever asked for this , Commissioner , and you refused it ?
Or did Libya , Italy and Malta simply come along and you accepted them without making any other requests ?
( FR ) Mr President , this gives me an opportunity to clarify two small points which , I believe - and as one of my fellow Members said just now - highlight the hypocritical nature of our policy .
The first point concerns the Dublin agreements .
Commissioner , you know the situation in Calais well ; you know that , in Calais , many people could easily apply for and obtain political refugee status .
Why do they not do so ?
Because , as a result of the Dublin agreements , they are guaranteed to be sent to countries to which they do not want to go , and sometimes for excellent reasons .
They do not want to go to Greece , where they have practically no chance of receiving refugee status .
Today , the Dublin agreements are an instrument that is hostile to the protection of those people who need them most and which create inequality among the Member States .
So let us stop talking about solidarity , when instruments are put in place that create inequality among the States .
The second point concerns the readmission agreements .
I fully understand , the aim is to negotiate these agreements with Turkey and with Libya , that is , to toy with the idea of having one huge environment of countries that are our neighbours and huge camps for holding the migratory flows .
This is unacceptable for practical reasons , for moral reasons and for political reasons , and you know it , Mr Barrot !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will immediately start by saying , without exaggeration , that for me , hospitality is a sacred value .
Ultimately , it is solidarity between people which gives rise to the communities of a state , which are regulated by means of certain special obligations : rights and duties .
Therefore as far as I am concerned , I am firmly opposed to anything that runs counter to this basic biblical principle .
Clearly , it is the action of taking people in and also the ways in which we need to do this which combine to give rise to integration and all it entails .
What can we do ?
Where should we locate these desperate people who arrive in the Member States and , at the same time , how should we eliminate that ensuing friction which we sometimes see as resentment , anger and rage , leading to rather worrying forms of antagonism ?
What should we do to ensure that safeguarding the right to asylum , a principle which has been cited in recent days too , does not , at the same time , leave the door open for fraudulent asylum seekers , which is the alibi certain people use : people who hide behind this universal right and who have nothing to do with the right to asylum , but everything to do with illegality and crime ?
Do we really think , Mr Billström , that all this responsibility can be shouldered by individual states ?
Until now , Europe has very probably acted with some uncertainty , but it seems to me that it can no longer put off establishing a united , serious approach to immigration .
It cannot speak as it has been doing , with many discordant voices , and cannot force the most exposed and vulnerable individual frontline states into isolation .
It cannot do so without a common position reached collectively , one which so far , we have not had , but whose essential principles are continually defended .
It cannot , Mr President , fail to see its borders as a European issue instead of an issue for individual states .
It cannot engage , as has already happened in this Chamber , in crude , theatrical performances in the argument over what the Italian Government or other governments are doing .
For me , it is clearly unthinkable that the tragedies that have occurred off the coast of Lampedusa and in Ceuta and Melilla have nothing to do with Brussels , Berlin and Paris .
Tension between the individual states and Europe stems from this and is causing problems , and this is also increasing Europe 's democratic deficit , which is only set to get worse in the absence of a coordinated policy on immigration ; it is heightening the impression that the self-interests of states prevail over the greater good .
It is intensifying , Mr President , the frustrating perception that Brussels and Strasbourg all too often deal with obscure issues and not those which concern the public .
Ultimately , it is undermining Europe 's political identity .
This is why I hope that the Swedish Presidency will begin to establish an agreement with the most vulnerable countries in order to think logically and bring about what has been lacking until now , namely a robust , balanced , sound and rigorous common policy on immigration .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , Mr Billström , ladies and gentlemen , we called for this debate to draw the EU 's attention to the grave violations of fundamental human rights taking place in Italy .
Since May , over 1 000 migrants have been picked up at sea by the Italian authorities and handed over to Libya in the course of informal and indiscriminate refoulements without identifying the people , giving them the right to appeal or access to asylum procedures , with the danger that they will be subjected to inhumane and degrading treatment in Libya .
As Commissioner Barrot confirmed when he asked Italy for details , we believe that these practices violate the fundamental principles which underpin Europe .
This kind of action is compatible neither with the European Convention on Human Rights nor with Community law , particularly the Schengen Borders Code and the Repatriation Directive , nor with Italian law .
Yesterday , the United Nations called on Italy to comply with international law and , also yesterday , 24 Somali and Eritrean refugees turned away by Italy lodged an appeal against Italy at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg for violating the European Convention on Human Rights .
Moreover , ladies and gentlemen , illegal immigration in Italy has become a criminal offence , an aggravating circumstance .
The mere fact of being a migrant entails discrimination and inequality , and gives rise to harsher punishments for the same crime .
The fact of being an illegal migrant , as were the families of our Italian , Portuguese , Polish , Greek and Italian communities , blocks access to fundamental rights and to the most basic care , including health services , for fear of being reported .
This is happening in Italy , Mr President , and has also been denounced by legal and constitutional experts and secular and Catholic associations .
What does the Commission intend to do to end these violations ?
Parliament has always supported the fight against illegal immigration , but only in compliance with fundamental rights .
We would like to know , Mr President , whether the Commission intends to take action on Italian legislation and examine the Italy-Libya agreement .
Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , we cannot allow certain governments to build new ones .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , reality goes beyond anything said in this House .
We see President Gaddafi entertaining this issue and the international media constantly reporting that EUR 1 billion is needed if it is to honour its obligations .
We see Turkey - a state which wants to accede to the European Union - turning back Frontex aircraft on a daily basis and the European Union failing to react as it should .
We see traffickers who move illegal immigrants giving them instructions on how to shoot themselves in the arm or leg in the event of arrest , so that the Member States are obliged to adopt and apply a different type of legislation to that which governs illegal immigration , because they are now injured persons .
We see traffickers giving illegal immigrants instructions to destroy their papers before they enter a country , so that host countries such as Greece have no idea where to send them ; we see immigrants claiming that they are seeking asylum , but have no papers so that we can establish the facts .
Chaos prevails , Commissioner , and order needs to be restored at some point with a strict and firm stand on the part of the European Union on this issue .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , we hear it said repeatedly that the Member States acknowledge the need to establish common immigration management policies at European level and policies aimed at the social integration of immigrants .
However , as we see every day , the reality is far removed from that .
For example , within the context of the budgetary discussions , the Fund for the integration of migrants has seen a drastic reduction in its resources .
As for the Member States , many of them continue unilaterally to impose strict legislation and regulations on movement to and on their territory , to restrict access to their labour markets , social systems and educational systems , and to make family reunification difficult .
In the same way , European policy on the fight against illegal immigration and on external border control ultimately amounts to passing the responsibility for border control on to our neighbours , in defiance of human rights .
We have seen this happen between Italy and Libya .
This tendency to externalise issues ultimately allows Europe to free itself from its responsibilities .
This is unacceptable .
The additional resources given to Frontex will never be a substitute for the necessary solidarity that must unite the Member States , enabling them to act together in accommodating people who need international protection , and in accommodating a foreign labour force that is needed to meet the democratic challenges of the future .
What provisions are you making to ensure real solidarity and real solutions to the suffering of migrants ?

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , Mr Billström , ladies and gentlemen , in recent days , when setting out the European asylum plan , you yourself , Mr Barrot , talked of steadfastness in the fight against illegal immigration and of humanity when receiving the victims of persecution .
Translated into legal terms , this means ensuring protection and the right to asylum for those fleeing starvation , war and persecution , and preventing their expulsion to countries where their lives are in danger or they risk inhumane treatment .
This is basically the opposite of what the Italian Government is doing , as demonstrated by the latest worrying refoulement of 75 immigrants from Eritrea and Somalia to Libya , which happened without at least checking whether there were any potential asylum seekers , as required by international law and as denounced yesterday by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .
An agreement between Italy and Libya cannot transform that stretch of the sea into a free zone where human rights are violated .
I therefore call on the Commission to take action as soon as possible to ensure that the rules of international law are restored and complied with .
Furthermore , I would like to know what progress has been made in the negotiations on the bilateral agreement between the EU and Libya , already underway for a number of years .
When do you expect to conclude it ?
Can the Council and the Commission confirm that this agreement would prevail over the Italy-Libya one ?
Can you explain to Parliament the key points relating to tackling illegal immigration and guaranteeing the right to asylum and the principle of non-refoulement ?
Mr President , it is a great joy for me to take the floor for the first time in this Plenary to commend Minister Tobias Billström for his deep understanding - and , as an Italian national originally , I am in a position to say that - of the grave situation facing the Mediterranean people and countries .
I would like to welcome his efforts to reach a consensus for a common European migration policy , which is very much needed .
I would also like to welcome his initiative for the asylum support officer , which is a very practical and concrete way to support Member States who feel burdened and to start cooperation among Member States .
I would like to ask Minister Billström if , other than the measures he has already talked about , he could maybe elaborate further , from a long-term point of view , about what measures we can take to support the Mediterranean countries and people , with his approach , which balances humanity , solidarity and firmness against any form of illegality .
( EL ) Mr President , without doubt , we need a common immigration policy and we need to reinforce our cooperation with third countries and make it more cohesive and effective .
Within this cooperation , as the debate has illustrated , Libya and Turkey have prime position .
Turkey 's conduct is provocative .
They are repeatedly obstructive and I want to make that known in the House and to send Mr Barrot the message that they are obstructing Frontex helicopters and aircraft when they are on European missions and on European duties .
The New Democracy MEPs have exercised parliamentary scrutiny . Mr Barrot , you will receive detailed notice of these cases of provocation and of Turkey 's provocative conduct .
As for readmission and relocation , we must reinforce Frontex still further and organise joint return flights .
Mr Barrot , Mr President , please hurry up and visit Turkey and Libya .
The problem is very acute .
Do not leave it until the end of the year .
Today or tomorrow ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , border officials of European states are forbidden to turn away potential asylum seekers who arrive by sea or to escort them away , prevent them from travelling further or return them to countries which do not form part of the EU .
This is laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights .
Today , we have once again heard numerous examples of how Frontex does not comply with these rules in practice .
For this reason , we need controls in this area .
We need these controls as Members of the European Parliament , because it is our responsibility to ensure that the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights are observed .
My question to you is as follows : To what extent are we able to monitor whether border officials in international waters are complying with these legal requirements relating to human rights ?
For years we have been aware that Frontex has violated human rights in individual cases .
However , in all its activities , it is also seriously undermining the credibility of the EU when it comes to the protection of human rights .
( SV ) Mr President , thank you Mr Billström .
I wonder if , at times , we do not become a little too fixated on the words ' illegal immigration ' .
After all , it cannot be illegal to flee for your life , since human rights and freedoms apply to everyone , wherever they live .
I would like to emphasise that it is also vital to find out what conditions are like in the countries that people are fleeing from .
Perhaps the EU could be more active and do more in those countries so that people do not need to flee only to subsequently be labelled illegal immigrants .
Perhaps , as I said before , we are too fixated on the word ' illegal ' .
As I say , it is perfectly legal to stand up for human rights and freedoms both inside and outside the EU .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning it was almost like being at the Italian Parliament with you in the chair .
In any case , I believe that immigration means security and respect for human rights .
Unfortunately though , globalisation and the enlargement of the European Union to 27 countries have happened in too much of a rush without taking the appropriate steps to safeguard security and respect for human rights .
I listened to the Commission : the strategy is sound and the future action is excellent , but we are forgetting that the issue is pressing and dramatic and that we have an emergency situation .
What was said this morning holds true in a normal situation , but today - especially in Italy - the situation is not normal .
I therefore urge the Commission to pay more attention to the tactics than to the strategy and to view the problem as entirely European . Thank you .
The president in the chair right now is certainly Italian , but the debate was far from being purely Italian .
Fortunately it was , shall we say , wide-ranging and enjoyed contributions from various quarters and different viewpoints from within the European Union .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank you all for a very interesting debate .
A lot of valuable opinions have been expressed here today .
I would like to mention Mr Busuttil 's views on greater cooperation with Libya .
I hope to be able to visit Libya along with Commissioner Barrot in order to build relations with this country , and the work with Turkey will also continue .
I also agree with Mr Aguilar , Chairman of the Committee on Civil liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , that one way to tackle illegal immigration is to open the way for legal immigration .
That would relieve the pressure on the asylum system , for example .
The criminal networks that exploit people 's desperation must be tackled .
The Swedish Presidency will organise a special conference in Brussels on this issue and the fight against human trafficking .
It is the absolute priority of the Swedish Presidency to try to reach agreement regarding the European Asylum Support Office and to improve practical cooperation .
Naturally , we are hoping for the support of the European Parliament in this matter .
I would like to say to Mrs Alfano that it is important that the legal acts adopted by the European Council are complied with and that all Member States implement them as decided .
It is also important to involve the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in our work in order to achieve the high quality that we are aiming for .
I must also say that I agree with Mr Kirkhope 's assessment of the importance of distinguishing between asylum and the immigration of workers .
This reasoning leads us , naturally , to the conclusion that the EU needs a common European asylum system and also better opportunities for the legal immigration of workers based on national needs , legal certainty and protection against wage dumping and social exploitation .
If we have this we will not need the policies of Messrs Meyer , Batten or Bontes .

We need a sensible and well thought-out migration policy to improve the demographic structure of the EU and to strengthen the economy and people 's welfare .
Mrs Corazza Bildt and Mr Svensson addressed the issue of how we should deal with the mortalities in the Mediterranean .
There is no single solution to the migration problem .
It requires a package of various initiatives within different areas .
Increased cooperation with the countries of origin and transit is particularly important .
For example , development cooperation with these countries needs to increase in order to create stability , security and sustainability .
The countries of origin and transit and the Member States must also improve their sea rescue .
The division of responsibility between the countries with regard to sea rescue efforts also needs to be clarified .
We also need to arrive at a common interpretation of the sea rescue regulations in terms of the right to international protection , on the one hand , and the international law of the sea , on the other .
Finally , on behalf of myself and the Presidency , I would like to thank you very much for the opportunity to come here to the European Parliament to present our views .
It is important to emphasise that our strategy must be based on multiple elements and initiatives .
I think that this debate has clearly shown that . Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Mr President , this debate has demonstrated , if demonstration were needed , the scale of these migration problems .
I would point out that our approach must be balanced between the rejection of illegal immigration , which , I might add , is often attributable to smugglers and traffickers ; the desire , in respect of this fight against illegal immigration , to promote a certain kind of legal migration , a decision which rests with the Member States ; and also the desire to preserve , in any case , the duty of asylum .
First of all , I should like to respond very briefly on the Frontex issue , and to point out that we are preparing a proposal amending the regulation on Frontex and its working methods .
I have certainly noted the desire for greater transparency that has been expressed .
On the other hand , we are also going to try to clarify the rules that should help to ensure that Community law and international law are applied consistently within the context of Frontex operations .
With regard to the Italian problems , I must say that , in July , we sent a letter to the Italian authorities requesting any useful information on the return of the boats intercepted in international waters .
We have just received a reply from the Italian authorities , which our services are now examining in great detail .
I would add that Community legislation demands that the Member States conduct border control operations in accordance with the principle of non-refoulement .
This principle means that a State must refrain from returning people to a territory in which they could run the risk of being subjected to torture , punishments , or inhumane or degrading treatment .
In the case of asylum seekers and refugees , return cannot take place where their lives and freedom may be threatened on the grounds of their race , religion or nationality .
In short , we are ensuring that this duty of protection is upheld .
Finally , I should like to reiterate our desire , with Mr Billström , to engage with Libya , on the one hand , and with Turkey , on the other , in a real dialogue that will allow us to get to the bottom of matters , to be able to cooperate on border control in order to prevent illegal migration , but also to see how , with the support of the High Commissioner for Refugees , we can try to initiate procedures in these Mediterranean countries that will mean that genuine asylum seekers do not have to resort to smugglers or traffickers in order to reach European shores and will see their asylum applications processed in those countries .
This , then , is a major dialogue that is going to take up this last quarter .
I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency for its willingness to cooperate so effectively .
To conclude , I should like to reiterate that we need a European strategy on migratory movements .
We feel that the Member States really must show more of this solidarity with each other .
The Member States are affected by the same problems .
It must be said that illegal immigration ultimately affects all the Member States , not just those on the outer borders .
I consider it truly important to establish this solidarity .
We are proposing that this be done on a voluntary basis , but this voluntary basis will , without doubt , have to be formalised as a genuine response to the problems .
There you have it ; I am not going to prolong these answers .
I have taken many notes during the various speeches that have been made .
I should like to finish with a somewhat urgent appeal to the European Parliament to help us , in particular , regarding this strategy , this European asylum policy .
I would point out - since the matter has been raised - that we wished to improve the application of the Dublin agreement by allowing some flexibility .
We have sought permission from the Council and Parliament to set up this support office by the end of the year , and we are also going to prepare for the harmonisation of the instruction procedures .
All of this makes for a real European asylum policy that I feel is entirely consistent with the values on which , in my view , there is consensus in Europe .
We believe in these values .
They must be translated into action .
I am grateful , in any case , to the European Parliament for helping us in this difficult task .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Illegal immigration is a veritable scourge which has afflicted mainly the southern countries of the EU , particularly Italy , Malta and Spain , for several years .
It is well known that among all the EU Member States , it is the Italian Government which receives the highest number of illegal immigrants , desperate people principally from Africa , in search of a better future .
Contrary to the claims made by exponents of the Italian left who , for the umpteenth time , have made improper use of the European Parliament to launch unjustified attacks against the Italian Government led by Mr Berlusconi , the preliminary reception centres provide medical care , board and lodging as well as legal aid for as long as is it takes to determine whether an illegal immigrant may remain in Italy or whether , in accordance with international agreements , he or she must be repatriated .
We urgently need to adopt effective Community measures on immigration and asylum .
We cannot seriously imagine that Italy is able to shoulder all the burdens associated with a phenomenon set to increase exponentially .
Some Members have voiced the idea of establishing ' illegal immigrant quotas ' .
This is a case of good intentions sadly not backed by concrete political will : only recently , the Swedish Presidency highlighted the difficulty of gaining acceptance for these quotas .
in writing . - I welcome this debate , which brings attention to the fragmented and inconsistent EU policies on border control , immigration and asylum seekers .
I am glad to hear that the Council and Commission recognise these as priority issues , but so far we have seen only half-measures to address them and no meaningful results .
It seems that there is a lack of political will on an EU level to provide adequate resources to tackle these issues in a fair manner .
For the moment , Member States with external borders are carrying most of the burden and their situation is worsening by the day due to a lack of resources and capacity .
Some good proposals have been discussed lately , such as the revision of the FRONTEX mandate , an EU-wide refugee resettlement scheme and the creation of a European asylum support office .
I urge the Commission to act quickly on their implementation .
We need more solutions based on a burden-sharing approach as it is the only adequate response .
The Commission and Council must show more resolve in providing the necessary funding for FRONTEX .
To protect our borders effectively , it should have its own equipment and assets , and operate on a year round basis .
The future extension of the Schengen area to include Romania will increase the importance of ensuring the security of Romania 's external borders and , therefore , the role of the FRONTEX agency in Romania .
The FRONTEX agency must play an ever-increasing role in the process of improving the monitoring and control of Romania 's external borders , representing more than 2 000 km of the EU 's external frontier , in other words , the Schengen area 's future external border .
During the last year , FRONTEX has signed cooperation agreements with Russia and the countries in the former Republic of Yugoslavia , as well as with Ukraine and Moldova .
This is a step forward towards managing all borders .
One welcome measure , at this point , would be for the European Commission to examine the ways in which FRONTEX could utilise this legal basis .
The possibility of signing cooperation agreements with other third countries is another matter which the Commission must explore .
Obtaining as many agreements of this kind as possible will facilitate the effective coordination of joint operations and , consequently , contribute to the respect for human rights and civil liberties and to the fight against cross-border crime .
I agree with Mr Buzek 's statement that immigration has always benefited Europe , insofar as this relates to immigration that is regulated , integrated and respects the institutions and laws of the country of destination .
When social renewal and labour turnover are needed , when cultural exchange enriches peoples , then immigration is a precious resource .
Our Judeo-Christian roots provide us with the notion of charity and hospitality towards those who are suffering .
However , when illegal immigration results in emergency situations , hardship , crime and insecurity , a tangible strategy for integration at levels that countries can sustain in demographic terms becomes necessary .
We are fooling ourselves if we believe that the problem is limited to the countries bordering the Mediterranean : the free movement of citizens in the EU can only encourage the free movement of many illegal immigrants who have turned to crime .
Every European state has a moral and direct interest since this is related to the issue of crime and the security of the half a billion citizens who have given us a mandate to protect them with urgent , tangible actions , both with regard to existing problems and those which are likely to develop rapidly .
The rights of citizens cannot be traded for the general indifference of the Member States or for Solonic warnings by the European Commission .
1 .
EC / Mongolia Agreement on certain aspects of air services (
2 .
EC-China agreement : maritime transport operations ; accession of Bulgaria and Romania (
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (
5 .
Draft amending budget No 6 / 2009 (
6 .
Draft amending budget No 7 / 2009 (
7 .
Draft amending budget No 8 / 2009 (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - As a result of judgments by the Court of Justice in the Open Skies cases , the Commission allowed for the replacement of bilateral agreements that had been entered into between some Member States and third countries with Community agreements .
The Commission has therefore negotiated an agreement that will replace the bilateral agreements between Mongolia and certain EU Member States .
This proposal is aimed at replacing certain provisions of bilateral air service agreements concluded in the past by EU Member States and the Government of Mongolia , and deals with aspects that I consider crucial , including technical issues , taxation of fuel , and pricing .
I particularly welcome the importance granted to compliance with Community competition law , since some provisions in earlier bilateral agreements were clearly anti-competitive .
I therefore endorse Mr Simpson 's report since it follows these general guidelines .
in writing . - When Romania and Bulgaria entered the EU , it was specified in their act of accession that a protocol would have to be drawn up amending the Agreement on Maritime Transport between the EU and its Member States and China .
This vote is in favour of the conclusion of this protocol .
I voted in favour of the report on mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund in favour of France because I believe this fund helps countries to respond effectively and flexibly to situations created by natural disasters , in this case the storm last January which affected south-western France , causing severe damage .
This financial instrument of solidarity is mobilised in cases where the damage caused by a disaster is so severe that national resources are insufficient to respond effectively to the crisis , the aim being to stimulate economic recovery and meet the needs of the Member State affected .


I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed German colleague and friend , Mr Böge , calling on the European Parliament to approve the proposal for a decision on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund to provide approximately EUR 109 million in commitment and payment appropriations in 2009 to help France , the victim of a disaster caused by storm Klaus which , in January 2009 , hit 31 departments in the south-west of the country , causing an estimated EUR 4 billion or so of serious damage .

I will take advantage of this speech to congratulate Mr Lamassoure , the chairman of our Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , on the speed with which he , together with the European Commission 's services , has dealt with this matter .
in writing . - In January 2009 , a storm took place in south-west France causing severe damage and enabling France to apply for funds from the European Union Solidarity Fund .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of these funds .
In my view , solidarity among Member States in the European Union and , in particular , European support for countries affected by disasters , are a clear sign that the EU is no longer just a free trade area .
By adopting special aid instruments like the European Union Solidarity Fund , the Community that we seek to make ' united in diversity ' demonstrates its ability to remain united in adversity , even in situations that place high demands on human and material resources .
That is something I sincerely welcome .
I hope the Solidarity Fund is not used very often , as it will mean that Europe is not suffering from many serious emergencies , but I also hope that its structure and availability are increasingly improved and frequently reassessed so that it can meet any real demands swiftly and without red tape .
I must mention the fires that have ravaged my country , particularly in 2003 , and I acknowledge how important and useful mechanisms like this fund have been .
I believe the particularly serious times that France went through in January this year justify mobilisation of the fund .
The overwhelmingly positive vote in the Committee on Budgets confirms that this is a good measure .
I welcome the intervention of the European Union Solidarity Fund - from which France will benefit - to help right the damage caused by the storm of January 2009 , which hit the European and French forestry sector hard .
The amounts granted should be available by October 2009 ; in other words , nine months after the storm .
This intervention is quicker than the average time taken for the Fund to intervene , which is around one year from the time of the disaster to the payment of aid .
While it is right to welcome this progress , it is worth continuing to call for the fund to be made available more quickly .
The current procedure for managing the Solidarity Fund makes this difficult .
Nonetheless , a revised proposal for a regulation was tabled by the European Commission and supported by a large majority of Parliament in May 2006 .
I regret that the Council has still not taken up this matter and I would encourage it now to consider , as soon as possible , the possibility of bringing the European Union Solidarity Fund into operation more quickly .

I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed German colleague and friend , Mr Böge , calling on the European Parliament to approve the proposal for a decision on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) to provide EUR 4.1 million in commitment and payment appropriations to help the Spanish and Portuguese textile sectors ( Catalonia and Norte-Centro regions ) .
The aim is to provide aid for the workers affected by the consequences of the significant changes in the structure of international trade and to help them re-enter the labour market .
I share my colleagues ' view about speeding up mobilisation of this fund and about assessing its complementarity with other existing instruments such as the Social Fund .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to provide additional support to Portuguese workers affected by redundancies in the textile sector and who suffer the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
The mobilisation of EUR 832 800 from the fund is aimed at reintegrating workers into the labour market by means of personal employment plans , drawn up together with the workers , which include personal skill development and strategies for entering the labour market .
EU support , particularly from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , is fundamental in helping those who have lost their jobs due to the relocations that have occurred in a globalised market .
In recent years , especially as a result of the world economic crisis , Portugal has been feeling the effects of the problem of how to reabsorb and reintegrate the unemployed into the labour market .
Countless firms have relocated to take advantage of the lower labour costs found in China and India , for example , with dire consequences for the entire national economy .
The approval of EGF money to help these workers is vital not only for improving their personal and family situations , but also for the whole national economy , because the aim of these exceptional measures in the longer term is to help these workers to find and keep a new job .
I voted in favour because I believe this support is important for Portuguese workers .
I feel , however , that Portugal 's application was not ambitious enough .
The Portuguese Government asked the EGF for EUR 833 for each worker made redundant in the textile sector , whereas Spain applied for EUR 3 006 per worker in the same sector .
I also find it somewhat surprising that , in the midst of an economic crisis with rising unemployment , in which the effects of globalisation can be felt , the EGF has received and accepted so few applications from the Member States .
In fact , the EGF has EUR 500 million available for all the Member States this year , and to date only about EUR 60 million has been utilised .
We voted in favour of this report , since the European Parliament is giving the green light for Portugal to receive EUR 832 800 to help workers made redundant in the textile industry in Portugal 's Norte and Centro regions .
This is a tiny sum , however , and it is merely a palliative measure , given the severe unemployment experienced in Portugal today , particularly in those regions .
As we all know , Portugal applied to the European Commission for this money in January this year , and it relates to 1 588 redundancies reported between February and November 2008 in 49 textile companies in the northern and central regions of the country .
Approval has also been given , however , for EUR 3 306 750 to support 1 720 workers dismissed from 30 textile companies in Cataluña , Spain .
What was really needed , though , was a policy to support production , particularly in the textile sector , to prevent further company closures and further redundancies .
While I agree with the basic principle , I believe that the seriousness of the crisis calls for provisions on an altogether different scale , not least to allow SMEs access to credit and to have credit that is conducive to employment , territorial development and the development of human capabilities .
The motions submitted by Spain and Portugal to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) once again make clear the consequences of globalisation .
In the countries of south-east Asia and , in particular , in the special economic zones , where people are exploited and employed without minimum social standards , textiles are being produced at dumping prices and then sold on the European market .
European companies , which respect the social rights of employees that have been established and acquired over decades , are left at a disadvantage because of the higher costs that they incur as a result .
We must stop this development from going any further immediately .
A ban must be imposed as soon as possible on the import of products into the EU which are not produced under specific minimum social standards .
Until this has been achieved , we can only work to reduce the damage caused by globalisation in the relevant countries .
Therefore , I have voted without reservations in favour of releasing aid from the fund .
In recognising the adverse impact of globalisation , which is all too evident in the industrial regions of Europe , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is grounded in the solidarity of the European project and brings it closer to the people by providing assistance for those workers who are worst affected by these changes .
Portugal 's Norte and Centro regions , where the economy was based on traditional sectors such as the textile industry , have been modernising since the early 1990s in an attempt to adapt to rapidly increasing competition .
The textile industry employs roughly 15 % of the labour force in these areas of the country , and almost 98 % of the unemployment in the sector across the country is concentrated in these two regions .
The worsening economic climate that has harmed these regions , along with others - particularly the outermost regions such as Madeira , where tourism is very important - has had worrying consequences in terms of social cohesion , above all , because of the rise in unemployment .
I therefore support the mobilisation of EUR 832 800 from the EGF in the wake of the 1 588 redundancies in the textile industry in Portugal 's Norte and Centro regions .
This sum must be used wisely for retraining these workers and reincorporating them quickly and sustainably into the labour market .
in writing . - This concerns the revision of Traditional Own Resources , VAT and GNI and provides for adjustments with reference to economic forecasts .
The proposal is extremely technical , so I shall simply declare that my vote has been favourable to this proposal .
in writing . - During January 2009 , the south-west of France was hit by a storm which caused severe damage and therefore allows France access to funds in the EUSF .
I am in favour of following the point of view of the rapporteur in accepting the proposed Draft amending budget No 7 / 2009 .
I consider it unacceptable to mix together in the same vote the appropriations to promote the bluetongue vaccination and the Europol and Eurojust appropriations .
I am in favour of the appropriations to eradicate bluetongue disease , but am against the Europol and Eurojust appropriations .
In January 2009 , France was hit by a severe storm .
Storm Klaus caused devastation , in particular to the country 's infrastructure .
The objective of the Solidarity Fund is to cover part of the cost of damage which has to be paid for out of the public purse .
This case meets all the requirements .
For this reason , and particularly for reasons of cross-border solidarity with the French citizens who were and , in some cases , still are affected by storm Klaus , I have voted in favour of the Draft amending budget .
I welcome the adoption today of the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Haug , to which I gave my full support .
With this vote , we are allowing the European Union Solidarity Fund to be mobilised for the second time this year .
Indeed , having come to the aid of Romania , the European Union is now showing its solidarity with the French population which , in January 2009 , felt the full force of the devastating and very violent storm Klaus , which was described as a ' major natural disaster ' and , as such , was eligible for inclusion in the main scope of this Fund .
In total , more than EUR 120 million have been made available in this way .
As you know , this aid is sorely needed for the departments in the south-west of my country , which have suffered considerable damage .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for voting in favour of this report .
It will , of course , be necessary now to ensure that the French Government involves the local authorities fairly in the process and that these authorities are not cheated as regards the way in which this money is used .
Indeed , it would be unacceptable if only the private sector were to benefit from it .
in writing . - We acknowledge the very real need for a bluetongue vaccine , particularly for beef and sheep farmers in the South and East of England who , by wholesale vaccination on their own farms , have created a firewall against bluetongue that their fellow farmers in the North and West have benefited from .
In order to vote for EU funding for this vaccine we are obliged ( in the same vote ) to vote for increased funding for Eurojust and Europol .
These are two agencies that operate outside the boundaries acceptable to British law , severely increasing the power of the state at the expense of the liberty of the individual .
It is contemptible that the EU attempts to bury such provisions in these types of reports , and then requires MEPs to vote on them as a whole and not individual parts .
Thus , we could not in good conscience support such a report , which explains our voting abstention on the subject .
in writing . - This report concerned modifications in the budget creating fresh commitments amounting to EUR 51 640 000 .
These funds will go to the fighting of bluetongue , the creation of a high flux reactor in addition to funds directed to Europol and OLAF .
My vote here is consistent with the opinion of the rapporteur .
in writing . - I acknowledge the very real need for a bluetongue vaccine , and deplore the refusal of the UK Government to assist its farming community on this important issue .
This report contained provisions related to this situation . However , this report also contained provisions totally unrelated to farming , which would have had a disastrous impact on the UK .
In particular , this report called for funding to Eurojust and Europol , agencies that operate outside of the boundaries acceptable to British law .
It is contemptible that the EU attempts to bury such provisions in these types of reports , and then requires MEPs to vote on them as a whole and not individual parts .
Thus , I could not in good conscience support such a report , which explains my vote on the subject .
in writing . - I acknowledge the very real need for a bluetongue vaccine , and note the unhelpful attitude of the UK Government on this important issue .
This report contained provisions related to this situation . However , this report also contained provisions totally unrelated to farming , which would have had a disastrous impact on the UK .
In particular , this report called for funding to Eurojust and Europol , agencies that operate outside of the boundaries acceptable to British law .
It is contemptible that the EU attempts to bury such provisions in these types of reports , and then requires MEPs to vote on them as a whole and not individual parts .
Thus , I could not in good conscience support such a report , which explains my vote on the subject .
in writing . - The Fine Gael members of the EPP Group voted in favour of Draft amending budget No 8 / 2009 .
We note that this vote includes the creation of a budget item to provide supplementary funding to the High Flux Reactor ( HFR ) at Petten , Netherlands .
Originally , the facility was set up to evaluate materials used in fusion and fission reactors .
It has become an indispensable facility for the production of radioisotopes for the medical sectors , covering some 60 % of European demand .
The report also provides support for , among other things , a strengthened budget to eradicate the bluetongue disease and assistance with European policing and anti-fraud .
On balance , given the nature of the HFR and the mix of budget items covered , the Fine Gael delegation voted to support Draft amending budget No 8 / 2009 .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the abovementioned report which includes an increase in loan commitments for programmes aiming at eradicating and tracking animal diseases as well as observing the physical well-being of animals which could present a threat to public health linked to external factors .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise my disagreement with the other issues raised in the report , which should not have been included in this report :
The creation of budget item 10 04 04 02 ( Operation of the high-flux reactor ( HFR ) ) ;
The creation of budget item 18 05 02 03 ( European Police ) ;
A reinforcement of the Community subsidy to EUROJUST ;
Modifications to the establishment plan of OLAF , without additional financial provisions .
The report on Draft amending budget No 8 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 includes some contradictory points .
It focuses on the increase in resources to eradicate bluetongue disease in sheep , the pursuit of a research programme on the use of a nuclear reactor installed in the Netherlands , the Europol and Eurojust programmes , and OLAF .
In voting against this draft report , I obviously did not wish to take a stand against provisions that are vitally important to sheep farmers .
I wished to take a stand against the ever-persistent use of nuclear power .
Above all , I wished to reaffirm my commitment to combating the construction of a fortress , security-driven and ineffective Europe to ensure the safety of our fellow citizens , via the Europol and Eurojust budgets .
There is a need to curb these policies which , in the name of the fight against insecurity and terrorism , are increasingly undermining the fundamental freedoms and rights of our fellow citizens , and to review and redefine the mandates of the various Community agencies and bodies involved in these policies .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 and resumed at 11.35 )

Inaugural address by the President of the European Parliament
Presidents of the European Parliament , Ministers , Presidents and representatives of the European institutions , ladies and gentlemen , and above all , dear friends .
I stand before you today as the thirteenth President of the directly-elected European Parliament . I am pleased to see a number of former Presidents here among us today : Mr Emilio Colombo , Mr Enrique Barón Crespo , Mr Egon Klepsch , Mr Klaus Hänsch , Mr José María Gil-Robles , Mrs Nicole Fontaine , Mr Pat Cox and Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering .
( Applause )
Your presence is a great privilege for us all .
As many of you have said , my election is also symbolic - symbolic of the dream of a united continent held by the citizens in our part of Europe , a dream that has now been fulfilled .
My dear colleagues from Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Slovenia , Romania , Bulgaria , Cyprus and Malta , I know and understand the concerns , needs and expectations of those who recently joined the Union .
I know , because in my country they are the same .
However , now we bear a shared responsibility for the future of our continent .
The old and new Europe are no more . This is our Europe !
We want it to be modern and strong . And we want our citizens to see it as such .
This calls for energy and hard work .
It is a goal that generations of Europeans have dreamed of and one worthy of the great effort needed to achieve it .
I am ready to do that work and make that effort , because those dreams were also my dreams .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , as we begin this new parliamentary term , Europe and we ourselves - its representatives - face many challenges . We must meet those challenges .
We must remember that , in striving for a better Europe , the European Parliament plays a special role , a role that is not only institutional , but also social , a deeply symbolic role .
The European Parliament is the essence of the European democratic system .
It is the basis for the permanence and stability of that system , a guardian of the ideals and values embodied not only in our decisions and their effects , but also in our debates .
However , the European Parliament has another task to fulfil - the task of creating a vision of a new Europe , a vision which extends beyond the present , beyond what Europe is towards what it should be .
In order to create this vision together , we need imagination , knowledge , wisdom and , above all , courage .
Hannah Arendt , a German philosopher of Jewish origin , said that politics is the only area of life , except for religion , where miracles happen .
Exactly 20 years ago , we in Europe witnessed such a miracle and that is why we believe in the power of courage , imagination and wisdom .
I think that all of us here today share that belief .
( Applause )
I view the challenges that face us with optimism .
For me , the important challenges before us are : firstly , the economic crisis and European solidarity ; secondly , energy and the environment ; thirdly , foreign policy ; fourthly , human rights and our system of values ; and fifthly , our Parliament and how to reform it .
The most painful and most difficult question facing us is the economic crisis .
We must overcome it and we will overcome it .
Europe took the lead in proposing solutions to the G8 and G20 summits , solutions which , while preserving our social model , can help the world put its economy to rights .
In the face of globalisation , Europe must speak with one voice .
Now more than ever , in this time of crisis , we must focus on economic growth and fighting unemployment . We must breathe fresh life into the ideas of the Lisbon Strategy and find ways of investing in new technologies , innovation , education and human resources .
The Community budget has an important role to play in ensuring that European research programmes have clear priorities and procedures .
Under the new Treaty , Parliament and the Council will enjoy equal budgetary powers .
The codecision procedure will include agriculture , fisheries , external trade , and justice and home affairs , while also giving us equal responsibilities in the area of agricultural spending .
We must guard against the temptation of protectionism and the renationalisation of common policies .
The cohesion policy must remain a priority in the next Community budget if we wish to achieve full integration of our reunited continent .
The single market is our great achievement . We must protect it and consolidate it to ensure that Europe remains competitive .
This means that European integration must be strengthened , not weakened .
Let us have the courage of our convictions .
If we are to revitalise , understand and live in the Community we are building , two things are essential : solidarity and social cohesion .
There can be no true community without concern for everyone , especially the most vulnerable - the unemployed , the least educated , those living in remote regions .
Fighting unemployment is the main aim of the Swedish Presidency .
We shall assist them vigorously in that task .
Behind the Iron Curtain , the cry in the streets was once : ' There can be no freedom without solidarity ' .
Now we can say : ' Without solidarity there can be no community . ' Nor can there be a modern , strong Europe .
( Applause )
We cannot overcome the economic crisis without making use of the vast intellectual , economic and creative potential of women .
The demographic crisis calls for a strengthening of family and fertility .
We must also ensure that women do not have to sacrifice their careers for their family and to bring up children .
( Applause )
In order to overcome the demographic crisis , while standing by our democratic principles , we must also be an open community .
Immigration has always brought Europe benefits .
We must propose solutions that will enable us to invite immigrants and create the conditions for their integration , while also expecting them to be open to such integration .
We are facing an energy crisis .
Europeans may not understand geopolitics , but they understand if their heating is turned off .
We must continue to diversify our energy resources and step up investment in renewable energy sources and fossil fuels .
Nuclear power is available to us and this is a matter for Member States to decide .
We must extend the external pipeline network so as not to be dependent on any particular country .
We need to increase the interconnections between our gas and electricity networks . We must also consider the possibility of purchasing gas jointly , so as to establish a genuine European energy market based on solidarity .
I believe that the time has come for the Union to have a real common energy policy and I will strive to achieve that .
( Applause )
Energy also prompted the founding of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 , the seed from which our Community sprang .
At that time , Robert Schuman said : ' The solidarity in production thus established will make it plain that any war ... becomes not merely unthinkable , but materially impossible ' .
This was the original idea behind that Community .
Our energy policy must take into account the environmental threats linked to climate change .
We need a green revolution and we must curb our own excesses .
The European Parliament is spearheading the debate on this subject .
Together with many of you , I worked on the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
You know where I stand and you know that I will work with you to reach a compromise in Copenhagen .
Parliament is an important actor on the international stage . This is what our citizens expect of us .
Europe must be more present not only within the borders of the European Union , but also worldwide .
Developing a coherent and effective foreign policy which includes a vision of the global order must be one of the great challenges during this Parliament .
Jean Monnet once said that everyone has ambition .
The question is whether you use that ambition to become someone , or rather to achieve something .
During this Parliament , let us have the ambition to achieve something .
So what are the most important goals ?
First : an active policy towards the European Union 's neighbours in the south and east .
With this in view , we should continue our work in the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and take action within the framework of the Euronest Assembly .
Second : we should promote democracy and models of good governance .
We should use the interparliamentary assemblies and our delegations to hold parliamentary summits in advance of the Union 's bilateral summits .
This is important , because the European Parliament will be involved in decisions on a greater number of policies .
EUROLAT is a good example of this kind of cooperation .
Third : it is time we had a genuine transatlantic parliamentary partnership , building together a new framework for the world order .
I shall strive to forge closer ties with the United States Congress at all levels .
Fourth : we must work on our strategic partnership with Russia , while not forgetting that , as in our relations with China , economic and political considerations cannot take precedence over human rights , the rule of law and democracy .
( Applause )
As President of this Parliament , I shall engage fully in dialogue with our Russian partners , notably in the context of the new Baltic strategy .
Fifth : we must strengthen our relations with India and other emerging powers such as Brazil and the Republic of South Africa .
India must be both an economic and a political partner .
Sixth : the Middle East remains the key to global stability .
Europe must play an active role in this region .
Seventh : enlargement has been one of our most successful political strategies .
Did any of our European forebears ever enjoy such a long period of peace and prosperity as we now have ?
At present , Croatia , and perhaps Iceland , appear to be the countries closest to accession .
Eighth : the European Union is the world 's biggest aid donor .
We must examine where we stand with current and potential beneficiaries and not forget our obligations towards them under the Millennium Development Goals .
We may close our doors to some who would come here , but let us not close our hearts and let us do what we can to bring life in their home countries closer to the standards we enjoy in Europe .
Ninth : we must strengthen the Union 's missions under the European security and defence policy .
There have been 22 such missions over the past six years and they should enjoy a clear mandate and the resources needed to do their job .
The European Parliament wants to ensure closer control and monitoring of these missions .
The wider budgetary powers Parliament will enjoy under the Treaty of Lisbon may improve our flexibility when it comes to allocating resources to the essential missions we support .
The implementation of the new Treaty must be our priority for the immediate future .
I am committed to preparing Parliament to function in accordance with the new provisions as soon as the Treaty comes into force .
Yet , regardless of the Treaty , we feel the need for change .
We feel the need for a more dynamic parliamentary dimension within our institution .
As President of Parliament , I want to draw on the vital work on parliamentary reform begun in recent years by my predecessors . But we must go further down that road .
I shall do all I can to make more room for creative political debate within our Parliament .
( Applause )
I firmly support making greater use of the ' catch-the-eye ' system for speakers , as a way of enlivening our plenary debates , and use will be made of this system after my speech .
This is particularly important in guaranteeing minority rights .
The most important missing link in the reform process is the improvement of relations with the other European Union institutions - the Commission and Council .
A significant part of my term of office will be devoted to this .
As President , I shall seek to develop a new model of partnership with the Commission so as to strengthen parliamentary scrutiny of the executive and make the executive branch more accountable to this House , as the Treaty of Lisbon directs .
In July , I invited the Commission President to take part in a question time to be held each month in Parliament , during which Members would be able to ask questions from the floor .
I propose that we introduce such a practice as soon as possible .
( Applause )
Two weeks ago , President Barroso forwarded to us his ' political guidelines ' for a second term .
This is a significant innovation , since it marks an acceptance of the fact that it is the European Parliament which elects the Commission President .
I take great satisfaction in this .
I have also encouraged the parliamentary committees to examine legislation still in the pipeline and to determine whether the new Commission intends to abandon , amend or maintain its legislative proposals .
I am also encouraging the committees to hold serious discussions on future political strategy so as to ensure that the hearings of Commissioners-designate are based on a detailed legislative programme and not just on an assessment of their CVs and professional experience .
We must forge closer relations with the Council of Ministers .
If these relations are to be credible , they must reflect the fact that in today 's European Union , Parliament is a true co-legislator .
We must also work together on the institutional questions arising from the Treaty of Lisbon .
These concern the extension of the codecision procedure , the new comitology system , the appointment of the new High Representative and Commission Vice-President , democratic control over the new external action service and the question of how to deal with the ' dual Council Presidency ' during plenary sittings .
Our relations with the 27 national parliaments of the European Union must be developed in the same spirit .
In recent years , cooperation has been on the increase and the Treaty of Lisbon will further strengthen these contacts and enhance their role in making citizen-friendly laws .
A fine example of this cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments is the Stockholm Programme , with its focus on justice and public security .
I want to push ahead with reforms in the use of Parliament 's human resources and expenditure , so that they are focused directly on our programmes .
The richness and strength of our institution also derive from our differences - different nationalities , different ways of thinking and different languages .
That is why Members must be able to speak in their mother tongue , if they so wish , so that they can properly represent their voters .
We must always remember that the Union is not only about the challenges of the future and a vision of ever-increasing prosperity and stability .
It is , above all , about human rights .
I have noted with concern the tensions in relations between Slovakia and Hungary over national minorities .
This remains a major problem , and I should like to offer my assistance in resolving this dispute in accordance with the values in which we firmly believe and which reflect the convictions of our Parliament .
( Loud applause )
A good example of how we uphold these values is the Sakharov Prize awarded to human rights defenders , who now form the basis of a ' Sakharov network ' , something which I intend to develop further .
I should also like to press ahead with the project for a House of European History begun by my predecessor , who is present today , and who is still a Member of the European Parliament , which is something we are very pleased about .
I should also like us to remember once again here in this House that the Union is a community of ideals and values .
This is the foundation on which it was built .
I am determined to take measures to ensure that all committees and delegations have access to satellite television and the Internet .
We need to look at the way in which European elections are organised .
For example , we should insist on the use of new technologies during elections in order to boost turnout .
It is also time to open a debate on European political parties .
Citizens must know what they are voting for - not only in their own countries , but also at European level .
I attach great importance to cooperation with the Conference of Presidents .
Together , we will take responsibility for the work of this House , along with the 14 Vice-presidents , whom I thank for their expressions of support .
I also appreciate the spirit of partnership shown by the chairmen of our parliamentary committees .
I should like the chairmen of the standing interparliamentary delegations to be able to exert a significant influence over the Union 's foreign policy .
Matters relating to Parliament 's budget will be addressed with the help of the Quaestors .
Most of all , however , my dear colleagues , I am counting on your cooperation .
As President of the European Parliament , I know that I am responsible for providing you with good working conditions , but I would strongly urge you all to share this burden .
For most of us , the Treaty of Lisbon represents a long-awaited institutional solution .
It will improve the Union 's ability to resolve existing problems and will bring the European institutions closer to our citizens .
The late Bronisław Geremek , in whose honour we have named the main courtyard of the Strasbourg Parliament , was fond of saying that European integration was like riding a bicycle : you have to keep pedalling to maintain your balance and to keep going in the right direction .
This illustrates precisely why ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is so necessary for us .
( Applause )
Less than a week ago , I was present in the Polish Parliament to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the establishment of the first non-communist government in our part of Europe , under the leadership of Tadeusz Mazowiecki .
It was a particularly moving anniversary , because it marked the beginning of the rapid collapse of the totalitarian system in other Central European countries .
It was this first breach which made it possible to bring down the wall dividing Europe .
I am speaking to you here today in Strasbourg , the capital of a region whose fate is reminiscent of that of my own region , Silesia , a border region whose inhabitants have frequently had to change their nationality without changing where they lived .
I solemnly pledge that , as President of Parliament over these coming years , I will serve as your ambassador , bringing the message of a reunited continent to the citizens of Europe and the world .
Let us work together to find real and practical solutions to the great challenges now facing Europe and the world .
Let us work to make our dreams come true .
Let us set about this task with enthusiasm , wisdom and courage .
Because this is our Europe . A modern Europe .
A strong Europe .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation )

Mr President , Presidents of the European institutions , Mr Buzek , my group fully subscribes to your programme for Parliament and the running of Parliament over the next five years .
If the European Parliament has a role to play , a mission to accomplish , over the next five years , it is indeed to reconcile the citizens with Europe .
And what better advantage in this task than to have as President a man who symbolises reunified Europe , a man such as yourself , Mr Buzek .
That is why I would like to say how proud I am that it was my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , that persuaded a very large majority of this Parliament to put their trust in you .
This Europe , reunified today , is not about intolerance or exclusion , but about openness and respect for the opinions and the origins of others .
I am convinced that this concept of living together as Europeans brings us all together in this House .
What I would like is for the European Parliament , under your leadership , to have our fellow citizens share these values .
I also support the determination that you have expressed , Mr President , to rise to this challenge , and I hope that we will make a particular effort in favour of young people .
My group has no hesitation in helping you .
Mr President , as you said , this Parliament has acquired powers and increased authority over the last few years .
The prospect of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon will increase this trend spectacularly .
This is one of the reasons why the PPE Group is calling for its application as soon as possible .
We must prepare ourselves for it technically , of course , so that we can work effectively with the Council and in close partnership with the Commission , but we must also and , above all , prepare ourselves for it politically .
Our primary objective is clear : to ensure that Parliament is more in tune with the 500 million citizens that it represents .
To do so , it must continue , in particular , to modernise its working methods , for example in the organisation of our debates - you alluded to this .
In this regard , I support your proposal to have a lively topical debate with the President of the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , the workings of the European Union are difficult to explain to Europeans .
Far from the traditional ' opposition / majority ' model to which we are accustomed in our Member States , we work here , I would stress , in search of a consensus , beyond the specific convictions of our political families .
That , in my view , is a modern take on political action .
I am convinced that our fellow citizens can accept this approach , but on one condition : that we take the trouble to explain to them better the issues at stake in Europe .
That is the task that I encourage you , Mr President , to undertake and for which you will receive the full support of my group .

Mr President , I endorse the comments made by Mr Daul .
Mr Buzek , our group can also endorse many , if not all , of the points in the programme which you have presented .
This applies to the content of your presentation , to the procedural updates that you have proposed and to the revitalisation of the debate in this House .
The broad majority of the Members of this House will agree with the content of the speech that you have given .
I do not fully share Mr Daul 's opinion that you have laid down your programme for the next five years .
Let us work on the basis of the next two-and-a-half years to start with , because that is a long time .
However , I believe , Mr Buzek , that you are taking over your office at a difficult time for the European Union .
You are also taking over your office at a difficult time for the European Parliament .
For the first time in a long time , the pro-European consensus is no longer undisputed in this House .
On the contrary , this House is , for the first time , a platform - this began in the last parliamentary term and has been reinforced by the most recent European elections - in which forces are at work and have gained attention and influence whose aim is exactly the opposite of what you have said in your speech .
The number of Members of this assembly who want to bring an end to European integration , the number of Members who want to reverse it and the number of Members who want renationalisation has risen dramatically .
In the previous parliamentary term , we experienced the process of attempting to have the Charter of Fundamental Rights signed by the three presidents of the institutions .
I would not have believed images and scenes of this kind to be possible in a multinational , democratic parliament , but we all bore witness to what happened .
The number of Members who hold opinions of this kind has increased .
This is why I would say that you are right .
The struggle to continue with and to deepen the integration process , the struggle for the Treaty of Lisbon , which is a fundamental requirement for the extension of the EU , and also the struggle to extend the EU on the basis of deeper integration , represent the right approach .
I am pleased that the President of this House - especially a President from a country which joined the EU in the most recent phase of enlargement , a President who , as Prime Minister of his country , began the accession negotiations - says as the central message of his period of office : we want more Europe .
We want an integrated Europe , we want a deeper Europe and we want an enlarged Europe as part of the deepening process , in order to achieve one thing , and this was the central sentence in your speech : the solidarity which has led to freedom .
This is the solidarity which we now need internally , so that this freedom can be achieved together with social justice .
For this reason , the socialists and social democrats fully agree with your speech , Mr Buzek .
It forms the ideological and spiritual foundation of a struggle which we must take part in during this parliamentary term .
When I was a newly elected Member , I had the privilege of hearing the speech made here by the French President François Mitterand in his role as President-in-Office of the Council .
I have never forgotten one sentence in that speech : ' In the end , nationalism always means war . '
This means that in the end , the opposite of nationalism , overcoming nationalism , the European ideal , means peace .
That is what we will be fighting to achieve together with you , Mr Buzek .
( Applause )
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank you on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe for your inaugural speech .
Our group can fully identify with the programme you announced .
As I told you at the time , Mr President , I welcome your election as President of Parliament , not only because you symbolise the enlargement of the European Union but also - and I should like to emphasise this - on account of your involvement with Solidarność .
After all , Solidarność can look back on three great achievements .
It gave people in Poland a vote , it introduced democracy to the entire former Eastern Bloc , and it even changed the face of Europe fundamentally , unifying a divided Europe .
As was clear from your speech , Mr President , this gives you the perfect experience to realise three ambitions in the European Parliament , too , over the next few years . These ambitions are to give the European people more say , to make the European Union more democratic and also , in this way , to advance European integration .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think it would be good to underline further to President Buzek 's inaugural speech that , according to the Eurobarometer , the European Parliament is the European Union institution in which citizens have the most confidence .
This represents a difficult task for us all , as it means that we cannot betray this confidence and that we must give the people 's voice more influence in European decision making .
At the same time - based on your speech , Mr President - I think that we face a dual challenge .
Firstly , we must apply the Treaty of Lisbon and implement it as soon as possible .
In this regard - as you have proposed - we must enter into negotiations with the Council Presidency as soon as possible in order to agree a number of amendments .
Secondly , Mr President - and this is the other aspect of the challenge - I think that Parliament must avail itself of all the possible levers at its command to further expand its power .
We have done this in the procedure for the appointment of the Commission President , but we must continue to do it on every possible point in other dossiers , too .
In my view , the most important point in this connection is the need to agree a new budget for Europe and the European Union in the next few years .
I consider this a splendid opportunity for the European Parliament to urge - to require - that , in future , this budget be based on the European Union 's own resources , as this Parliament will not be a real parliament until it also has complete control over its own resources , which it will be able to collect itself in future .
( Applause )
Herein lies an important task for you , Mr President : to join the whole of Parliament in this fight .
In this , you will be able to count on the full support of our group , as we all know , particularly in these times of economic and financial crisis , that it is not nationalism or protectionism that will relieve our difficulties or secure our future ; only continuing European integration represents a solution for the peoples of Europe , for the citizens of Europe .
In any case , I wish you every success , Mr President .
( Applause )
Mr President , I do not need to go over much of what the previous speaker has said .
It was clear to my group that we would support your candidacy , because we felt that it was high time that a major figure from the European Parliament , who also comes from one of the new Member States , took on the role of the head of this House .
In future , we would like to see the President of this House being elected on the basis of considerations such as your special skills and abilities , which have often been acknowledged .
We would also like to see the power of national delegations within the large groups perhaps being applied to a slightly lesser extent than the approach which figures like you adopt .
We have great expectations of you when it comes to overcoming the major breaches which remain between East and West and which I described some weeks ago .
Following the summer holidays and my observations of political developments , I would simply like to say that you are likely to have a very difficult task .
My impression is that the major global financial crisis and the subsequent economic crisis have not made the job of bringing East and West closer together within the EU any easier .
On the contrary , the challenges have become greater because the imbalances represent a major problem .
I would also like to take a slightly more critical approach and remind Parliament that today is the anniversary of the collapse of Lehman Brothers .
We are sending a large delegation to the G20 summit where the subject of how the financial crisis can be overcome will be discussed .
However , this Parliament has not managed to discuss any resolutions in this area and has not given our negotiators a uniform basis on which to work .
I believe that this is an expression of weakness rather than strength .
I suspect that what lies behind this is that we still cannot agree on the analysis of how we actually got into this mess .
I believe that this major crisis is not solely the responsibility of a few crazy bankers , but that in fact , it is due to the neo-liberal belief in the benefits of unregulated financial markets , which not only was and is prevalent in the US , but also remains widespread in Europe today .
In the policies of the European Union we are far from reaching a consensus on the evaluation of this analysis and , therefore , we are also unable to agree on the ways out of the crisis .
I also believe , Mr President , that everything which you said about the second major challenge facing us in the context of an international round of negotiations , that is , the challenge of the climate crisis , was correct .
I hope that we Europeans can take a stronger position in Copenhagen than is currently the case .
I have the impression that the Europeans are still a long way from playing an appropriate leading role in the area of climate policy .
There are many reasons for this , but one reason keeps coming to my mind .
We continue to put far too little trust in concepts such as the Green New Deal put forward by Ban Ki-moon or Achim Steiner on behalf of the UN .
We are also unable to agree that we should begin transforming our old industrial society , that we should think more than one day ahead and that climate-friendly technologies , efficiency technologies and many other measures represent the future , not only of Europe but also of the world .
I can only say , Mr President , that we face major challenges .
If you intend to put forward modern , sustainable ideas , our group will definitely be behind you .
It is regrettable that we will not see a real change in the staffing of the European Commission because it is becoming apparent that the main player behind yesterday 's concepts , Mr Barroso , will continue to head the Commission during the next parliamentary term .
Mr President , we wish you luck !
On behalf of my group , I look forward to some exciting and , hopefully , productive debates .
( Applause )
Mr President , it was a real pleasure today to listen to your speech and your programme for the next two and a half years of our work .
Thank you very much for your speech .
It testifies to your respect for us , Members of the European Parliament , a respect which does not depend on which political group or country we come from , or on what views we represent .
It was a stimulating speech , because I think that our Parliament is truly in need of the kind of leadership which you have presented in your vision today .
We do not agree about everything , and it is not a secret that there are differences of opinion between us , but I would like to begin with this , responding in some sense to the voices which I have also heard in this House today .
It is not a bad thing that Parliament is a place of debate , and that Parliament is a meeting place for people who may have different views on different subjects , including different views on the future of Europe .
The problem is that we should endeavour , in good faith , to confront our views with those of others - then there will always be room for compromise .
If we assume - and I do assume - that everyone in this House has good intentions and wants the best for our continent , then we will be able to overcome differences , and we will always be open to discussion .
What is needed is that good will .
Of course , however , Mr President , our group , the European Conservatives and Reformists , a group which is proud that it brings to Parliament a certain new dimension to political thinking about Europe , is going to want to be a strong voice for those citizens who elected us .
For while we do not negate the democratic mandate of any Member who sits in this House , indeed , we deeply respect that mandate , it is our voters whom we represent .
Our voters , when they chose parties which are part of the ECR Group , knew what they were voting for .
Mr President , your election was an historic moment .
I will permit myself to remind our fellow Members and say that today in this House , there is a group of young Poles , invited by Members of different political groups .
These Poles were born on 4 June , on the day of the first partially free elections held in our country .
A meeting with people born on 4 June may not allow us to feel young any more , when we see that they are now adult people .
However , I want to say that when I talked with them today , and I realised that they got on the bus in Rzeszów , a city in the south-east of Poland , and without having to stop at any borders , they came here to Strasbourg , to their Parliament , I thought that none of us who remember 4 June could imagine such felicitous events - today , young Poles , young Czechs , Estonians and Lithuanians come here to their Parliament .
Mr President , I am certain that you will guard this Parliament as a democratic institution , as a place of genuine debate of people who sincerely want to help the citizens of the European Union .
And today , when we recall that you too , Mr President , come from my country , a country which has suffered so much at the hands of totalitarianism , we know one thing - and this truly is the best thing about the EU - the European Union has ensured the nations of Europe 60 years without war .
This is a great achievement of this organisation , an organisation which we , the ECR Group , do want to reform , as our name indicates , but it is an organisation which we believe in .
We believe in a better Europe , and it is such a Europe , a better Europe , which is closer to its citizens , that we will serve during this parliamentary term .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would once again like to congratulate you on your election .
Transparency , democracy and pluralism are honourable words for the EU and for Parliament , but they must never be turned into mere symbolic policies .
Unfortunately , these terms sometimes become nothing more than fine words .
In reality , agreements are made behind closed doors .
We therefore need a different method of working in Parliament , one where our work and our decisions are brought into the open in a genuine spirit of true democracy .
We need an open way of working that applies to all political groups and all Members of the House .
If some MEPs do not even feel involved in and aware of the work , how can we expect our citizens to feel involved and have confidence in our work and to vote in elections ?
Let us have new technology by all means - we need it to provide information - but we must not forget the most important ingredients for involvement .
These are democracy and transparency .
We are experiencing a financial crisis and an environmental and climate crisis .
I should also mention that we have trade agreements which sometimes exacerbate the problems with regard to food supply and poverty in the world .
The view of the left is that the solution to the crises is not to continue with the same policy that has sometimes been a contributory factor in creating them .
The people of Europe need a different policy .
They deserve a different policy - a policy that puts the needs of the people first and not , as is currently the case , the needs of the market .
One way to start to move the policy in the right direction is to stop the privatisation and deregulation of public services .
The market has not , in fact , succeeded when it comes to satisfying people 's need for work and social rights , for example .
We have to suffer the consequences of this .
We talk about democracy .
Democracy also requires that our civil rights and freedoms never be violated .
We currently have many proposals for the additional monitoring of our citizens .
Freedom of expression must also apply on the Internet .
Thus , the EU and its citizens need a different policy for a fairer society with greater solidarity .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left are prepared , and gladly accept our responsibility , to play our part in building a fairer EU with greater solidarity and a fairer and better world .
Mr President , I again extend my congratulations to you on your appointment .
I welcomed your address , your programme , and wish to concentrate on an aspect which , in my opinion , is the most important or should be the most important for us MEPs , namely our legislative work .
Dialogue with the major powers is important , missions are important , but the main task of a parliament - at least in my opinion - is to make laws , to establish rules , because , above all , we were elected to carry out this task , this mandate .
One of the problems is that we do not have the right of legislative initiative , since the founding fathers and their successors denied it to us .
We are continually voting for resolutions and signing written statements which are not followed up as the Commission does not take them into account .
Mr Barroso said that this is only right as otherwise , if the Commission were to accept legislative proposals from Parliament through written declarations and resolutions , it would violate the treaties , which do not permit this .
Allow me to say that I find this interpretation specious : the treaties do not provide for it explicitly , but neither do they prohibit it .
I must point out that when Parliament asks for something , when Parliament asks for a legislative initiative , it does so on behalf of millions of European citizens , the majority of the millions of European citizens , since both written declarations and resolutions need majority support in order to be adopted .
I am therefore sure that you , Mr President , will work hard to make the Commission accept that the proposals we MEPs put forward can become EU legislation , in accordance with the will of the people , our electors .
It is an onerous task , but I am certain that you will make every effort to accomplish it .
( FR ) Mr President , as a non-attached Member I speak , of course , on my own behalf , but also on behalf of some of my colleagues , not my Dutch colleagues from the PVV , but my colleagues from the Front National , from the Bulgarian Ataka party , from the Austrian FPÖ party , from the British National Party , from the Hungarian Jobbik party and from the Flemish Vlaams Belang party .
I should like to say , Mr President , that I do not for one second doubt the sincerity of the proposals you have made .
However , you will permit me to say that I have doubts about their realism .
You began by raising the problem of the economic crisis .
It is a fact that millions of Europeans are seeing their assets and jobs threatened by the perverse effects of globalisation , which abandons them , for the benefit of the few , to the unfair competition of countries whose workers are cynically exploited , and to the rapacity of stateless financial interests .
The Union , sadly , has not protected Europeans from this situation .
On the contrary , it has plunged them into it .
Secondly , from my modest position , but expressing the political forces that Mr Schulz was quite willing to admit are a threat to the traditional organisations - and I thank him for it - I should like to call on our Parliament , and yourself , Mr President , to be more modest and to set certain voluntary limits to our powers .
I am thoroughly convinced , as a European and as a Christian , that a number of the values that we convey are universal values .
I am even happier to insist that it is not our job to give the world principles and laws , all the more so because organisations , such as the United Nations , exist for that very purpose , and all the more so because there is a great deal to do in Europe itself , where , against the right to life , we are providing for the elimination of our own children , and where , against freedom of expression , we are pushing through a moral , media , political and judicial dictatorship of what is known as ' political correctness ' .
Political groups such as ours that express the suffering and the hopes of millions of Europeans are discriminated against , pursued and sometimes even dissolved , as the Vlaams Blok party was in Belgium in an absolute scandal that provoked not a single protest in this House .
Had that have happened in Africa or in Latin America , we undoubtedly would have heard a different version of events .
We non-attached Members do not have the same rights as the others - that much is clear - and , as we told you yesterday , we still do not have any representatives at the Conference of Presidents .
Finally , due to the voting methods , millions of Europeans are denied the possibility of being represented in their own countries ' legislative bodies , which are supposed to represent the electorate in all its diversity .
To conclude , I should like to express the wish that we remember , at all times in our work , that Europe is , in the history of mankind , the region that invented the freedom of nations , which cannot be found elsewhere ; the equal dignity of those nations ; and respect for their jurisdiction and for the principle of non-interference , which means that everyone is in charge of their own affairs and on their own territory .
That is one of the great contributions of European civilisation to man 's heritage .
Mr President , this is my first opportunity in my capacity as a member of the Council Presidency to stand before this Chamber and , on behalf of the Swedish Presidency and the whole of the Council and also myself personally , I would like to congratulate you most sincerely Mr President .
Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , it is wonderful to see you in this position .
It is a personal victory for you , I know .
It is a victory for the European Parliament and it is also a victory for all of us who fervently support European cooperation and everything it stands for .
I would also like to thank you for the visionary speech and the ambitious plans you have for this Parliament .
I am convinced that the European Parliament rests safe in your hands .
During your leadership , you will hopefully bring about concrete decisions , but indeed also the miracle you referred to .
We in the Council look forward to working with you and the European Parliament .
Many Members have spoken of the numerous challenges we are facing : the climate question , the economic crisis , jobs , Europe 's role in the world and so on .
You have an important legislative role here , in representing citizens , but also in the debate that is held here .
It is extremely important for the European Parliament to always stand up for European values .
If the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force - and that is something that I certainly hope will happen - the European Parliament 's role will be extended and you will have a greater influence on the European agenda .
I know that you will take the defence of the European Parliament and the institution 's role seriously , but you will also hopefully be a bridge to other institutions as well as a serious partner for dialogue .
The Presidency is very much looking forward to being your partner for dialogue over the next six years and we wish you the best of luck in your work .
I would like to say to all new Members of the European Parliament that the Minister is a former Member of this House , and so is one of us .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission and on my own behalf , I want sincerely to congratulate you once again and wish you all the best in your term of office .
Your election symbolises not only the reunification of Europe , but also a Europe that is very much attached to the central values of freedom and solidarity .
Personally and institutionally I want to commit to close cooperation with you and with the European Parliament .
Parliament and the Commission are the two Community institutions par excellence at the heart of Community matters .
You and all the Members of this Parliament have been directly elected by our citizens and the Commission has the right and the duty to put European interests above any particular interest .
I believe that we have a special responsibility for the European project in full respect of the Treaties .
That is why I want to reiterate my willingness to work together to advance European parliamentary democracy .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr Buzek , I very much enjoyed your speech and especially the part about the institutional , but also social role played by Parliament , which you described as the very essence of the European democratic system .
Today we are celebrating the Union of 27 which has come together once more , meeting here following the divisions caused by the ideologies of terror which built walls on our continent , walls which did not endure and which were blown down by the winds of democracy and freedom .
This year we are celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of the first elections to Parliament by direct universal suffrage , together with the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall .
I am pleased to recall , Mr Buzek , that when , for the first time , 30 years ago , my parents voted to elect the first MEPs from Italy , there was no right to vote in your country .
In 1979 , just one year after Karol Wojtyla was elected Supreme Pontiff of the Catholic Church , while in Italy and in other countries the first European Parliament elections were being held , you were active in the then semi-clandestine trade union Solidarność , which fought to bring democracy and freedom to your country .
To assert those same rights - democracy and freedom - we went to the polls , while every day you were risking your life and repression .

For that reason , President Buzek , I am honoured to have contributed with my small and possibly non-decisive vote to your election , and I am pleased that today in Parliament , various histories are coming together and being ennobled , inspired by the same values and ideals : histories which make the great history of this young Europe strong .
( PL ) Mr President , I congratulate you on your election , and on a good speech .
I would have liked you to devote a little more attention in your speech to the countries of Eastern Europe .
In the near future , a very difficult election will be held in Ukraine .
The European Parliament has a particular responsibility to show concern for democratic procedures in that country .
It was in the European Parliament , in the foremost institution of the European Union , that support began for the great changes which took place five years ago .
I would ask that this matter , connected with the presidential election in Ukraine , be treated in a special and unconventional way , with the involvement of those institutions and delegations which have been designated for this , so that the European Parliament will be known as a serious institution which is concerned about democratic procedures in Ukraine .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate you and I would like to say one thing to you in particular .
A Parliament is measured by the way in which it uses and puts into practice its rights and by the fact that it does not withdraw from major political debate .
We are all responsible for working together with you to ensure that this Parliament is not subjected to pressure from Commission proposals which are half-baked or which represent the unilateral interests of specific lobbyists .
We are responsible for speaking up clearly at this point and we must do so .
We must think about how the Treaty of Lisbon will change our situation .
I hope that we will be able to do all of this .
We must demonstrate clearly - and , in my opinion , this also concerns the question of the election of the Commission President - that we are making use of our rights and we must send a clear signal to the Commission .
This means that there must now be no direct election of Mr Barroso .
( HU ) President Buzek , allow me to address you directly , even though you are sitting in your member 's seat .
Your election in this Parliament has been viewed as a sign that there is no longer an Eastern bloc , but a united Europe .
You mentioned this in your address when you talked about there being no more old and new Europe , just our Europe .
Unfortunately , many people do not feel this way .
You also referred in your address to the great fear that pervaded the countries which joined only in 2004 .
Today , however , you are aware of the sense of disappointment felt in these countries .
The reason for this is that there is no equality of rights .
Equal rights are the key issue .
Mr Lindblad , the state secretary , mentioned that equality of rights was the budget 's fundamental principle .
If this really is the case , why is there no equality of rights with regard to agricultural subsidies ?
Hungary proved that it is able to receive them with its institutional system , yet it is still discriminated against .
Mr President , you have encouraged everyone to use their mother tongue .
I am pleased that in this Parliament , as a Hungarian , I can enjoy equal rights , but in Slovakia I would be punished for using my mother tongue .
Mr President , you have suggested acting as a mediator .
We sincerely thank you for this offer .
However , a real result will only be achieved by this action if the Hungarian minority can freely use their mother tongue in the land of their birth .
I wish you every success with this too .
( CS ) Mr President , I am truly delighted that you , a citizen of high moral standing and a Silesian to boot , are taking the baton from the hand of Hans-Gert Pöttering and that , like him , you are emphasising the potential of a united European Union in terms of values such as human rights and solidarity between nations .
This election period in the shadow of the economic crisis will put that solidarity to the test .
I do not fear for it as far as the voting here is concerned , but I know that individual citizens and regional politicians are ever more frequently scrutinising our voting under the slogan of ' charity begins at home ' .
I would therefore like to call on you , Mr President , when reporting on our work here in the European parliament , to devote greater attention than has previously been the case to improvements in the position of Europeans in global terms .


Mr President , I have always admired Mr Barroso as our Commission President , who is an Atlanticist free-marketeer , which my party strongly supports and holds dear .
I am also a strong friend of Portugal , so I am very happy to support José Manuel .
However , I am concerned at what I read yesterday in the Daily Telegraph that he has agreed with the ALDE Group to create a powerful new and intrusive Human Rights Commissioner in his Commission , straddling external and internal human rights issues .
This seems to fly in the face of the Centre Right-led decision of this Parliament to reject a new combined Human Rights Committee and duplicates the work of the Council of Europe and its own Human Rights Commissioner .
Please can President Barroso clarify his policies and intentions here ?
I think that this question should have been asked at a different time today , namely when we discuss Mr Barroso 's statement , and not at this time .
( HU ) President Buzek , you spoke about the Slovak-Hungarian dispute .
It is not a Slovak-Hungarian dispute .
It is , in fact , a Slovak-European Union dispute as it involves a country flouting fundamental European values .
Your task is to help reach agreement not between Slovakia and Hungary , but between the European Union Parliament and Slovakia , as this country has infringed the documents and agreements which it has signed and ratified .
Secondly , there is the issue of Silesia .
I am pleased that you mentioned it .
There are so many territories like this in the European Union which belonged to several different countries during the last century .
We Hungarians were split among 10 countries after the First World War , of which seven are now EU Member States .
We are very grateful that we can now be together without resorting to weapons and changing borders .
During the last century , five official languages were learnt in the Lower Carpathians region .
Why am I mentioning this ?
It is because in my own country too , where I live in the Székely Land , in Transylvania , the current Romanian Government is still ashamed of our mother tongue and symbols .
However , the problem with Europe 's human rights values is not limited just to the Eastern bloc ; it affects the West too .
This is why we are urging that Europe have not only a commissioner for minorities , but also a minority framework law which is binding on every European country .
Mr President , thank you for your speech .
I believe , however , that our paths diverge considerably .
I stand here before you as one who believes in a Europe of cooperating nations , not a Europe tied to the federalist approach of the Lisbon Treaty .
On 2 October , the Irish electorate will be asked - for a second time - to vote for the Lisbon Treaty , a treaty cobbled together to circumvent the people 's rejection of a European Constitution .
I commend the electorate of the Irish Republic for exercising good sense in the first referendum , sense that I believe that they will show once again in the second one .
I urge them to remain firm in their resolve to reject the Treaty .
The post-dated promises and threats have done nothing to change the fundamentals of the Treaty .
It remains the wrong path for Europe and Europe 's nations .
However , I believe that that choice should also be given to my people , the British people .
They were promised a referendum by the Labour Government , and the Labour Government should fulfil that promise .
If not , their possible successors in the Conservatives should do the same .
( HU ) Mr President , as a Hungarian and a friend of Poland , as well as an East European and a citizen of a new Member State , I derive great pleasure and satisfaction from your work as president because it can contribute to the full emancipation of the 12 new Member States .
Until now , we have only been equal , but we would like to be more equal .
You have made an historic pledge , Mr President , because you are prepared to tackle such a delicate issue as Silesia , which has not been tackled before .
In other words , you are assuming a mediating role in dealing with national minority matters .
Minorities account for 15 % of Europe 's population , 6.5 % of which are migrant or immigrant minorities , primarily in Western Europe , and 8.5 % historical minorities .
The fact that you are willing to mediate in the Hungarian-Slovak conflict and between the Slovak majority and the Hungarian ethnic community in Slovakia is an historic act .
I hope that the Commission will also follow this example .
We cannot sweep minority issues in Europe under the carpet .
Thank you for your attention and I wish you every success .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to express , Mr Buzek , how proud I am to be part of an institution as important as the European Parliament , which you chair .
The sacrifices which you made in your country 20 years ago and which today allow those 12 countries which were mentioned earlier to be represented in this Chamber make Europe stronger .
I would , however , like to express my concern over the programme you set out during your address which should , and I hope it will , strengthen Parliament .
I hope that what you announced will come to fruition .
I hope that the next President of the European Commission , who I am sure will be Mr Barroso , will listen to you on account of the forceful words that you used , to ensure that Parliament meets the needs of over 550 million European citizens who voted for us , who chose us , and who want and demand that Parliament and each and every one of us provide the answers which , perhaps , Europe has certainly tried to give , but without fully succeeding .
With regard to this aspect of your work I am hopeful , and I am convinced that through you we will manage to attain that certainty that you yourself referred to .
( CS ) It was John Stuart Mill who said that parliament should be a mirror of national life .
This is no mean feat and , in my opinion , it is important for our forthcoming term in office , especially as Europe is too important an issue to be entrusted solely to the decision making of the so-called political elites .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate you warmly on your speech .
The process of bringing an end to the division of Europe was the result , on the one hand , of the desire for freedom among Central and Eastern European countries and , on the other , of course , of the attractiveness of Europe as an economic model .
I believe that we have too little confidence , too little confidence in the future .
If we cannot achieve this in Europe , then who can ?
We should explain with greater conviction that we can work on resolving our problems with confidence .
We have a great deal of potential and there are still opportunities for growth throughout the world .
While there are still people in the world who need goods and services , there will still be opportunities for growth .
We can make sure that in Europe , we have a slice of this cake and everyone involved will benefit .
I would like to encourage all of us to have more confidence in Europe as a successful model and I would like to ask you to convey this idea in your speeches .
( HU ) Hungary commemorated the 1956 revolution and fight for freedom on 23 October 2006 .
On that day , a huge number of police , orchestrated by the government , attacked peaceful demonstrators , pedestrians and even numerous groups of foreign tourists in restaurants as they were quietly having a meal .
Absolute terror reigned in the country .
Many hundreds of people suffered serious injury , including 14 people who were shot in the eyes , many of whom also lost their sight .
Many hundreds of people were put in prison and had sham criminal proceedings brought against them .
This ended only recently with them all being released , virtually without exception .
The Prime Minister paid tribute to the outstanding job done by the police .
Today , Mr President , we have in this European Parliament Kinga Göncz , Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , who was a member of that government which sanctioned the shooting .
I would like to hear your view on this , Mr President .
I would also like to ask you , on Hungary 's behalf , to be true to the spirit of solidarity , to fight for human rights in the European Union , and to fight to put an end to the human rights crisis which has been going on in Hungary since autumn 2006 .
I would also call on the person in this Parliament who reminds people of this situation and brings shame to the House to resign from her post as Vice-Chairman of the LIBE Committee .
( HU ) As a Hungarian living in Romania , I would like to congratulate President Jerzy Buzek , in the spirit of solidarity , a worthy successor to our former president , Hans-Gert Pöttering .
In the spirit of solidarity , let us remember that Polish refugees were welcomed by Hungary 70 years ago .
In the spirit of solidarity , I wish to express our pleasure that one of the key figures in Solidarność has been appointed to lead Parliament .
Let us also remember Pope John Paul II and the faith aspect .
Solidarność and the 1956 Hungarian Revolution signified freedom , while the events in Temesvár ( Timişoara ) , along with the personality and spirituality of Pope John Paul , represent the power of faith .
We also expect that through their accession , the Polish people and Eastern Europe will make the same contribution and bring greater faith .
This is why I am looking forward to President Buzek 's presidency with confidence .
( PL ) Mr President , I would also like to congratulate you very sincerely , not only on your election , but also on your speech today , because you have shown that we have one Europe , and that there are no old and new countries .
Europe also remains diverse , and what you have pledged , that the European Parliament will reflect this diversity in its work , is of immense value .
This does not mean , however , that Europe is equal .
Indeed , there are many differences , which we in the European Parliament should tackle .
Citizens of the European Union very often receive entirely different remuneration for doing the same work .
Citizens of the European Union today , in numbers which are always too high , are without work , and this is another matter which we should tackle .
There is too much diversity and inequality in terms of access to the benefits associated with education , culture and health care .
This is a tremendous challenge , which the European Parliament , under your leadership , should also set itself .
I would like to find out what you think should be done , in the context of what was said about a common energy policy , with an undertaking which is today more German and Russian than European ?
I am thinking of the gas pipeline , because you spoke about energy policy .
There is also the question of enlargement of the European Union - what about Ukraine ?
What time scale are we setting for the accession of Ukraine to the European Union ?
Thank you , Mr Buzek , not least for the painstaking precision with which you responded to all the speeches , without exception .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I congratulate you on your election to the position of President of the European Parliament .
Along with all our compatriots , I am proud that for the first time in history , a Pole has taken up this position of honour .
This is , for us , confirmation of our role and position in Europe .
At the same time , Poland is one of the few remaining countries which have not completed the ratification procedure for the Treaty of Lisbon , a treaty which would make European integration more effective .
I find this paradoxical .
I will remind you that the Polish Parliament approved ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon in April of this year , but the ratification documents have yet to be signed by the President .
I think that you could make a valuable contribution to public debate in Poland and help to increase the support of society for the treaty , which could speed up completion of the ratification procedure .
I would also like to thank you for your personal involvement in this matter in Ireland .
I hope very strongly that the Irish people will vote ' yes ' on 2 October , and that the necessary formalities will then be completed by the Czech Republic and Poland .
Helping to bring an end to the ' Lisbon ratification saga ' is one of the most important objectives of this Parliament , and I hope that it will also be one of its successes .
This is an important moment in the history of European integration .
Thank you for the programme which you have presented .
I hope that you will manage to complete this ambitious agenda .
I wish you success in directing the work of the European Parliament in accordance with values which are important for all Europeans .
Just as the Polish Solidarity movement was able to change the face of Poland and other countries in Central Europe , so European solidarity will enable us to meet the challenges before which we stand today .
This will be possible under certain conditions , namely that our solidarity will have to be consistent , genuine and determined to bring about changes .
Just as in Poland , where totalitarianism did not fall because of words , but because of deeds , so European solidarity will be effective if it is translated into specific action .
I believe that this will indeed happen .
This vision of the future of Europe is attractive to very many Europeans .
I am counting on the European Parliament , under your leadership , Mr President , to play a positive and intensive role in making this vision a reality . Thank you very much .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.25 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting
( DE ) Mr President , I have no comments on the minutes of yesterday 's session , but instead I would like to comment on an incident in this morning 's session .
My colleague , Kinga Göncz , a Member of Parliament in my group and former Hungarian Foreign Minister , was insulted in the debate this morning by Krisztina Morvai from the fascist Jobbik party in a completely unacceptable way .
As Foreign Minister for Hungary , Mrs Göncz has worked harder than almost anyone else in the country to achieve international reconciliation between Hungary and its neighbouring countries .
I would like to reject emphatically the outrageous insult made to Mrs Göncz by Mrs Morvai , a member of a neo-fascist party .
( Applause )
( HU ) Thank you for this opportunity to speak .
I am very sorry that this discussion is being held here in the European Parliament .
I would also like to respond briefly by saying that the party represented by Krisztina Morvai set up a paramilitary unit in 2006 and , since then , is using it to intimidate the peaceful public majority .
This includes , in particular , minorities , gays , Roma and Jews .
This paramilitary unit was recently disbanded by the courts , but an MEP from this party wore the uniform of this organisation in this chamber during the July session .
In Hungary , this party conducted a campaign full of anti-European , racist , homophobic , anti-Roma and xenophobic diatribes and regularly described Hungary as a colony of the European Union in its utterances .
The event which Krisztina Morvai spoke about took place in 2006 when these extreme right-wing protesters set the Hungarian television broadcasting corporation 's central building on fire and ran riot for days , resulting in 113 police officers being injured .
They ran riot again on 23 October .
They tried , in fact , to disrupt a national ceremony using violence .
This was the first time in the country 's history , since the change of regime , that the police had had any experience of dealing with extreme right-wing protests .
After this , the government set up an independent committee , whose reports are available on a wide range of websites , including in English .
This committee made suggestions and numerous court proceedings were also initiated .
Hungarian government bodies investigated these abuses .
There were indeed problems .
However , I would like to say to Krisztina Morvai that if she is calling the institutional system in her own country dictatorial , the problem with this is that if democracy was not really working in Hungary , she would not have been able to make her speech in this Chamber just now .
I apologise again that this subject was raised before Parliament and I sincerely hope that this discussion will not be continued here .
( HU ) Mr President , according to the Rules of Procedure , I have half a minute to ask a question .
This question is addressed to Mr Schulz .
Based on the slanderous statements made here by his colleague , how can he dare call a party fascist in this Chamber , simply because it does not agree with every aspect of the European Union 's main thrust ?
This party received 430 000 votes in Hungary .
You are therefore calling 430 000 voters fascist .
From now on , think before you speak !
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Statement by the President-designate of the Commission ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the President-designate of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are living in unprecedented times .
I personally am convinced that the history books of the future will refer to the pre-financial crisis era and the post-financial crisis era .
Yet this crisis is not just a financial , economic and social one .
It is also a crisis of values .
That is why I believe that we must put our European social model , our social market economy , at the heart of our response to this crisis .
At the same time , the crisis has shown just how interdependent we have become in this globalised era .
There is the financial crisis , but also the energy crisis .
There are the food security problems and climate change , an area in which Europe is now the leader .
That is why I feel we can say that this is the moment of truth for Europe .
Do we want to shape globalisation with our values , by defending our interests , or do we want to suffer globalisation , by following the lead of others ?
For me , the choice is clear .
We must rise to this challenge together because , if we do not do so together , Europe is in danger of being marginalised .
We have experience .
I do not believe that any another region in the world has the same experience as we have of establishing an internal market , common rules , common institutions , and indeed a single currency and solidarity and cohesion policies .
We have this unique experience .
I therefore believe that , instead of suffering globalisation , we can shape it , because we are , by nature , a globalisation laboratory ; we are the champions of global governance .
Now is not the time for the status quo , or routine .
We must have an agenda for change .
Now more than ever we need a strong Europe .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , we will be stronger in the future and we will be better able to act .
When I say a stronger Europe , let us be clear what that means .
It does not necessarily mean more centralisation of powers .
I am committed to the democratic principle of subsidiarity , subsidiarity linked , of course , to solidarity , with decisions being taken at the most appropriate level .
When I speak of a stronger Europe , I am also speaking of the European spirit , of the culture of European decision-making , of the Community method and of the will to act together - not only the ability to act but also the will to act , the political will .
We need a Europe that is uncompromising when it comes to defending its values and its interests , which rejects protectionism of all kinds , but without being naive , and which can demonstrate this proactive spirit .
It is this proactive spirit that guided the drafting of the document that I sent to you all before this sitting .
The mandate of the Commission over which I currently preside was that of the first Commission of the enlarged Europe , of the great Europe of 27 .
I believe that , now we have consolidated this Europe , we have the conditions in place for a new ambition : a new social ambition , because there is a crisis and unemployment is the main problem facing Europeans ; a new ambition regarding the fight against climate change , an area in which we already play a leading role ; and a new ambition in terms of the way we deal with globalisation .
Last week I had the opportunity to discuss these political guidelines with all the political groups that invited me .
I think it was a very useful , constructive and open discussion .
I received many points of view .
I believe that the time has now come for us to reach a broad consensus and to reach some level of agreement on the way forward .
Before you all today I formerly pledge that - if I am confirmed by this Parliament - I will apply those political guidelines during my second term and I will , together with incoming Commissioners , translate them into the next Commission 's legislative and work programme .
I am not going to repeat those guidelines now but I think , after discussions with all of you , that it will be useful to make some of the elements in the guidelines more concrete and also to take on board a number of your suggestions .
In the interests of transparency , I would like to highlight those areas with all of you now .
First of all , the basic line : as we fully implement our recovery plan in order to move out of this economic and financial crisis , we must keep an eye on the future .
We must reinvigorate our inclusive social market economy .
We will invest in new sources of sustainable growth , in smart green growth , in the networks of the future from digital infrastructure to the European super grids for electricity and gas - all this to promote high levels of employment and social provision and to reinforce the European model of society , while succeeding in an increasingly competitive world .
Solidarity must remain key .
That is why , apart from all the decisions already taken and proposed in terms of structural funds and in terms of doubling our balance of payment support for some countries in difficulties , I want to commit myself to using all the instruments at my disposal to help those Member States with serious budgetary constraints - namely the new Member States - back onto the road to recovery .
But we cannot return to the previous growth model .
It has clearly proved unsustainable .
We have to create the conditions where the transition to a low-carbon economy is a source of competitive advantage for our businesses , a source of jobs for our workers and a source of hope for future generations .
Yes , I agree with those of you who said that coordination is not enough .
Yes , we need to map out a genuine European agenda .
Yes , we need an integrated vision for a coherent European strategy , a European Union 2020 strategy that builds on open markets by combining new sources of sustainable growth , employment and social cohesion , our climate and energy security agenda , a fresh approach to industrial policy and a move to a knowledge society .
I stand for a particular emphasis on innovation and support measures for SMEs .
Yes , this means overhauling the Lisbon Strategy after 2010 .
Yes , we need a much more integrated approach to the economic , social and environmental strands of the different strategies .
As President of the Commission , I commit myself to doing my best to convince Member States also to accept this coherence and coordination approach .
I said in the guidelines that the economy needs a financial system that is more ethical , robust and responsible .
Regulation and supervision have not kept pace with the integration and innovation of financial markets - not in Europe ; not at a global level .
Let me say that I have been shocked by the scale of unethical behaviour that we have seen .
We cannot allow a return to ' business as usual ' .
The issue of bonuses , for instance , requires urgent action .
We are now in a leading position in the G20 - a process which , by the way , was started in Europe - but it is true that more needs to be done .
Next week , on the eve of the G20 meeting in Pittsburgh , the Commission will adopt proposals to build a true European system of supervision - a system that reflects the integrated nature of our single market .
A review of our action in three years will provide an opportunity to see what further action is needed .
It is crucial that we get regulation that ensures the responsibility and the legitimacy of the financial sector without suffocating innovation .
I want Europe to keep its world leadership in financial services .
In my guidelines , I also explained why the crisis calls for a much stronger focus on the social dimension in Europe at all levels of decision making - in Europe , but also at a national level .
The financial sector and the economy may be showing signs of recovery but - let us be clear - the crisis is not over for those who have lost their jobs and we cannot say the crisis is over before we come back to the creation of employment instead of rising unemployment .
I would like to make my commitment to a high level of employment and social cohesion through a number of actions that I have discussed with some of you .
I have clearly stated my attachment to the respect of fundamental social rights and to the principle of the movement of workers .
The interpretation and the implementation of the Posted Workers Directive fall short in both respects .
That is why I am committed to proposing , as soon as possible , a regulation to resolve the problems that have arisen .
This regulation will be codecided by the European Parliament and the Council .
A regulation has the advantage of giving much more legal certainty than the revision of the directive itself , which would still leave too much room for diverging national transpositions and take longer to produce real effects on the ground .
But , if we discover during the preparation of the regulation that there are areas where we need to revisit the directive itself , I will not hesitate to do so .
Let me be clear - I am committed to fighting social dumping in Europe whatever form it takes .
The issue of social impact assessments for all future proposals was also raised and I agree that this is needed .
The first test case for such a social impact assessment should be the revision of the Working Time Directive .
On the basis of this impact assessment , the next Commission will consult social partners and will come with a comprehensive legislative proposal .
In the guidelines , I emphasise the importance of services of general interest for our European model of society .
The Lisbon Treaty makes this point very clear and I am ready to work with you to develop a quality framework for services of general interest .
I also highlighted gender equality and the need to eliminate the gender pay gap , so I now commit myself to working with you on a Women 's Charter , also as a way of commemorating the 15th anniversary of the Beijing Conference in 2010 .
In my guidelines , I express my determination to make the Lisbon Treaty innovations in international relations , including the European External Action Service and the post of High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , work effectively .
I believe it is one of the greatest innovations of our Lisbon Treaty and I am committed to reinforcing cooperation with the European Parliament in the field of external affairs in general .
Europe needs the means to match its ambitions , however .
As I said in the guidelines , this requires a root-and-branch reform of the European Union budget covering the expenditure and revenue side .
We need to move away from a narrow focus on net balances and move towards an approach based on solidarity , burden-sharing and equity .
This also includes the question of own resources .
The European Union must have a more transparent and efficient way of financing its policies and I am ready - I hope with the support of this Parliament - to take this battle to the Member States as we reshape the Union 's budget .
I also want to work more closely with the European Investment Bank to look at innovative forms of financing .
I am also committed to smart regulation , and I want to reiterate that the simplification of procedures and the reduction of administrative burdens on businesses , particularly SMEs , will remain a priority in the next Commission .
This task - just like the Impact Assessment Board and ex post evaluation - will be placed directly under my authority to fully reflect the priority I give to it .
I will also defend - as we have done over the years and sometimes in difficult circumstances - the integrity of the single market because , without a single market and without a cohesion policy , we will never have a European Union .
But why stop there ?
Why only defend the internal market ?
I want to complete the missing links to unleash its full benefits for businesses and consumers .
Honourable Members , I am committed to translating these priorities into the organisation of the next College once I have been confirmed by you , but I can already share with you today some organisational changes that I intend to introduce .
I will create the post of Commissioner for Justice , Fundamental Rights and Civil Liberties , including citizens ' and minority rights as a reflection that the European Union is a community of rights and values .
I will also create the post of Commissioner for Internal Affairs and Migration , including security .
One of the key tasks of this Commissioner will be to develop a truly common approach to migration : promoting the integration of legal migrants , fighting illegal migration and related criminal activities , and ensuring solidarity between Member States .
We need solidarity .
We need solidarity when we have to give support to our Baltic friends or countries affected by the gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine , but we also need solidarity when we have to give support to our Mediterranean friends when they are facing challenges with which they cannot cope alone .
I will also create the post of Commissioner for Climate Action to reflect the fact that climate change is a challenge that needs to be addressed across the whole range of our policies .
A dedicated Commissioner for Climate Action will also send an important signal that , independently of the level of ambition that comes out of Copenhagen , Europe is serious about maintaining momentum for action .
We also need a fundamental review of the way the European institutions access and use scientific advice .
In the next Commission , I want to create the post of Chief Scientific Adviser , with the power to deliver proactive , scientific advice throughout all stages of policy development and delivery .
This will reflect the central priority I attach to research and innovation .
I think we have a lot to do in this field .
If there is one area where the fragmented efforts in Europe are not giving the results we want , it is precisely in the field of research and innovation .
I believe that , from fighting climate change to energy security , the potential is there if we want to work together in research and innovation for Europe .
What I propose is no less than a transformational agenda for Europe .
In order to realise this ambition , I have suggested a special partnership between Parliament and the Commission .
We represent the two European institutions par excellence and this gives us a special responsibility to create a true European public space for debate .
I am committed to making my contribution to European parliamentary democracy .
I have had the opportunity to discuss this over the last couple of months with President Buzek , which led to many of the improvements proposed in my guidelines , like a regular question time .
Following my meetings with the groups , I am ready to take up the suggestion made by some of you , not only to meet your Conference of Presidents on a more regular basis , but also to establish an appropriate dialogue with your Conference of Committee Chairs .
Very concretely , I will invite the Conference of Committee Chairs to meet the whole College of Commissioners every year before the adoption of the Commission legislative and work programme .
We are indeed living in very exceptional times , times of uncertainty and power shifts .
There may be a fundamental change in the relations between the most important powers in the world and there is indeed a great risk in these times of anxiety of the emergence of national egoisms , of naked nationalism , of ugly nationalism and some forms of extremism .
There is a real danger that our achievements in European integration are called into question .
That is why I believe it is important to have this special relationship between Commission and Parliament to fight those national egoisms .
Let me finish with a plea to each and every one of you .
Now , more than ever , we need a strong Europe and a strong European Commission - a strong Commission , let us be frank , has to be a political Commission - but a political Commission must not be a partisan Commission .
As President of the Commission , my party is Europe .
The next College , like the current one , will contain a significant number of members from a variety of political families .
I am committed to having Europe 's political diversity reflected in the College and in the most important positions .
Only with this cross-party support , however , can we , in fact , have a strong Europe and a strong Commission .
We need a Commission that delivers on its promises .
We also need a Parliament capable of mobilising the effective majorities necessary for a Europe of action .
If you want a strong Commission that sometimes stands up to Member States and to national egoisms , you should give the Commission the strong support it needs .
We all have our different political , ideological positions and we come from very different political families but I believe that , in times like the ones we are living in , in times of crisis , apart from our convictions , we also need a strong ethic of European responsibility .
It is to this ethic of European responsibility to each of you that I make my appeal - my appeal with passion for Europe .
Let us embark on this European journey together .
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been asking myself in the last few days why a candidate who is so controversial across all the groups in this Parliament causes so little controversy in the Council .
I believe that the answer is obvious .
If I had been a head of government , I would also have elected José Manuel Durão Barroso .
There could have been no better advocate of the interests of the European Council over the last five years .
For this reason , your call , Mr Barroso , for cooperation with Parliament is correct , but it comes too late .
( Applause )
One aspect of the last five years was the fact that you were constantly at the service of the governments in the European Union and that is precisely one of the reasons why there is so much scepticism about you .
Many friends are more dangerous than enemies .
You had hardly finished your speech with the claim : ' I am everyone 's candidate ! ' , before Mr Daul said : ' This is the candidate of the Group of the European People 's Party ' .
What a risk for you , Mr Barroso !
What motive would another possible majority in this House have for electing you if your programme is the programme of the Group of the European People 's Party ?
We could have started with a different majority .
In July , we saw a possible majority form in this House on the basis of different considerations among the various groups , which Guy Verhofstadt brought together into a reform-based , pro-European majority .
This resulted in the vote being postponed until September and other things would perhaps also have been possible .
Unfortunately , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe did not continue to support their leader , otherwise this would have been possible .
This is why we are voting today and weighing up whether what you are saying is convincing .
However , you have hardly started to concentrate on one programme before you begin doing something different .
In the last few days you have been sending out your messengers on horseback with the following message : ' Moi , j 'ai la majorité , I have the majority ' .
It may be that you have a majority tomorrow .
That could be the case .
Perhaps you will have a majority tomorrow , consisting of the PPE Group and the ALDE Group , the majority of whom will vote for you , and , of course , the only group which will vote for you unanimously , immediately and without hesitation : the European Conservatives and Reformists , the party of Mr Kaczyński and his brother , the party of Mr Klaus , the Tory party .
As you say , you want to achieve a majority in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon , but this is the party whose members oppose the treaty .
How can you lead Europe in a pro-European way if you enter into alliances of this kind ?
( Applause )
Furthermore , this is not only about you .
It is true that it is about you , but it is also about the question : Barroso - yes or no ?
It is about the question of whether you gain a majority - yes or no ?
However , it is also about another issue .
It is about the direction of Europe as a whole and that is not your decision alone .
In this case , the Council and , above all , this Parliament are also involved in making the decision about the composition of the College and about the portfolios which you will make available and about the programme for the next five years that you will present .
It is about you , but it is also about the question of whether we finally manage to regulate the internal market and the financial markets and about whether we finally manage to put a stop to cheap labour in Europe , which is destroying the social cohesion of our society .
It is also about whether we manage to bring about a change of direction in the European Union which the Commission , as a whole , must support .
Therefore , for us it is also a question of programme-related issues .
It is not enough to reduce Europe to the question of an individual person and to the question of whether this individual person has a majority or not .
We need more !
We need social impact assessments .
You have said that you will put them in place .
We will judge you by whether you really do this , whether you are prepared to draw up regulations together with Parliament in an interinstitutional agreement .
In future , the Commission must consider in advance what the effects of its measures on the social security systems in the Member States will be .
We want and need a directive for public services , for services of general interest .
It must not be the case that the Commission will not rest until the last public cemetery in Europe is privatised .
This strategy must finally be stopped .
We also need a change of direction on wage policy in Europe .
Whichever tool we choose , Mr Barroso , I expect to hear one sentence from you .
You have failed to say it again today .
However , I expect you to say it once .
The objective of the Commission , particularly following the verdict of the Court of Justice of the European Communities in the cases of Viking , Laval and Rüffert , must be equal pay for equal work in the same place for both men and women .
These are the issues relating to programmes and content which we want to discuss with you , but not only with you .
It is also a question of who the Commissioners are and which portfolios they have .
I do not know what has caused greater damage to Europe , you yourself or the fact that you have not prevented Mr McCreevy from doing what he was able to .
We need a change of direction within the EU .
This is what we will judge you on .
( Applause )
Therefore , we can see a connection between tomorrow 's vote and the final vote on the Commission .
There is a way to get there .
There is the possibility of achieving greater agreement and trust than is currently the case .
However , with regard to your balance sheet for the last five years and to what you have presented us with thus far - I am not talking about what may happen in future , but what is currently on the table - I can say one thing to you with certainty : you do not have the support of my group .
( Applause )
I would like to inform you that we have a new rule of procedure .
Perhaps not all of you have taken note of it yet .
The rule says that if , during a speech , Members present in the House raise a blue card , they may put a question to the person who is speaking .
The question must be no longer than half a minute 's duration , and can be asked only with the speaker 's agreement .
This is a new rule , which we did not have before .
This is intended to enliven our debates .


( PT ) Mr President , I will be very brief : Mr Schulz , I listened to you very carefully and I share many of the issues that you put to the President of the Commission , who is now standing again .
I even heard you say that Socialists do not only support the right and Europe is not made up solely of the right .
I ask you , how many members of your parliamentary group - Socialists , Portuguese , Spanish or English - have already given their support to the new candidate , irrespective of the opinions that you yourself hold , Mr Schulz ?
( DE ) Mr President , I must admit that I do not know the fellow Member .
However , I am pleased that as new fellow Members ...
( Heckling )
He has been here for a while ?
I have not really noticed him until now .
After what I have heard , I understand why .
We will decide this evening on the final vote for our group .
I do not know how deeply democratic the structures in your party are , but we are a democratic party and so we will decide this evening by means of a democratic vote .
I would like to say that only one question per speech is foreseen , because otherwise we might not finish the debate .
Mr President , since the start of this appointment procedure , as you know , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has said that what is at stake here is the programme for the next five years , that this is not a question of people or of personalities .
This is what counts : the programme that the candidate presents , the one that he presents now in its broad outlines , then the detailed programme , which will be presented towards the end of the year , I hope , when the Commission is finalised .
Secondly , at the request of some of my colleagues , our group has also debated at length whether we should wait before taking a final decision .
We supported that in July , because we felt it necessary for the candidate to come equipped with a programme , which was not the case in the past .
I believe that it was the right decision to do so , to wait in July , not to appoint and to wait for the proposals that we are going to debate now .
However , we felt that , once the candidate had presented his guidelines , there was no point in saying once again that we were going to wait a few weeks or months .
We are going through an economic and financial crisis , therefore we need European institutions and we need a Commission .
It is not very responsible ...
( Applause )
...
It is not very responsible to say today , ' Let us wait ' .
Wait for what ?
Wait two weeks , three weeks , two months , until they come with proposals ?
They are there .
Let us assume our responsibilities , whether we vote for or against , but let us assume our responsibilities .
Thirdly , we were not very convinced by the guidelines presented by the candidate .
I believe that these proposals , as detailed as they sometimes are , are based on a flawed philosophy , that is , on the assumption that the recession is over , that a recovery is taking place and that we do not need additional Community policies in order to come out of the crisis .
That is a poor starting point , because the end of the recession does not mean that this is the start of the recovery .
We may fall into economic stagnation , as is the case in Japan , where they have been waiting for growth for 10 to 15 years .
Hence the need to have , in addition , a new integrated Community strategy that goes beyond the 27 national plans .
That is the demand we are making as liberals and as democrats , and it is just as important for the Commission to present as quickly as possible a plan for cleaning up the banks .
Not 27 different plans , as we have today , but a common , consistent approach set out by the Commission .
I heard , Mr Barroso , that you said in our group that you were prepared to submit proposals concerning both this new integrated Community strategy , which goes beyond the 27 national plans , and this European stabilisation of the banking sector .
This is positive , and what we are asking is for these two elements to be detailed and developed in the programme that you are now going to prepare and that you are going to present with the Commission .
Our support is very clear .
It is conditional .
This means that our support will continue until such time as we see that these elements , that is , a new integrated Community strategy , a plan for stabilising the banking sector , beyond the things you repeated today in your speech , a budget based on own resources , and a mid-term review of financial supervision , are going to materialise in every part of the Commission 's programme .
On this subject , I must tell you that I continue to believe that it is the structure of the European Central Bank that should be used , not the de Larosière proposals , which are the Commission 's and the Council 's starting point for the moment .
Lastly , our support will also depend , as you know , on the new structure of the Commission .
We want an effective Commission , with powers distributed more evenly than was the case in the past and , in this context , we are also counting on the promise that you made to our group , namely that a particular commissioner from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , with responsibility for fundamental rights and civil liberties , will be given a place in your team .
It is important that this commissioner be jointly responsible with the other commissioners , and not just someone who gives them opinions .
That is why , for the common good of Europe , we need more audacity and a more ambitious Commission , and we hope that you will ensure this and hope , too , that in your definitive programme you will fulfil our expectations .
Mr President , President-designate , ladies and gentlemen , I confess that I think I am hallucinating .
Firstly we are told : ' everything has changed , so I am staying ! '
The reason why Mr Barroso must stay is because everything is changing , and he is the stability in a changing world .
So be it .
Then , I hear what Mr Daul has to say .
I was part of the electoral campaign in France .
In France , we were told , during the electoral campaign , that , on the banks , look to Mr Sarkozy , on climate change , look to Mr Sarkozy , on change in Europe , look to Mr Sarkozy .

Now I hear Mr Daul say that , on climate change , look to Mr Barroso , on issue X , Y or Z , look to Mr Barroso .
You are going to get a roasting from the Elysée Palace , my friend !
You are going to get a roasting !
All the same , it is incredible , this whole business !
Yes , yes , I know , May 68 , it annoys you , you always come out with the same old thing .
I will explain it to you one day if you want to hear about it .
All I am saying is that this place , right here , is a place where we have the right to say anything .
José Manuel Obama : Yes , he can !
He can do anything he likes now ; he can do everything that he was unable to do for five years .
You will see what happens , and , on that note , Heads of State or Government , Mrs Malmström , be careful , because the days of the little Mr Barroso who listens to you are over .
You are going to have to listen to him now , he is going to impose a new integrated policy , not a policy of coordination , on you , you are going to have to follow his lead ...
No , but stop , stop , Mr Barroso !
We know what you are like !
In five years in this House , not once have you said , ' I was wrong ' , as I , Daniel Cohn-Bendit , and others have done ...
For you talk about European values , you talk about European ethics , but the problem is this , Mr Barroso . If you really want to change things , you must explain something to the MEPs and to the citizens : the response to the financial and economic crisis must , at the same time , be a response to the environmental crisis .
Moreover , if you want to respond to these crises you have to transform Europe - to reform it is not enough - and by that I mean you have to transform it environmentally and socially .
Our production systems must be called into question .
The banks : why did they go crazy ?
Because we have a system that makes them completely crazy .
Why ?
For the simple reason that it is about having more and more , and still more , more quickly .
Is it the case , Mr Barroso , is it the case , Heads of State or Government , that the majority of this House is ready today to challenge the ' more and more as quickly as possible ' approach ?
This is at the root of the crisis , and when people talk about sustainable development , it is not just about a few piecemeal measures , it is about trying to explain and to understand that , while there are areas that need growth , that is , selective growth - renewables , and so on - there are a whole host of areas that need to be curbed .
There needs to be a measure , and here I am hallucinating even more .
You talked about the Lisbon process .
You talked about research .
Mr Barroso , explain something to me .
For five years - actually , for four years : last year , after the crisis , you were more cautious - you explained to us that the basis for economic and environmental effectiveness was deregulation .
Deregulation .
Yes indeed , I remember your speeches , I remember what you said .
Then , with the crises , you suddenly realised that it did not work like that .
With the crises , and this is to your credit , we never said that you were a man of dishonour , we merely said that , seeing the way in which you , Mr Barroso , have led this Commission , we do not have faith in you .
You are a European but , at the same time , you are locked in an ideology that is the very ideology that caused the crisis , not that which solves it .

And , Mr Verhofstadt , that really takes the biscuit , now .
Throughout the campaign we said - I am going to finish here , and , besides , Mr Barroso will thank us for it - that we did not want to vote in July .
Now , everyone is grateful to us that the vote did not take place in July , because at least Mr Barroso could present his programme .
If it was up to Mr Daul , if it was up to Mr Barroso , we would have voted without a programme in July , and everything would have been just fine !
So at least thank us for having given you the opportunity to present your programme .
Not at all , not at all , Mr Barroso .
Secondly - but this is rich - you say : ' why postpone further ? '
For the simple reason , and this has never existed before , that the people of Ireland are going to vote in three weeks ' time and if , as I believe will happen , as is thought will happen , they vote in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon , there is another condition for this Commission .
You tell us : ' it is absolutely necessary , because we are in an economic crisis , you will see what happens ' .
Over the next two months , Mr Barroso will have to form his Commission .
He will not have the time to deal with Lisbon , nor with Copenhagen , because he will have to negotiate with Mr Sarkozy .
Is Mr Barnier going to get the internal market ?
If Mr Barnier does get the internal market , what is he going to give to the Poles , to whom he promised a great Commission ?
What is he going to give to the Germans ?
What is he going to give to the British ?
Because the Commission is all about bargaining !
And bargaining is going to keep him busy , but while he is busy bargaining , the others are going to bargain at Copenhagen .
That is the problem ; that is the reality .
So I shall conclude by saying to you , Mr Barroso , that you are a man of honour , that is true , but you should know one thing : the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance does not have faith in you and will vote against your appointment , because we believe that Europe needs someone better , someone better than you , Mr Barroso !
( Applause )
Mr Cohn-Bendit may have spoken for too long , and it may be that I hardly agree with him at all , but he always has interesting things to say , and that , after all , is important in Parliament .
This gives Parliament the vitality which you spoke of , Mr President , in your speech at the beginning today .
The European Conservatives and Reformists will vote for President-designate Barroso .
We will not do this because we agree with you on everything , Mr President .
There are , unfortunately , many questions on which we do not agree .
I will mention at the outset your enthusiastic support for the Treaty of Lisbon .
We do not share that enthusiastic support , but we do share the dislike and condemnation of all forms of national egoism and nationalism which you expressed in your speech .
Indeed , it was to Europe , to our continent , which we want to be at peace and to live on in peace , that national egoisms and chauvinisms brought an ocean of misery . We thank God that today , we live in a Europe at peace .
We do not agree on some of the matters about which Mr Barroso spoke .
We are entitled to disagree , and we will defend that right , although some continually question the simple fact that voters in Europe have elected European Conservatives and Reformists , and I promise that they will elect still more of them .
We are going to be here , and our voice is going to be heard .
We are entitled , therefore , to say on behalf of our voters that we support Mr Barroso in his difficult mission .
I am glad that mention has been made today of European solidarity .
I am glad it was said that the Commission - the new Commission under the leadership of Mr Barroso - will direct its efforts to enable us to overcome the economic crisis .
This is extremely important , and we are pleased that the ambitious programme which Mr Barroso has presented indeed appears to be directed at the most important areas , where action on our part is needed .
This , by the way , shows how great the need is for cooperation between the nations in today 's Europe .
The crisis has affected all of us , irrespective of the political structure and economy we are part of , irrespective of the region of Europe where our countries are found .
The crisis is affecting us all , and all of us must fight the crisis .
Mr President , in giving you support on behalf of our group , I would like to appeal to you to ensure that , in the coming months , Europe does not remain indifferent to what is happening in world politics .
I do not hide the fact that , in my opinion , one of the most important tests which awaits the western world is what is happening today in Iran .
Iran is a country which makes no secret of its nuclear ambitions .
The President of that country not only denies the horrific crime of the holocaust , but also threatens Israel today with destruction .
It seems to me that there should be no place for this type of behaviour , and it should not find acceptance in a modern , democratic world .
Our group expects that the European Commission under your leadership will resolutely oppose the undemocratic procedures and undemocratic policies of the present authorities in Iran , which are directed against our greatest ally in the Middle East - against the state of Israel .
We also expect - and I am pleased that this always comes through strongly in what you say , Mr President - that the foreign policy of the European Union will always be a banner for citizens ' freedoms , and that it will also promote our common European values beyond our borders .
I am sure that you did not manage to avoid making mistakes in the previous Parliamentary term , but then no-one who is involved in politics avoids making mistakes - that , unfortunately , is the way things are in this world .
However , in the hard work which you do undertake , we are counting on you to hold high the banner of European values , and to work for the good - and I would like to stress this - of a common and united Europe .


Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , you represent the continuity of a policy , Mr Barroso , which has contributed to the greatest economic crisis in post-war history .
While the casinos in the major financial centres are reopening , the citizens of the world are footing the bill .
The consequences of the crisis are unemployment , poverty , lower incomes and less education .
You maintain that the financial crisis came primarily from the US and that it was only the bankers who caused the collapse .
We say that the political system , including the policies of the EU Commission , was responsible for promoting casino capitalism .
The ideology of liberalisation , deregulation and privatisation has led to the crisis .
Continuing as we have done in the past will result in an even more serious crisis .
The political system must take responsibility , learn from its mistakes and give up its neo-liberal ideals .
European policy must focus consistently on the interests of the people of Europe .
I cannot identify a focus of this kind in your guidelines . However , I am pleased that in your remarks today , social issues were given greater importance than was the case a year ago .
I would like to illustrate our political disagreement using some examples .
You want to adhere to the Lisbon strategy .
However , the people of Europe need good jobs at wages which will allow them to live with dignity .
We need to put on the agenda a reduction and not an extension of working hours .
We expect the new Commission to restructure the Posting of Workers Directive .
Europe must finally give a guarantee that social rights will not be sacrificed to the competitive approach .
For this reason , we have proposed , together with some others , a legally binding clause on social progress and a charter of public services , which will give precedence to social security and services of general interest over internal market regulations .
From what you have said , I understand that you do not think much of this .
In the Zimmermann report , the European Parliament calls for a minimum wage of at least 60 % of the average income in all Member States .
You maintain that you can do nothing about this .
I think that you could , for example , by means of the employment policy guidelines .
You are focusing solely on the Stability and Growth Pact which has proved to be an ineffective tool , in particular , during the crisis .
We want a social pact to replace the Lisbon strategy and the Stability Pact .
You believe that a few new financial supervision regulations will keep the greed of the financial world in check .
We are calling for a ban on particularly risky forms of investment and a tax on capital movements .
You , and I quote , ' support every paragraph of the Treaty of Lisbon ' .
We want a social Europe instead of a continuation of the radical focus on the internal market .
We want a commitment to disarmament and civil conflict management instead of the continuing growth in military capability .
You see Europe as a leading power and we want to spread the ideology of free trade and marketisation of all areas of life throughout the world .
We stand for intercultural , multilateral dialogue and the greatest possible support for developing countries in overcoming the economic , food , financial and climate crisis .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us elect a Commission together which sets itself the objective of a social , peaceful , economically sustainable and democratic European Union .
If we want to gain acceptance among the people of Europe for the EU project , we need a break with radical free-market concepts and more direct democracy .
In this case , Mr Barroso is the wrong man for the job of president .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I should like to ask Mr Barroso : why the unseemly haste ?
Why change the rules of the game ?
Why does your re-election for five years as Commission President have to take place now ?
Well , of course , the answer is Ireland and the Lisbon Treaty .
The plan is to show everybody that the ship is steady , that everything is going well , that all the Irish have to do is to correct their rather silly little mistake - and indeed your working document is written as if the Treaty were already ratified .
But there is a rather important point being missed here : you have been the boss ; you have been the governor for the last five years .
You have been in charge of overseeing that the Constitutional Treaty was pushed through .
But things went wrong , did they not ?
The French said ' no ' and the Dutch said ' no ' , but you refused to accept these democratic results and you took part , with many Members of this Parliament , in the absolute deceit that is the Lisbon Treaty .
You told us that the flag and the anthem would be dropped , but I have not seen much evidence of that .
No , you rebranded it as the Lisbon Treaty but you could not stop the Irish from voting , and the Irish said ' no ' .
But once again you could not accept a democratic result , oh no - the Irish have to vote again !
Where in all of this , given that you are in charge , is the principle of democratic accountability ?
Well , you might argue that there is not much democracy left in the European Union now , but there should at least be some degree of accountability , and I would argue that , on the eve of what may well be a fourth rejection of this Treaty , the one that kills it off for good , this Parliament should not install you as Commission President for the next five years until we have that result .
If the Irish people say ' no ' for a second time , then we simply have to respect what they say , and you have to go as President of the Commission .
It would happen in any other walk of life , it would happen in any business , and I suggest that it really ought to happen in European politics .
And what about your record ?
You have overseen the Lisbon Agenda : it was sunk without trace way before the credit crunch hit us .
Now you are telling us we have to have a commissioner for immigration , taking away from nation states their most basic right to decide who comes to live , work and settle in their countries .
You have pushed on with your obsession with climate change , which has led to massive costs and no material benefits whatsoever .
But , above all , it is the fact that you ignored that Irish referendum , that you said the Irish cannot stop this Treaty : for that reason alone , I simply cannot support you .
But it is possible that I have got this horribly wrong .
It is possible that you are the right man after all , because yesterday in the Daily Telegraph , a poll asked : If Lisbon goes through without a referendum , would you want Britain to stay part of the European Union ?
And by 43 % to 26 % - for the first time in over 30 years - a massive majority of Britons said they want us to leave this European Union if Mr Barroso gets his way .
So maybe I got it wrong : maybe you are the right man .
We will see .
( Applause and laughter from certain quarters )
Yes , he is very happy to go !
( HU ) Mr President , Europe has reached an historic turning point .
Millions of people making a living from an honest day 's work want a fundamental change .
They want to combat the gross injustices of neoliberalism and global big capital .
These include family farmers , smallholders , small business owners and government employees .
To be able to do this , they are in huge need of human rights .
I am sorry that the commissioner is not here now to hear me speaking in defence of human rights and civil liberties .
These rights are necessary so that people can express their views , in other words , enjoy the freedom of opinion , the right to free assembly and freedom of speech without being labelled as fascists , as actually happened here today in this chamber , or shot in the eye , intimidated by police brutality , maltreated , put in prison or subjected to sham criminal proceedings .
When all these events took place in Hungary in autumn 2006 , we turned to you for you to do something .
You did nothing .
Why not ?
I would ask Parliament 's Vice-President , Mr Schmitt , to confirm what happened , why we turned to you .
It was because of what happened at a meeting organised by the Fidesz party , a civic party ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you , Mr President , honourable Members , thank you for the opportunity to say a few words in this discussion .
I must say that it is wonderful to be back in the European Parliament .
The discussion and speeches here are undeniably more dynamic and entertaining than back home in Sweden .
I would like to congratulate Mr Barroso for giving us such a clear indication of the role that he would like the Commission to play and for his reform agenda for the next five years .
I have also listened very carefully to what the group rapporteurs had to say .
There is , of course , an awful lot I could comment on , but I will not do that today , because this is not the Council 's debate .
It is Parliament 's debate with the President-designate of the Commission .
As I mentioned , it is not my job to comment on what has been said , but I have listened very carefully to the debate .
There are just two things I would like to say .
The first thing is self-evident : José Manuel Barroso has been unanimously nominated by 27 Heads of State or Government with various political affiliations .
He has our clear support to lead the Commission for another term .
This does not , of course , reduce Parliament 's duty to scrutinise him and take a decision as to whether to approve or not to approve him .
My second comment is also self-evident , but it bears repeating .
We are living in extremely uncertain times with considerable and difficult challenges .
We need a strong Europe with an ability to take action and one in which the European Institutions function properly and are able to cooperate .
We need certainty , clarity and stability , so that , together , we can tackle the issues for which our citizens expect results and on which they expect Europe to deliver .
President-designate of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all let us address some issues of policy substance .
The Commission does not and has never advocated the privatisation of public services .
We believe public services are an important part of our European model of society .
What we believe is important is that those public services work in the framework of a strong single market in respect of Community rules . This is very important .
If we want to have a real European Union , we have to have this internal market respected .
Let us be frank about it : sometimes some national politicians , when there is a problem , say it is the fault of Brussels and when they have success , say it is their merit .
So please let us not embark on those accusations that it is because of Brussels that there is privatisation .
These are national decisions .
We have amongst our Member States some countries with some public services that they have decided to privatise but this is not an imposition of Brussels .
I think that the usual exercise of Brussels-bashing goes too far sometimes .
Everyone should assume their responsibilities .
The second point is about posting of workers .
The principles of the directive are indeed those that have been mentioned , namely by the Socialist Group : the respect for fundamental rights of workers ; I said it very often .
For us , these are sacred rights : the right to strike ; the right of association .
Fundamental rights are something very important .
I come from a country where there was a time when there were no civil rights or social rights , so I know what it means to have access to those social rights .
At the same time , we are committed to the freedom of circulation in Europe .
Without that freedom of circulation , we are not going to have a Europe .
So let us try to reconcile both principles in a way .
Let us not give into interpretations of the European Court of Justice .
That is why I proposed here a way forward inspired by many of your suggestions and I am ready to work in loyalty with all the Members of this Parliament to achieve it so that we have a stronger Europe , keeping our internal market , but respecting fully the social rights of our workers .
On regulation and deregulation , let me make the point very clear , and I ask you , Mr Cohn-Bendit , find a statement where I advocate deregulation .
I have always said ' better regulation ' or ' smart regulation ' .
It is not my fault if in French it is translated as ' deregulation ' .
Better legislation : mieux légiférer , not moins légiférer .
( FR ) And , Mr Cohn-Bendit , I wish to tell you something .
You have an obsession with me .
I do not have an obsession with you .
On the contrary , I almost feel sympathy towards you because you remind me of my youth ...
( Applause )
There is one political issue that is very important .
I may be criticised for many things , and I am the first to admit that there are issues on which myself and the Commission may be criticised .
However , we must fulfil our commitment regarding climate change : everyone acknowledges that we are the world 's leaders on this issue .
I have received compliments , for the Commission , from President Obama , from the United Nations Secretary-General , and from the Nobel Prize winner , Mr Pachauri , who wrote me a touching letter .
I will be the first to share this success for Europe with you , since the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has contributed to the agenda for green growth .
Make no mistake : I am in favour of green growth ; I am not in favour of the decline of Europe .
This is important .
I am in favour of green growth , of viable growth , but I am not in favour of the deindustrialisation of Europe .
I am not in favour of cutting our jobs in Europe .
The fact is , it is the Commission that has done the most for climate change , and it is precisely the Commission that Mr Cohn-Bendit has made a scapegoat of since the beginning .
Even before I have presented the guidelines and even before I have presented myself to your group , you have said ' No ' .
You have even made T-shirts .
They have not sold well , the ' Stop Barroso ' T-shirts .
You speak of hallucinations , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
Listen !
A party put forward a candidate before the elections .
I myself heard your proposals .
You proposed a UK conservative , Mr Patten .
You even , I believe , put the French Prime Minister forward as a candidate , which shows ... but no , you did not , because I was thinking that that was yet another favour like the one you did Mr Sarkozy , by dividing the left in France .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , the truth is this : if we want to have a Europe that is closer to the citizens , we have to make our choices on the basis of policies .
I should very much like the pro-European forces to support a pro-European programme .
I have presented a very pro-European programme to you .
It is up to you to vote for me .
It is not I who decides who must support me .
It is you who must vote .
I have a pro-European programme , linked to the Treaty of Lisbon .
This may not be the best news for everyone , but I believe in it .
I am proposing to you now a new ambition for Europe .
Indeed , the last five years have been the years of consolidation of the enlarged Europe .
I make no apology for having the support of the 27 Heads of State or Government , who were democratically elected and who are on all political sides , of course , because I believe that my role was essentially to bring people together .
This is the first time that we have had this enlarged Europe .
I make no apology for having loyally worked alongside these Heads of State or Government .
It goes without saying that a re-elected President of the Commission will have increased authority .
I call on you to give strong support to a Commission that is in favour of more ambition , of more determined progress , and of a European project of solidarity and freedom .
I am offering you loyal cooperation .
Some people have ruled themselves out of this .
That is a shame !
I for my part am going to remain committed to my values , and even to the values that you at times defend .
( Applause )
( Mr Cohn-Bendit held up a blue card )
I must explain .
Mr Cohn-Bendit is holding up a blue card , but we discovered half an hour ago that the rule in question applies only to speakers who are Members of the European Parliament and not to speakers from outside Parliament , such as speakers from the Commission .
Maybe we should change this in future , but for now we must observe the rules .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to change the tone of this debate and suggest that we all ask ourselves : Who among us does not need to grow and develop ?
Who among us does not have scope for improvement ?
Who among us never makes mistakes ?
A new direction needs to be taken in many areas , not only by the Commission President , but also by us .
There are many new paths for us to tread .
I have the feeling that many people here are looking for one person to blame for the problems which face us , instead of working on solving our common problems with new strength , new ideas , enthusiasm and vision .
Many people make insinuations and generate mistrust in order to divert attention from their own weaknesses .
Many people are also ignoring the election results of 7 June 2009 which form the democratic basis for today 's debate .
We accuse the Commission President of doing things that he is obliged to do , in other words , adhering to the treaties and implementing the resolutions .
Someone today uttered the fine statement : ' Without freedom there is no solidarity and without solidarity there is no strong , effective European Union . '
I would like to add : no strong European Commission .
We are all in the same boat .
All of us are jointly responsible .
Each of us has his or her own share of responsibility .
The Commission President has a great deal of the primary responsibility .
However , as Martin Schulz said , this is not just about him .
His strength depends on us , on the Member States , on the competence and quality of the Commissioners .
That is the next chapter in our book .
How will we implement an eco-social market economy ?
How will we restructure the Commission ?
How will we create a commissioner for financial markets ?
What about the diplomatic service ?
What about protecting the climate ?
At the end of his speech , our President paraphrased a quotation from Bronisław Geremek : ' Let us all work hard in our own way and make the most of the opportunity to bring about change , rather than running each other down ! '
Mr President , Mr Barroso might recall my intervention when he came before our group last week .
As I said then , Mr Barroso , I read your political guidelines for the new Commission with considerable interest and I actually found that much of the rhetoric contained in the guidelines reflects my own beliefs and political priorities .
I am sure of many others on the Left as well .
The problem is , however , that you used pretty much the same rhetoric when you came here five years ago to look for the Commission Presidency then .
At that time , you made a number of promises in relation to social Europe on renewing the social agenda for five years that have not been met .
You might recall , for example , saying five years ago on services of general interest : ' I do not exclude the possibility of a framework directive ' .
Now five years later , as you have said again today , the EU might establish a ' quality framework for public and social services ' .
We are not quite sure what that means .
We do know what a framework directive means and for us that is a very important commitment that we would like you to enter into .
Telling us that you do not exclude the possibility of one is simply not enough this time .
When we looked at your document last week , we looked for specific concrete commitments , but we found virtually none .
What we did find - thanks to Google - is that the guidelines themselves , presented as a transformational agenda , are , by and large , nothing more than a recycling of existing Commission texts and the existing policy agenda .
Three broad points on your guidelines :
Firstly , they simply do not address the seriousness of the severe unemployment and social crisis that we are facing and which will worsen in the months if not years to come .
Secondly , we think your words about a crisis exit strategy are premature .
You have modified that in what you have said to us today .
But what we should be talking about is an entry strategy , a strategy for positive intervention in the labour market , not just at Member State level but at European level .
Thirdly , your transformational agenda is the agenda of the past .
The crisis is calling for much bolder and more far-sighted policies than you have in mind .
Instead , what the number one priority of the new Commission must be is the launching of a modernised and ambitious new European social agenda .
I have listened to what you have said very carefully again today on the response to the Laval judgment in relation to the Posting of Workers Directive .
You have said again today that an implementing regulation , without touching the directive , is the way to go .
That simply will not work .
The problem is in the directive itself which repeats over and over again that ' Member States ' may ' ... ' .
Unless the implementing regulation replaces or overtakes that directive , the problem of Laval will remain .
Also , forgive us if we judge you on your track record .
Laval did not happen yesterday .
What have you done in the almost two years since the Laval judgment sent shock waves through the trade union movement ?
One final question : will you commit yourself today to doing everything possible to bring about a proper gender balance in the next College of the Commission ?
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why now ?
Why Mr Barroso ?
These are the two questions which we need to answer .
The question ' Why now ? ' has already been covered here .
We are in the middle of a financial and economic crisis and the preconditions for strong economic growth and the creation of more jobs will not be established overnight .
We need an effective Commission and we need a common , long-term European strategy .
We cannot start work on this next year ; we must begin immediately .
This is why we also need to vote now .
Why Mr Barroso ?
I am pleased about the clear declaration by the Commission President , the candidate , on the social market economy , on competition and on the internal market .
As liberals , we also have high expectations and demands .
We expect that a common strategy will be developed jointly with the Member States .
In the medium term , it will not be enough to have a network of regulators monitoring the financial markets .
We need a single European financial supervisory body .
As Guy Verhofstadt has just said , the mid-term review will be decisive for us .
As liberals , we believe that the creation of the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights is a positive move .
We want him to have genuine authority .
For anyone who does not know what is meant by this : data protection and the treatment of asylum seekers at Europe 's external borders are both subjects which require more attention .
I would like to say a few words about the comments made here on the political situation .
I very much regret that the majority of social democrats will not be voting in your favour tomorrow .
The social democrats are thus withdrawing from the pro-European alliance which we wanted to establish , particularly in the case of European policy issues .
Mr Schulz , Mr Bisky and Mr Cohn-Bendit are organising a red / red / green blockade of Europe , or at least they are trying to .
The decisive factor is as follows : we cannot defend ourselves against the agreement among the European conservatives , but it is crucial that the liberals and Christian democrats maintain Europe 's ability to act .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the European Free Alliance members in the Greens / EFA Group .
We believe in equality for all people in Europe .
We support independence for the nations and the regions of Europe that are not currently Member States in their own right but that aspire to be , and we campaign for equal rights for speakers of all languages , whether they are official EU languages or co-official languages , and whether they are spoken by the majority or the minority in a Member State .
Mr Barroso , you talk in your guidelines , and you have talked again today , about the need to create a feeling of connection between the EU and its citizens , but this can never be achieved until the EU recognises the real nations and peoples , and that subsidiarity operates at all levels and not just between the EU and the Member State government .
If the European Union is to effectively support us through the economic crisis , lead the way as it must in fighting climate change , protect public services , defend human rights and contribute to international peace and disarmament , then it needs the input of all of us , and that includes Wales , Scotland , Catalonia , Corsica , Flanders and many others .
Across Europe at this moment , there are discussions , consultations and referenda taking place , and I am not talking about Lisbon but about proposals for constitutional change and for greater autonomy in these countries .
I regret that you have not acknowledged , recognised or addressed these current developments in your guidelines and you have not brought forward proposals for greater involvement of countries and regions which have legislative powers in EU decision making , something which we in the EFA see as crucial .
I would ask you again to agree to do that .
Mr President , one of the most corrosive criticisms of the EU is that it is more concerned with its own internal systems than in demonstrating leadership on global issues or acting in a way that adds value to citizens ' lives .
Nowhere has this tendency been more apparent than in the preposterous discussions we have been forced to endure over whether and when to appoint the President of the Commission .
The anniversary today of the collapse of Lehman Brothers is a timely reminder of the parlous state of the European economy and especially that of the UK .
Unemployment is on the increase wherever we look , and we are just weeks away from a crucial global summit on climate change .
In these circumstances , it was absurd to seek to delay the appointment of the President of the Commission beyond September .
I read President Barroso 's political guidelines with great interest .
I warmly welcome the opportunity the ECR Group had for a vigorous discussion with him on it .
First , our central priority must be restarting economic growth and building long-term competitiveness .
In the short term , this means less economic intervention , and resisting protectionism .
Then we must ensure a return to sound public finances and work to secure further market liberalisation to restore trade and business confidence and ensure there is proper investment in skills and human capital , as well as in innovation and research .
The Commission has a vital role to play in making sure the EU institutions do not undermine economic recovery through imposing unnecessary and excessive burdens on business .
The work done by President Barroso and Commissioner Verheugen in this area has been significant .
Tackling excessive regulation and promoting the ' better regulation ' agenda - although , Mr Barroso , I myself would have preferred it to be called ' deregulation ' - was an area of success of the last Commission .
Nonetheless , it is regrettable this success was not more pronounced , and more work is certainly required .
We need to have a senior Vice-President of the Commission responsible for this area of work .
I urge you , President Barroso , to make such an appointment if you are elected tomorrow .
On the issue of climate change , it is the case that the EU has shown leadership in international negotiations in this area and it must continue to do so .
I welcome the emphasis President Barroso has placed on the need to show how fighting climate change can help to modernise our economies .
Another area I wish to highlight is the commitment to reshape the EU budget with a root-and-branch reform .
Such a reform is long overdue and it should have been a binding commitment .
Although I , personally , and my group strongly support the renomination of the President and welcome some of the major elements , we do not see eye to eye on everything , as my friend Michał Kamiński has said .
I have grave concerns about the Commission 's reported plans in the field of immigration and asylum and , as far as the UK is concerned , retention of national control over our borders continues to be essential .
As President Barroso knows from our discussions , there are problems with the Commission proposals in the field of financial supervision .
There is a real risk that key financial businesses will relocate outside the EU to the benefit of no one other than our competitors .
Lastly , there have been references throughout the debate to the Lisbon Treaty .
I do not hide the fact , and confine myself to pointing out once again , that the EU has continued to function perfectly well without the Lisbon Treaty in the past three or four years .
There is no reason why this could not continue to be the case .
Finally , I quote a paragraph towards the end of President Barroso 's manifesto .
He said : ' The EU works best when it focuses on its core business .
I want to concentrate our limited resources on where we can have most effect and where we can bring most added value . '
In other words , I think that means that the EU might do less , but it must do it better .
President Barroso , if these were to be your watchwords in the next five years , it would be an excellent basis for progress but , in any event , you do deserve a resounding vote of support from us tomorrow .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the institutions do not permit the left to put forward a candidate .
We deplore this single-candidacy condition and the political agreements among right-wing and social-democrat governments that make it possible .
Indeed , this condition denies the existence of a widely held opinion in Europe that is totally opposed to the liberal model of European integration that you embody .
This is the model which , without your saying a single word about it , plunges the European ideal into the depths of hostile abstentions from the European elections , in particular , and that is remarkable , in the new Member States .
This is the model that has turned the dream of a protective Europe into a machine for destroying our social rights and our national industries , and which makes peoples compete against one another in order to earn a living .
More and more people are saying : ' Nothing good comes of Europe ' .
You did not see the financial disaster and the environmental catastrophe coming , despite all the warnings , because there were warnings .
You helped them happen - you , and the others - with this dictatorship of free and fair competition , which is crippling our societies and destroying their public spirit and our public services .
Now , you are changing the words but not the deeds .
However , your programme can be summed up in one sentence - I do not know whether the French pun can be translated - which is : ' Henceforth it will be the same as before ' .
It is , however , a great change that Europe needs in order to turn the page on an epoch , on an archaic and bygone era , that of financial capitalism and maximum productivity .
The change could therefore begin by the refusal to invest you with the presidency .
That is why our delegation will deny you its vote .

( FI ) Mr President , President Barroso , you came to see our Eurosceptic group and we appreciate that .
It was time to discuss issues and you had some tough questions , from me among others .
The fact that there is only one candidate , however , does not appeal to me .
Moreover , if we do not accept you now , will it be how it was in Ireland , with Mr Barroso coming along in a couple of months ' time wearing a different tie and then everyone voting again on the same thing ?
You like the Commission .
I have read this document very carefully .
You say in it that the Commission is irreplaceable and that it is only the Commission which has the authority to put forward proposals which take the interests of all our citizens into account , and that only the Commission has competence and independence .
Ladies and gentlemen , where are the nations of Europe ?
Where are the parliaments of Europe and where are the European voters ?
Do they not say that it is for them that this Union is kept on its feet ?
I do not actually believe in that very much .
Mr Barroso , stand up for the working man , stand up for the workers , because the tired Left can no longer do that .
Stand up for the small entrepreneurs : we have no shortage of labour ; we have a shortage of employers .
Do good work from the bottom up , so that people are able to employ others , and this way Europe can move forward .
Finally , President Barroso , no EU taxes , thank you ; we already have enough taxes .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to direct my comments to Mr Barroso .

Mr Barroso , I have listened to you with great interest , and also great respect , for a very long time , in fact since you were a politician in a country that is very close to us and our hearts , namely Portugal .
However , you have just totally surprised me .
There are two reasons for this : firstly , you have demonstrated contempt for the group to which I belong - the group of Non-attached members - by not giving us even a minute of your time to explain your political proposals .
We represent many European citizens and you have demonstrated contempt for all our voters .
Secondly , your political plan is weak and your political proposals in the document ' Political guidelines for the next Commission ' are poor .
These proposals do not even include what you yourself have defended during your term as Commission President .
I am surprised that issues such as energy which , throughout your term of office , have been well handled , are now , when you are offering your proposals for the next ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , President Barroso , I shall begin by offering you my congratulations .
I congratulate you first on your five years of work at the head of the Commission , in which you have shown firmness in dealing with the Member States , as on the climate and energy question , and an ability to generate compromise and consensus , as on the financial perspective , despite the added difficulties resulting from enlargement , the institutional crisis and the international financial crisis .
Secondly , I congratulate you on the political guidelines for the next Commission that you have presented to this Parliament .
Unfortunately , President Barroso , in a democracy you cannot please everyone .
Some people do not like you because you are too European , and others because of ideological prejudice .
Other people compare you with the past , forgetting that today there are 27 Member States whose interests have to be reconciled , not just 12 any more , and that , fortunately , this Parliament has greater power and interinstitutional cooperation is more demanding .
Others want to postpone the decision .
Postponing it would create a vacuum and would weaken both the Commission and Europe .
The world is not waiting for us .
Just yesterday , the President of Brazil made a statement that threw the G8 into the wastebasket of history and supported the G20 .
The world is not standing still while Europe sets its house in order and elects its leaders .
Postponing a decision would be to accept that Europe is irrelevant in a more global world .
I am naturally proud that a Portuguese is presiding over the European Commission , but my support is not just an expression of national solidarity .
It represents my acknowledgment of the work that you have done , and my agreement with your priorities , which I make mine : economic growth ; investment in innovation , training and fighting unemployment ; an emphasis on the importance of economic and social cohesion ; investment in the environment and the fight against climate change ; greater security without curbing freedom ; and a strengthening of citizenship and civic participation .
I welcome what you have just proposed to us regarding working together , bringing this Parliament and your Commission closer together for the sake of our common Europe .
It is time for this Parliament to give the Heads of State of different political families a reason to unanimously reappoint you to head the Commission .
Good luck , President Barroso , and success in your work .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I fought my election campaign as the leading social democratic candidate in Austria on the basis of strong European regulation of the financial markets , a change in the Posting of Workers Directive , the protection of public services and an assessment of the social impact of legislation .
As none of this was achieved by the previous Commission , of which you were head , I have worked on the assumption that we need a new Commission and a new Commission President .
Now you are saying that you will do everything I have asked for .
How can we suddenly start believing what you say ?
My colleague , Stephen Hughes , has already referred to the fact that the first Barroso Commission has failed to deliver much of what you had already promised .
In the next few weeks , you will have the time to prove that you really take this seriously .
In this case , taking it seriously means having the support of the people who want to implement these measures .
It has already been made clear that tomorrow you will receive support from many people who have nothing to do with these substantive objectives .
You will receive a lot of support from those Members of Parliament who have prevented these objectives from being achieved or have rejected these objectives , for example , in the case of the Posting of Workers Directive and the public services measures , and who have been strongly in favour of privatisation .
These Members will support you tomorrow .
You must prove that you can form a new majority in the Commission which really wants to achieve these objectives .
In answer to Mr Lambsdorff , who says that this can only be a German election campaign and that the social democrats are leaving the European path , I would like to say that it is not the social democrats , but you who are entering into an alliance with genuine anti-Europeans and that is the problem .
Many of us would be prepared to support you , if the Commission had a clear position on the social dimension .
We note the promises that you have made today , but we also expect a decision which will indicate that the matters that I have referred to today will be taken seriously in the policy of the future Commission .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , in this House there are MEPs , including myself , who will not be placing their confidence in you in tomorrow 's vote .
I wish to state here the reasons for this decision , and also to voice our concerns to you , because I believe that they deserve to be heard .
We believe that the Commission is rather less strong today than it was five years ago .
We believe that , too often , it has deliberately chosen to give way to the Council , so as not to upset anyone .
We also believe that it has been unable to use the power conferred on it by the Treaties , this right of initiative which , in times of crisis , should be a real duty of initiative .
We believe , finally , that the Commission is no longer the place where the European general interest is formed , so as to make itself heard by one and all , and that none of this is good for Europe .
This Europe needs a vision , it needs powers to think and to produce a new development model , and it needs new solutions to economic issues : how can we achieve more industrial and budgetary integration ; how can we prioritise the long term over the short term ; how can we ensure , for example , that the banks are there , firstly , to support businesses , households and European investors in the area of regulation ; how can we put in place a European regulator who can discuss social issues on an equal footing with his or her US counterpart ; how can we implement a pact on employment ; how can we achieve more upwards harmonisation in the monetary field ; how can we use and demonstrate solidarity ; how can we achieve , in the future perhaps , a further enlargement of the euro area , including in the area of sustainable development ; and how can we make this transition work , not only in Europe but also in developing countries ?
There , Mr Barroso , are some of the questions facing you .
This is why I believe that we need a Commission that can revive the European general interest and its vision , quite simply to restore meaning to the idea of Europe .
It is on this basis that we shall judge your future actions .
Thank you for listening .

( DE ) Mr President , the depth of the crisis in Europe was caused not simply by unethical behaviour on the financial markets , Mr Barroso .
Other causes include growing social inequality , dangerous macro-economic imbalances between the Member States , which led to a lack of solidarity , and Europe 's dependency on rising resource prices .
The citizens of Europe deserve a Commission which repeatedly puts these deeper causes back on the agenda instead of turning them into taboos , instead of doing the opposite and instead of shifting the responsibility on to the Member States .
We need properly coordinated economic and fiscal policies in Europe .
We need collaboration on tax in Europe , which will put an end to tax dumping .
Only then will it be possible to stop the spread of social divisions and to finance the environmentally friendly investments that are needed .
We need a policy which consistently promotes green technologies and lifestyles in order to bring about a rapid reduction in the EU 's dependence on finite resources .
This will represent a green environmental revolution .
I cannot find any of these things in your programme , Mr Barroso , which is why I cannot vote for you .

( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Mr Barroso , for years , some of the smaller new Member States had already maintained a fixed exchange rate for their national currency against the euro before joining the European Union .
This allowed the European Union financial sector to invest most profitably in those countries .
However , at this time of crisis , for these countries to preserve this strict exchange rate results in a socially dramatic devaluation of people 's incomes and in speculative attacks on the foreign currency reserves of those countries ' central banks .
This costs both their citizens and the European Commission , as the lender of this money , dear .
A speedier introduction of the euro in these countries would reduce these costs and create stability .
That is why , Mr Barroso , I should like to see you promote an application of the Maastricht criteria appropriate to these times of crisis with as much zeal as you defend the Treaty of Lisbon . Thank you .
Mr President , I opposed the nomination of Mr Barroso as President of the Commission .
Mr Barroso is using the EU Commission to interfere with the democratic right of the Irish people to freely decide to accept or reject the Lisbon Treaty in a referendum on 2 October .
With great cynicism , his Commission has sent employees of the Commission into schools all over Ireland in recent days to speak , supposedly , of how good the Commission of the European Union is - in reality a signal to their parents that they should vote ' yes ' for Lisbon .
Moreover , a senior civil servant of the Commission has openly participated in public rallies of organisations campaigning for the Lisbon Treaty .
Like Caesar Augustus , Mr Barroso is sending his emissaries to tell the Irish people what they should do .
We will embark on democratic debate with anybody , but it is a gross abuse of taxpayers ' funds that civil servants should intervene on one side of this debate .
( GA ) Mr Barroso 's policies are not at all for the benefit of the European workforce and the Lisbon Treaty is not for the benefit of the European workforce , but rather it promotes militarisation and privatisation and , as a result , we will not accept Mr Barroso as president from now on .
Mr President , President Barroso espouses a Europe of ambition .
The EU has certainly achieved that : 27 states in 50 years , and the Lisbon Treaty - if ratified by Ireland - will mark the death of their national sovereignty and the launch pad for the European Union takeover .
But we in UKIP reject Mr Barroso 's plan for European integration because we know that individual Member States are not an irrelevance .
National sovereignty is the bedrock of our values and the cornerstone of the United Kingdom 's democracy .
In the EU , human rights - whether individual or collective - take second place to solidarity for Europeans .
The two are directly incompatible , yet President Barroso puts them together at the centre of his vision of the EU for the next five years , with solidarity as the cornerstone for European society .
We in UKIP prefer sovereignty to solidarity .
When Member States ' citizens express views in national referendums , the result should be final , respecting their rights to their opinions , but the EU 's version of citizens ' rights is to make them vote and vote again in national referendums until they can cave in to the pressure and vote ' yes ' .
This is how the Maastricht Treaty and the Nice Treaty were achieved , and now the EU is following the same tactic and forcing Ireland to vote again on the Lisbon Treaty when it has already rejected it , as did France and the Netherlands .
What kind of rights are these , when they are rejected out of hand in the name of solidarity ?
UKIP places sovereignty and the citizen 's rights above solidarity .
We reject the Lisbon Treaty and President Barroso 's vision of it .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a revolution in democracy .
Mr Barroso , just imagine you were to stand for election in Europe , just you and no other candidate .
What percentage of the votes would you receive ?
What would the citizens do ?
They would probably have listened to you today and seen that you promised everything to everyone .
Hopefully , they would also find out what you did five years ago .
That was when you promised most people a very great deal .
It is a question of comparing what you promised then with what you are promising now and with what can be expected .
I believe that is very , very little .
You represent the old Europe , the botched Europe , the contribution to the financial crisis , as a result of the failure on the part of the Commission , the lack of commitment to climate issues , and so on and so forth .
I would be on the side of the majority of European citizens , because I believe that you would not get more than 10 or 12 or 15 % of the votes .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say in advance that the German conservative ( CDU / CSU ) Members of Parliament will support you , Mr Barroso , in your bid for a second period of office .
However , we do have specific expectations of you and , of course , of the future Commission during this second period of office .
I want to make that quite clear .
Our demands are focused on the future but , of course , we have five years ' experience behind us and therefore I would like to highlight briefly the changes we would like to see .
In our opinion , the last five years have brought high points and low points .
The low points included the lack of regulation of the financial markets , because the Commission lacked the courage to take the necessary measures against individual Member States which were blocking progress , the noticeable increase in the power of the Council , and the high-handedness of individual Commissioners who have disregarded the concept of subsidiarity .
We will lend our support to your programme and your guidelines , because we believe that they represent the right approach .
We want to ensure that some of the things that are important to us are achieved and I am sure that you will take that into account .
Firstly , the model of a social market economy must be the basis of our common policy in Europe , in other words , freedom and responsibility and not just the freedom which was to be found on the financial markets .
The competitiveness of Europe and job security in Europe have to be weighed up against protecting the environment and the climate .
I was rather surprised that you are potentially putting this overall approach at risk by appointing a separate climate commissioner .
We need an industrial base in Europe and the problems of the world , such as hunger , poverty and disease , can only be solved if Europe is a strong economic power with a base of this kind .
The citizens must lend their support to Europe .
Over-regulation is significantly reducing people 's motivation and alienating them from the concept of Europe , which is why we want an independent assessment of the impact of legislation .
Fourthly and finally , we want a fundamentally new version of the interinstitutional agreements .
Under these conditions , the five-year period of office will be a positive one .
Mr President , one could not ask a Popular Party politician to be a Socialist , nor a Socialist to vote for a Popular Party politician .
It would be as simple as that , if it were not much more complicated .
Why do we feel somehow embarrassed and divided , however , when asked to support your candidacy ?
Let us be frank .
The list of disappointments and failures during the term of office of this Commission is far too long , as is that of the unaccomplished promises and initiatives .
Consequently , our European citizens not only lost trust in the European institutions but also their hopes and passions .
In complete fairness , we must also admit that you cannot be held solely responsible for that .
The prime responsibility should lie with the national political leaders who always nationalised the achievements and Europeanised the defeats , and who mostly gave priority to national egoism over European solidarity .
Many of your Commissioners , Socialists included , and provided by the same national leaders , are also responsible for lacking enough vision , courage , competence and will .
Thus , today we are not just confronting you but those nominating you as the only candidate for one of the most important European positions .
Obviously , they did not do so out of respect for your qualities and strengths , but for what they consider to be your weaknesses .
Not because they believe you will work for the achievement of an ever closer union with a powerful social appeal , but because they think you will call them individually to ask for their national blessing in advance of each European Commission initiative .
It is paradoxical , at least , that today , the European Parliament as a communitarian institution , rather than consolidating the democratic legitimacy of the future president of the communitarian institution that is the Commission with an overwhelming ' yes ' , should , through this candidate , challenge the intergovernmental institution that is the Council .

Therefore , at the end of this process of our vote for the college , it will be important if you could prove that you are one of us and not one of them .
Mr President , President Barroso should be congratulated for his staunch support for the treaty change agenda throughout his previous term .
I think he should also be thanked for publishing a good programme of stability plus necessary proposals for improvement in the challenging policy sectors that we all agree upon .
But I have to say that , as GDP sinks and as our spending increases , we are facing , across the period to 2014 , the prospect of a fresh budgetary crisis , and at that time , I do trust that President Barroso will be firmly on the side of Parliament and is going to oppose the position that we can foresee will be the position of national treasuries .
The fact is that the Union requires a larger budget and a budgetary policy crafted to promote economic recovery .
National spending should be transferred to the European budget in places where there are clear cost efficiencies , economies of scale and value added , and where market failure requires stronger European policies to correct it .
We must resource the budget by means of an independent and more progressive and transparent system .
( DE ) Mr President , I am , of course , not referring to the previous speaker , but I would ask you to be fair when interrupting speakers who have exceeded their speaking time .
You cut off some people dramatically and let others run over for a very long time .
That is not acceptable .

Mr President , I just want to clarify that Ireland is not having to vote again because someone has said so : the Irish people are voting again because they have decided to do so of their own accord , and they will take their own decision .
Secondly , the vote now is different to the last time .
We have guarantees that clarify matters for the Irish people , and we also have a guarantee that we can keep our Commissioner .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Kelly , I am sorry but this is a new procedure but we have to apply it correctly .
It applies only to questions to the previous speaker , not for statements .
Apologies for cutting you off .
President-designate of the Commission . - Mr President , I will start with issues of policy , then politics if I have the time .
Regarding Mr Hughes ' questions , I think it is important to clarify those issues that are very important for your group and for me , and for our commitment to a social market economy .
On the posting of workers , my commitment to a regulation is intended to address the very problem you highlighted , Mr Hughes .
The implementation and interpretation issues that have created uncertainty are the problem .
I remind you that a regulation is directly applicable and will take less time than overall revision of the directive .
In any case , I have said that , if necessary , we can look at revising the directive .
On Laval , Commissioner Špidla , a member of your Socialist family , has , in agreement with me , conducted a very complete search for practical solutions .
You must be aware that the problems you raised do not arise in all Member States .
The diversity of labour law in the Member States means that a Laval situation can arise in some Member States but not in others .
You , of all people , know that Member States , social partners and trade unions stick to their labour law acquis .
We needed to fully assess the situation to make sure that the remedy was not going to create a bigger problem than the one it set out to solve .
Mr Špidla has carried out that analysis , and that is why I can now propose a solution , trying to get a broad agreement in this Parliament .
On public services , Mr Hughes asked why the Commission has not yet proposed a framework directive .
I will point out that my Commission has done very important legal work on clarifying the application of state aid rules to public services .
That was the most important issue five years ago , and the truth is that these clarifications have taken much of the heat out of the age-old debate on public services in the internal market .
I did not say that there are no more problems .
On the contrary , I recognise them .
I am committed to completely assessing the situation and I will not hesitate , if necessary , to go further .
I have made an honest and loyal offer in discussions with your group , and I look forward to working on it with you , including on the appropriate legal instruments .
On gender balance , I am committed to this and my Commission has a record number of women .
I can tell you very frankly that it was a very hard fight to get some Member States to send competent women to the Commission because they did not want to send women .
As you know , the initiative on that comes from the Member States .
I am committed to doing my best once again . I remember the first Delors Commission had no women and the second had only one .
At one time I had nine women members of the Commission , which I believe is very important .
I nominated the first woman ever as Secretary-General - the most important civil servant in the Commission - so I am very committed to that issue and I need your support there .
Once again , however , please also work with your Member States so that they do not resort to this routine , because for 50 years , some Member States were incapable of making one single proposal for a woman for the Commission .
Regarding the issue of social matters , let us put this bluntly .
If you want to attack the caricature of Mr Barroso , then do so , but you know very well that I have often made proposals that were refused by the Council - including , by the way , some governments from your family .
Let us be honest about it .
At the last European Council , I proposed that we no longer have cofinancing for the Social Fund for those countries that do not have this possibility , namely the new Member States that are having difficulties .
I made that proposal .
It was refused by several governments , including some whose leadership , or whose finance minister , is from your party .
So I completely disagree .
It is not intellectually honest to attack the Commission all the time .
You are missing the target .
It is easier for you , but the reality is that we are pushing hard .
After that Council , I put a proposal on the table - that is now being considered by the Council - to suspend the Social Fund cofinancing rules for countries that are in difficulties .
I am committed to social cohesion .
How could I not be committed , coming from a country like Portugal that benefits so much from the European Union ?
I am committed to social and economic cohesion , and that is why I believe this caricature that some try to present is damaging Europe .
I agree with what Mr Lambsdorff said before .
I would prefer to have the support of the main pro-European political families , but some are excluding themselves from that .
That is your choice , not mine .
I want to bring the broadest possible consensus and exclude nobody .
Let us be frank : in the history of European integration , it is not only the EPP , not only the Socialists , not only the Liberals , who have made great contributions .
From Lord Cockfield , a Conservative , to a Communist like Altiero Spinelli , to the Green movement , there have been many contributions to our European integration .
After the election , and with this diversity of views , it is important that we work together for Europe .
We need a strong Europe , but there is a contradiction there .
On the one hand , you say that you want a strong Europe , you want a strong Commission , you want me to stand up to some Member States that are going national , but at the same time you say ' We are not going to vote for you .
We are going to reduce your influence .
We are going to weaken you in front of the Member States ' .
There is a contradiction there , so let us be honest about it .
If you want a strong Commission that has all the rights and initiative to defend European interests , at least give me the benefit of the doubt .
We are living in difficult times and I have made an honest offer to you , a loyal offer to all Members of the Parliament , in full transparency .
You cannot say that I am saying different things to different groups because this is the same programme I am presenting to all of you .
Today I have added some complements and clarifications , but it is the same programme .
Of course it is a compromise , but Europe only works as a compromise .
Europe cannot work on fanaticism , or on dogmatism .
I thank the EPP for the support it has given me .
I am really grateful for the support you have given me , but the EPP was the first to say that they do not want this because it is alone .
No party has a majority alone , so we have to build a consensus in Europe .
Building this consensus in Europe is critically important .
Of course we keep our ideological differences and keep up the political debate , but we make an effort to have a stronger Europe .
I am committed to that .
Are you ?
That is my question .
Mr President , Mr Barroso did not reply to my charge of interference by the Commission in the democratic process in Ireland on the Lisbon Treaty ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I have a problem which means that I am not going to vote for you tomorrow , but you know what it is , since my group has explained it well .
It is a political issue .
You do not have a project for transforming Europe environmentally and socially .
And yet that is , I believe , what needs to be done today .
However , as Mr Daul elegantly put it , it was the right that won the elections , therefore you are on the right .
The situation is clear .
I should like , however , to be able to have respect for the President of the Commission , but I have a problem with this : when I see you , I inevitably think - and I assure you this is true - of your responsibility in the CIA 's secret flights .
Between 2002 and 2006 , 728 people were transferred to Guantánamo via Portuguese airspace .
You were minister from 2002 to 2004 .
I therefore cannot believe you , Mr Barroso , when you make declamations about Europe being a champion of human rights .
What I expect from you - what I hope for from you , because I would like , in the future , to respect you as President of the Commission - is not your memoirs , in however many years ' time , but that you will acknowledge your responsibilities in this serious act , which casts a shadow over European values .
Mr President , there is a saying that if you are not at the table , you are on the menu .
The next decade will decide where Europe is going to be .
The current leading generation in Western Europe had a holiday from history .
We grew up in peace .
We grew up in a welfare state .
We made debts and passed them on to our children . But history is knocking on our door .
We will have a sluggish economy for years to come ; we are facing mounting immigration and are sustaining an ageing population .
Unfortunately , Europe does not have a culture of achievement .
The European dream is to retire to the French Riviera as soon as possible .
If we do not innovate and develop an entrepreneurial culture as you designed , Europe will be on the menu .
I count on your leadership .
May I give you one piece of advice : keep Europe focused on its core task .
If you fail there , you will fail everywhere .
Remain open-minded and do not propose a European tax because it will provoke a pitchfork revolution against Europe .
I have never seen a demonstration in favour of a European tax .
It is simply a bridge too far and you will only feed public anger .
I count on your sense of realism to get Europe at the table and not on it , and I wish you good luck in your second term .

( DE ) Mr President , we are aware that Mr Barroso is a walking compromise between the powers of Europe .
We know also that he is the lowest common denominator among the governments of the Member States .
We know that Mr Barroso also has something to offer for everyone : a hint of Maoism for those on the left , a touch of conservatism for the members of the Christian Social party , a smattering of neo-liberalism , plus a green and socialist approach .
Mr Barroso will , of course , stand as a candidate without opposition , without an alternative .
For this reason , he is now having a few tough days and having to listen to unpleasant remarks from the united left and from other critics .

However , this will pay off , because we know that after these tough days , Mr Barroso will probably once again be Commission President and that there will , once again , be uneasy compromises between the large and powerful groups in this House , but also between the governments in the Council , and that Mr Barroso , who has personified the failures of European integration during the last five years , is likely to continue to do so over the next five years .
When it comes down to it , we all have very little influence .
Mr President , let me start by saying that we support President Barroso 's European ambition and his programme , and I say that on behalf of 28 Polish MEPs , if not more .
There is one thing in this programme , however , which is especially close to our hearts , and that is energy security .
You know , President Barroso , that this House is very much attached to this issue .
We need to revisit and reassess both the progress and the deficiencies in this process and to set priorities for the coming months and years .
The present situation is not satisfactory , but rather grey , because , in spite of all the declarations and apparent goodwill , the progress made in terms of energy infrastructure and crisis mechanisms is far from sufficient .
The measures taken are not fulfilling all expectations and are still not satisfactory .
We obviously welcome the short-term measures set by the Commission and Presidency , but we expect a long-term vision and determination from the Commission President and , if necessary , for the President of the Commission to face or challenge the inertia and egoism of the Member States .
We need a strong Commission and strong leadership from you because we need the Commission to act on behalf of the whole Union and in the interests of the Union 's citizens .
Let me emphasise that such leadership should be based on a consensus that you have to lead and build in the Parliament and Commission as well as in the Member States .
As you know , this idea was launched here in Parliament three years ago , but there is still a long way to go and we still have to wait for this dream to come true .
I hope that by the end of this legislature , President Barroso , you will make this miracle happen and that you will be given the chance to do so .
In this expectation , we support your candidature and keep our fingers crossed for your Presidency .

( SV ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , you said in your introduction that Europe and the world have suffered a crisis of values .
Why do you not use plain language ?
What we have suffered is , of course , a crisis for radical market thinking , for which you and your group are among the primary advocates .
I promised my voters that I would not vote for you - as many other Social Democrats have done - if you do not guarantee that the Posting of Workers Directive will be amended to strengthen the rights of workers .
Now I hear you trying to sound as if you have complied with this request .
However , you say that this request will not be complied with by amending the directive , but by means of a new regulation , which we know to be completely inadequate .
At the same time , I hear you painting an erroneous picture of the consequences of these amendments to the Posting of Workers Directive .
You have been asked about this before and you have been evasive every time .
I will ask you again : will you take action to amend the Posting of Workers Directive , so that European workers receive equal pay for equal work throughout the EU instead of experiencing the wage dumping that we are currently suffering throughout Europe ?
( SV ) Mr President , Europe today is a continent defined by peace and democracy .
This was not the case 70 years ago when Europe was at war .
This was not the case 20 years ago , either , when Europe was divided into East and West .
Our generation has a responsibility to manage our continent and preserve and strengthen an open and democratic Europe .
Mr Barroso , you have a special responsibility .
Europe needs clear leadership and an EU that is both visible and there for the people of Europe in hard times as well as good ones .
We need a leadership that listens .
You need to do more in this regard .
I would like to see more of the commitment that we have seen today , more of the José Manuel Barroso that we have seen today .
Tomorrow you will receive the support of the Liberal Party of Sweden - Cecilia Malmström 's party , not because we agree with you on everything , but because we believe that you can do more than you have shown us thus far .
Here are some guiding principles for the continuation of your work .
Protectionism is an abomination - even for a former Maoist .
The strength of the EU lies in its open borders and free trade .
Human rights apply to everyone , wherever they are .
You need to do more in this regard .
The economic crisis cries out for a global new order , with balanced regulations enabling us to deal with the climate crisis .
Free Europe 's farmers and give consumers and the market a chance .
The EU does not need more institutional power struggles .
Preserve us from that fate !
Europe has had enough of lame ducks .
Mr Barroso , tomorrow , you will hopefully have the opportunity to establish a new Commission .
I hope that you will then ensure that there are as many women as men in the new Commission .

( EL ) Mr Barroso , as you know , you have made no mention whatsoever of your position on issues such as the protection of biodiversity or your commitments pursuant to the Millennium Goals and the European Union 's sustainable development strategy .
I shall focus on the meaning of flexicurity , which you often use to combine flexibility and security .
This concept appears to harbour serious dangers in terms of worker protection .
Part-time employment , for example , is fine when it is the worker 's choice .
However , forced employment , where the worker has no choice , but is perhaps unable to find a job , looks like part-time unemployment .
There is a similar problem with forced employment in jobs and with working times that have an adverse impact on citizens ' personal lives and their quality of life .
If you are elected , what political guidelines do you intend to issue on these matters , in cases which concern you ?
Also , why do you not mention specific targets for green professions and other such initiatives , not so that you become ' green ' , but so that you at least indicate which way is the way out of the crisis ?

( RO ) Mr Barroso , I read your document but , quite frankly , I will vote for you tomorrow because I believe that Europe needs a religious Christian man like yourself , with this kind of upbringing .
I think that you will be President of the Commission tomorrow and I urge you , Mr Barroso , to ask God to give you what he gave to Solomon : the wisdom to lead the European Commission .
Please God .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Italian delegation of the European People 's Party will support you , Mr Barroso , with our customary respect , our customary friendship and our customary loyalty .
Nevertheless , we call on you to show more courage to enable our institutions to face the momentous times which we are experiencing , and to focus not only on the legitimate concerns of the governments , but first and foremost on the needs of the young generations , their desire to set up a home , have a family and have children : basically , the courage to fight for a true Europe , one underpinned by our sense of responsibility and not by our political mix .
That is why I am calling on my fellow Socialist Members to show the same courage .
Of course , electing Mr Barroso again may be a stopgap measure for the crisis of consensus , which is clearly shown by the outcome of the elections , but a yes vote , albeit a yes vote with conditions attached for the candidate for Commission President , would also give you all an opportunity to play your part at this difficult time , and send a clear signal to the European public , namely , that what unites us is stronger than what divides us , and that only in this way , together , can we help each other out of the abyss .

In short , it is not just a yes to Mr Barroso but a yes to a clear and simple recipe : a Commission created with a contribution from all of you means that that Commission will be more independent , more efficient , stronger and , in other words , more European .
( SK ) I would like to discuss a topic which is causing concern to many people in the European Union , including myself .
Our economies are going through a very difficult period , a period of crisis , the impact of which is being felt by so-called ordinary people in particular .
These people are fighting for their work , for their existence and for their children , and it is precisely this fear and worry which creates such fertile ground for the growth of far-right extremism in the EU and in the Member States .
In the past , far-right extremists concealed their faces under various different masks and guises .
Today they parade through public squares and speak openly to the media .
In addition , these people , who spread hatred against Roma , Jews , immigrants and homosexuals , are establishing political parties and , unfortunately , are successfully fielding candidates both for national parliaments and for the European Parliament during this difficult period .
Finally , it was not so long ago that we witnessed even here , on the floor of this democratic institution , here in the European Parliament , the arrival or rather the marching in of certain MEPs in uniforms reminiscent of the fascist period of the Second World War .
I would therefore like to ask you , Mr President , what sort of measures need to be adopted in the future , in respect of your role and the Commission as an authority , against such an abuse of the European Parliament and especially in the actual fight against extremism .
Mr President , Mr Barroso observed that we are living in extraordinary times - true - but extraordinary times call for extraordinary leadership .
Are you that leader , Mr Barroso ?
I did not support you back in 2004 and unfortunately , in five years , you have not done enough to convince me .
A majority of my group , however , is willing to give you the benefit of the doubt , but we will reserve our final judgment until we have seen the full package of commissioners ' portfolios and the full details of your political programme , because do not forget , and I hope you hear the irony in this , that the President of the European Commission is a politician , and not a civil servant with job security .
Regardless of the outcome of the votes , this process has strengthened European parliamentary democracy because , contrary to what some in this House fear , obliging a candidate to campaign has not weakened but strengthened the position of Commission President .
Because , the way I see it , a mandate by the European Parliament for a political programme is a much more solid base than a nomination on the basis of a backroom deal between national governments .
I also happen to believe , contrary to you , if I listened carefully , that the emergence of a real opposition in this House is very welcome and a healthy sign that European parliamentary democracy is vital and mature .
So , Mr Barroso , the ball is in your court .
Will you meet the challenge ?
Because you have not convinced me yet .
But that is not nearly as relevant , Mr Barroso , as convincing the European citizens in the next five years .
( Applause )
( NL ) Madam President .
Mr Barroso , when the credit crunch broke , you did nothing .
It was the French Presidency that found the way to the emergency exit .
You did not take back the reins : not with your European Economic Recovery Plan - you failed to make State aid to the car industry subject to strict environmental conditions - nor with a proposal for better financial supervision : you capitulated at the outset in the face of opposition from the City of London .
The EU did hold the reins in the global approach to the climate crisis , but you are rapidly throwing them away .
You are threatening to buy most of our CO2 reductions from developing countries instead of ensuring we emit less ourselves .
You could blame national governments for this , but not for last week 's appallingly meagre proposal of climate aid to developing countries : EUR 2 billion .
This is peanuts compared to the EUR 30-35 billion Europe ought to be providing .
In so doing , you are severely hampering Copenhagen 's chances of success .
There is the credit crunch , the economic crisis , the climate crisis - three tests of genuine leadership .
Mr Barroso , three times you have failed to make the grade .

Madam President , as a new Member of this House , I have listened to the many speakers who have focussed on Mr Barroso 's track record in office and have voiced many concerns .
Many I agree with .
Our paths diverge completely on the Lisbon Treaty , Mr Barroso .
However , you have taken a great interest in my constituency of Northern Ireland . For this commitment I thank you .
We value the support and close working relationship of Commission officials at all levels with Northern Ireland .
I look forward to this relationship continuing and my constituency benefiting from it .
You will know about our past : the impact of violence on investment , and the need for new roads and rail links .
You will know about the huge potential for the economy through the development of tourism .
To aid our economic development I would urge the Commission to examine what resources will be made available to redress the years of underinvestment .
As many in this Chamber have said already today , it is actions and delivery that count .
( ES ) Madam President , Commission President , I want to make a preliminary comment .
We cannot have the same debate after elections as before elections , out of respect for the elections and for the European people .
We should not do things any differently from what happens in the national parliaments in this respect .
If the European Commissioners are the result of a majority in each country , our main concern should be that the Commission President is faithful to what the European people have voted for in the European elections , hence the importance and correctness of Mr Barroso becoming Commission President .
This is a strictly democratic principle .
There are two points which Mr Barroso made and which I do not have any doubts in clearly and definitively supporting .
The first is the extent of the diagnosis of the current situation , which he gave in his speech and comments .
We are not only experiencing an economic and financial crisis , but also a crisis of values .
This is the first time that I have heard in this House any confirmation of these characteristics .
We are not only experiencing a crisis , but also a changing world .
That is why , more than ever before , the emphasis must be placed on positive action by individuals and on a change of attitude towards the State and the markets , because we have probably lived beyond our means in many EU countries .
The second point , which I also support , is Mr Barroso 's European ambition .
Europe needs to elect , prioritise and organise , and the crisis and the Treaty of Lisbon are the two main issues on which the Commission President must particularly concentrate .
Tackling the crisis requires a determined Commission and also a Parliament which is capable of tackling the serious circumstances that we are experiencing .
The crisis is not yet over and its landscape is still unrecognisable .
It is also forcing us to deal with social inequalities in the European Union .
We therefore need the political ambition that you have shown this afternoon , Mr Barroso .
( ES ) Madam President , Mr President-designate , having listened to you closely , I should like to underline a few points on which many of us would agree with you .

Firstly , it is clear that we are facing a crisis , yet many of us believe that , in recent years , Europe has been incapable of developing expectations and hopes that can overcome pessimism .
Secondly , it is clear that we need the European Union , strong institutions and a Commission that knows where it is going .
However , many of us think that you cannot be a candidate for re-election to the same Commission , but rather to a new Commission in order to start a new era in which we are confronted with many more and much tougher challenges .
We need a Europe capable of regulating markets and guaranteeing rights , particularly social rights .
However , we really need a Europe capable of adding value in order to correct global abuses and injustices at source .
I have listened to the proposal to include a security-related immigration commissioner in your Commission .
I would stress that immigration does not impact solely or mainly on our security , but on our values and our capacity to correct inequalities at source .
As a result , tomorrow 's vote will not mark the end of a process , but rather the first step or starting point in a huge task that the new Commission must take on so that , in defiance of those who want the paralysis or retreat of the European Union , it can give a new impetus to a much better Europe than the one we have known in recent years .
This new Commission must be capable of asserting itself against the Europhobes and Eurosceptics ; it must be capable of defending its independence as a European engine against the Council ; and it must be capable , not only of cooperating , but also of continually responding to this Parliament .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , there are several elements to , and reasons for , our show of confidence and our very clear vote tomorrow .
The first element is that of democratic consistency : with regard to the choice of the 27 Heads of State or Government who chose you unanimously ; with regard to what we said during the electoral campaign - it was not so long ago - and with regard to the citizens ' vote .
We are not going to apologise for having won the elections , even though we are aware - we are well aware , I would say to our fellow Members - that we will have to surround you with more ideas than those of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) alone .
Then , there is democratic consistency with regard to the exercise that you have been conducting for several weeks , in the demanding , sincere and humble dialogue with Parliament , and we are here to bear witness to it .
There is a second reason , which is a conviction : the very strong conviction that there will be no strong policies in Europe if the institutions are weak .
We need strong institutions .
This is why we hope that the Treaty of Lisbon will be ratified .
It is a tool box that will make the institutions work .
We need a strong Commission that can confront the crisis as quickly as possible .
The third reason is a contract of confidence that we have signed with you .
In the face of this , the most serious and most profound economic , financial , food - let us not forget the one billion starving people in the world - and environmental crisis , we need the Commission to show its fighting spirit .
We need you , and us with you , to learn all the lessons from this crisis , in terms of governance , regulation , innovation and new policies - I am thinking of the idea of a European savings bank to support small and medium-sized enterprises in the strategic sectors - and , with regard to the most profound crisis , the environmental crisis , to introduce a new model of economic and social growth , of green growth , as you yourself said .
That , Mr Barroso , is why we shall be ready , tomorrow , to sign the contract of confidence with you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , your speech today , Mr Barroso , has not changed our opinion .
Our view remains strongly negative .
Throughout the years of your presidency , the Commission has shown itself to be incapable and lacking in autonomy .
This was the case for the financial crisis and the same holds true for immigration policy : the safeguarding of fundamental rights and compliance with Community law must represent two sides of the same policy .
You said in this Chamber that you intend to appoint a commissioner for justice and rights and a commissioner for internal affairs and immigration .
Do not do that , Mr Barroso : immigration and rights must stay together so as not to endorse xenophobic policies .
You have a majority here in Parliament , a right-wing majority , and clearly we are unable to identify with this majority .
I understand the difficulties of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and the Democrats for Europe but , Mr Verhofstadt , do not tell us that the coherent approach that you called for in order to emerge from the crisis consists of the speed with which the Barroso Commission will be formed .
It is obvious that we cannot identify with this majority .
Our positions cannot be reconciled with those who do not resolutely fight for full and steadfast freedom of information , with those who do not fight to safeguard rights , and with those who view Parliament as a mere forum to represent national governments .
( RO ) Madam President , President of the Commission , the growth of energy security is an important item in your programme .
The success of the negotiations with Turkey , which led to the signing of the Nabucco agreement , highlights that the European Union is able to represent Member States on the international stage , and I wish to congratulate you on this achievement .
I hope that by using the same methods , a similar success will be achieved in securing the required volume of gas at a time when there are countries in the region which want to make their sources available for this project .
The future Commission must create an internal energy market , effective competition and a high level of supply security for all Member States .
In this respect , an important role will be played by the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators .
Romania has applied to host the headquarters of this agency and I hope that it will enjoy the necessary support .
Energy security also depends on the EU 's neighbours .
We must support neighbouring countries which subscribe to European values and aspire to become part of the European family .
I also want to draw your attention to the still fragile political situation and the difficult economic situation in the Republic of Moldova .
Support needs to be given urgently to the new political authorities in Chişinău to help them get through this difficult situation .
Finally , I firmly believe that tomorrow 's vote will demonstrate the stability of Europe 's institutions and will make a positive contribution to the outcome of the referendum in Ireland .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , I might as well say it straight away : you did not convince the French socialists for five years , and you are not succeeding in convincing us now with a project in which you are as generous in word as you are general in purpose .
How can you say to us ' vote for me if you want a Europe that is united in its diversity ' , when it is precisely because we want this Europe that we are recommending waiting for the Irish vote so as to vote on your candidacy ?
Armed with the support of the Member States , you preferred to secure your appointment ahead of time and with fewer risks as regards the number of votes required .
You thought that the passage before Parliament would be a mere formality : it is not so , and this is just the beginning , for your response does not meet the expectations of the citizens , who are suffering in the crisis and who have demonstrated their anger towards our institutions through their low turnout .
You say that the crisis has changed you and you pose as the great navigator of a united Europe , but you have not been able to guide the Member States towards a truly European recovery plan , and we are still awaiting the concrete and binding measures needed for financial regulation .
You claim to have given us guarantees regarding the social agenda , but all you are advocating is a new regulation , not a review of the Posting of Workers Directive .
Moreover , you have not made a firm , and above all clear , commitment on a directive protecting public services .
You show contempt for the MEPs ' memory of events .
We have not forgotten that , over the last five years , social issues have never been at the heart of the proposed solutions , and it is only now that you are agreeing to a social impact study for each piece of European legislation .
In a period of unprecedented crisis , which is destroying hundreds of thousands of jobs , everything must be done to ensure that the number of European unemployed workers or working poor does not reach 25 million by 2010 .
For this we need an industrial policy to be adopted .
The citizens need to be set an example of solidarity in order to combat the crisis .
Neither in your words nor in your declared ambition for Europe will they find this impetus today .
To carry on as before is disastrous , said the philosopher , Walter Benjamin .
You still have a very long way to go to win over the socialists and the social democrats .
For the sake of political consistency and out of respect for our electorate , we shall not vote for you .
( NL ) Madam President .
Mr Barroso , the members of the Dutch delegation in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will be voting for you with conviction tomorrow .
This is not only because we are convinced of your qualities but also because we are in a hurry .
In our view , the last two months have been a lost opportunity to tackle the economic crisis - and we , the Dutch , are in a hurry .
We do indeed want to see more social market economy in your programme - as far as we were concerned , the previous Commission was rather too liberal in that regard .
We hope that you will continue the fight against excessive regulation and make Copenhagen a success , but reduce the number of European Agencies created .
Another matter concerns Europe 's citizens .
Today , this afternoon , the word has come up perhaps two or three times .
That is not enough .
The European elections have shown us that we really have our work cut out to win the minds of ordinary people for Europe .
The Opel workers who are to be made redundant must immediately think of Europe as a source of hope , a source of work .
Finally , over the last six weeks , you have struck me as a man with passion and enthusiasm .
You thrive when challenged .
I urge you to keep that up for the next five years : I should like to see it every week .

Madam President , we are indeed living in extraordinary times , but Mr Barroso 's response to the economic crisis lacks strength and impact and his promises on social Europe have not been kept .
Mr Barroso , your political guidelines provide little illumination as to your plans and drag out much of the same rhetoric used five years ago .
Of course we need a strong and vibrant internal market bringing jobs and prosperity , but this must go hand in hand with improved social rights in Europe for workers and citizens , not at their expense .
Despite strong pressure from this House to correct this imbalance and calls for a review of the Posted Workers Directive , for social impact assessments and for a more ambitious economic recovery package , we are still waiting .
Earlier , you referred to union membership and the right to strike as sacred .
Across the UK , unions are once more in talks over strike action in response to problems associated with the Posted Workers Directive , with fears of the undercutting of wages and undermining of collective agreements .
Your answer to my question on this issue last week sounded like warm words , yet you admitted that the Directive falls short of its aims .
The problems lie in implementation and interpretation by the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) .
You promised to make amends through a new legal instrument , but the ECJ judgments have shown we need to strengthen the directive to stop the undercutting of wages .
At this time of financial crisis , we need clear legal guidelines and , Mr Barroso , we need the same wage for the same work at the same place , regardless of gender .
What guarantees can you give us that this will be the case ?
( NL ) Madam President , Commission President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , these are difficult times , transitional times , times of change - but interesting times too .
Institutionally speaking , we are on the way from Nice to Lisbon .
I hope we arrive unscathed : financially , economically , ecologically , demographically , even in terms of energy , migration and security , and not forgetting globalisation , the food problem , the fight to preserve our social model - in all these fields we are in the throes of transition .
Whether these are dangers or opportunities depends to a great extent on ourselves .
One thing is certain in this regard : only if we take a European approach to the challenges , only if we tackle them with a solid , well-oriented European programme - which you have , Mr President-designate of the Commission - and if we have strong institutions to work with , can we help shape the future ourselves and further develop our socially and ecologically adjusted market economy .
We have no time to lose - ' we are in a hurry ' , as my neighbour has just put it - and for this reason , too , we must press on with the matter of a new Commission .
At present , ladies and gentlemen , we have one President-designate , and one only .
We must give José Manuel Barroso our trust .
I would ask anyone who disagrees to make sure they can tell friends from enemies - after all , what are you achieving with delays and dissenting votes ?
If you do not want Mr Barroso , who do you want ?
Who was your candidate , who is your candidate , I ask the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
If you succeed in your plans , are you sure you will obtain what you consider a better candidate , a better President of the Commission ?
Mr President-designate of the Commission , you have my trust , and you will have my vote and that of my group colleagues .
I wish you every success , including with the formation of the new Commission : you must be given elbow room to press on with this .

( PT ) President Barroso , the Lisbon Treaty will be ratified and will enter into force within a few months .
That is my hope .
It is clear from your programme and your speech today , however , that you want to strengthen the European Parliament 's powers right away .
I agree , because we can no longer go back to the time when the future of Europe was cooked up between the Council and the Commission , while the European Parliament was given the role of a mere onlooker .
I believe , Mr Barroso , that your next mandate will be decisive for consolidating this new institutional balance between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
Our support is not , therefore , a blank cheque , but an investment .
Our democratic tradition , the protection of human rights , and innovations in the production of cleaner forms of energy and better environmental policies are distinctive European features , but nothing makes us stand out from the rest of the world as much as our social policies .
I must therefore express our hope that the Commission over which you will preside , I am sure , will assume the responsibility of protecting , consolidating and improving the European social model and promoting gender equality .
Before I finish , I would like to emphasise that I have made a note of what you said today , your commitments for the future .
You can count on the vote of the Portuguese Socialists .
However , you can also count on a relationship that will certainly be loyal , but very demanding as well during your next term of office .
I wish you good luck and success in your work .
( DE ) Madam President , Commission President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , what is tomorrow 's vote all about ?
It is about doing what many people in this House cannot do and others do not want to do .
It is , in fact , about taking responsibility for Europe .
I would like to highlight one point .
Mr Barroso , I am very grateful to you for mentioning this again in your interruption .
It is about taking responsibility for Europe 's ability to act during a difficult time , in order to overcome all the problems which have been the subject of justified criticism from citizens and also from this Parliament .
I believe that today 's debate has helped to clarify the issue of whom Europe can and cannot rely on in future when it comes to taking political responsibility in the years to come .
However , I would like to point out , Mr Barroso , that there is , of course , a whole series of subjects on the agenda which need to be dealt with and you have a great deal of responsibility in this area because you have a monopoly on launching initiatives at a European level .
I would like to look at one more subject which seems to me not to have been covered in sufficient detail in the debate so far and that is agricultural policy .
In this area , we are faced with several new challenges .
It is not enough simply to mention the fact that the agriculture ministers came to a resolution in the autumn of last year .
It is not enough that we have begun a programme of comprehensive agricultural reform , because when the basic conditions change , you must , of course , take a corresponding initiative to help farmers in the European Union .
My request is that you take the Commissioner for Agriculture on one side and point out to her that her model will not succeed in guiding this important sector out of the crisis .
We are prepared , and I am speaking on behalf of my colleagues here , to take over responsibility for Europe in the interests of the European Union and the people of Europe .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , in February 2008 , six months before the global financial crisis , the Hungarian Prime Minister proposed the establishment of a European institution to supervise and monitor global financial trends .
Unfortunately , the Council and your Commission decided to set up this institution only after the global crisis had erupted .
Mr Barroso , at what stage are the preparations for this institution ?
When will the institution begin its work ?
My second question is : over the last few years , the Commission has had no success in combating the predominance of the major commercial chains and has protected neither farmers nor consumers .
Can we expect concrete and effective measures from the Commission ?
My third question is : there is a profound crisis in the dairy sector throughout Europe , with very serious social and political consequences .
Do you intend to amend , to revise the neoliberal policy pursued by the Commission thus far , which has failed completely ?
My fourth question is : as a candidate for President , do you intend to establish a mediation mechanism ?
Do you wish to reaffirm your intention to entrust the new commissioner in charge of fundamental rights with the responsibility for historical national minorities , immigrant minorities and the Roma ?

( MT ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , financial and economic challenges have been extensively discussed .
Today , however , I would like to focus on citizens ' rights and on the citizen 's Europe .
We talk of European citizenship , of citizens ' rights , freedom of movement , the fight against criminality , the strengthening of security , the fight against terrorism and a common immigration policy .
All of the above affect the European citizen , as do economic and financial issues .
However , there are also other challenges which affect our citizens in their daily lives and which therefore deserve to be addressed .
We do have a plan , a plan of creating a European space based on justice , freedom and security .
We had the Tampere Programme , the Hague Programme , and now that of Stockholm .
I believe that we must invest renewed energy in this field .
The Stockholm Programme will open up new opportunities .
Moreover , there is the Lisbon Treaty that will bestow new and important powers as well as grant a much greater role to this Parliament in this area .
This evening you told us , President Barroso , that there will no longer be one but two Commissioners devoted to this field .
We were told that there is to be a Commissioner responsible for internal affairs and immigration and another who will be assigned the area of justice , human rights and civil liberties .
Let us form a partnership ; a close partnership between the Commission and Parliament for a Europe that will indeed be a Europe for our citizens , a Europe that defends our citizens ' rights ; that protects our citizens ' freedoms , that guards our citizens ' security .
Yes , I believe that together , we can work towards building a Europe for our citizens , and I wish you the best of luck in tomorrow 's elections .

( SL ) I would agree with the comments of many of my colleagues who have already spoken , but allow me to also put the following questions to you , Mr Barroso : Have you taken stock of your previous term of office ?
Are you satisfied with your achievements over the past five years ?
I would imagine that you are and that that is the reason why you are standing for the presidency of the Commission again .
However , I also wonder whether you are satisfied with how effective you have been to date as regards preventing financial , economic and social crises ?
Can you witness , with a clear conscience , the staggering increase in unemployment figures which have now reached millions in the European Union , and the shameless rewards again being paid out by the financial sector to those who have not only plunged us into the worst crisis imaginable , but also threatened us with poverty ?
Can you tell us today whether you are going to do things differently in your second term ?
Are we going to see more of the same , or something new ?
Is there anything we ought to be looking forward to ?
What do you think you need to change about the way in which you go about your work ?
Allow me to put one more question to you : it is one that you have been going to great lengths to avoid addressing in your policy guidelines .
You clearly want to lead the Commission of a European Union that numbers 500 million people .
Where is the ambition and drive of our great community when it comes to opening the door to those fellow Europeans who want to join it ?
What additional efforts will your Commission make in order to speed up this process ?
Will you offer tangible assistance , i.e. expertise and material resources , to the central government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to help it achieve its roadmap and the criteria needed for its citizens to travel freely within the European Union ?
Madam President , Mr Barroso will have our support tomorrow , not only because you are nominated by all 27 Member States , Mr Barroso , and not only because we need to start work , but also because you have presented a broad political agenda that addresses the main challenges of our time .
Of course , we all have different views on that .
We will call on initiatives from you and your Commission based upon the majority of this Parliament , not by trying to impose minority positions , and we will discuss and scrutinise your proposals and take decisions based upon the majority of this Parliament .
That is how democracy works , and that is how we work .
We are confident not only in you , but also in this Parliament .
Just let me say that voting ' no ' tomorrow without an alternative means that you do not have an alternative .
At the same time as we are calling for action , there are those who want to stop the action .
And I must say that with only weeks to go until the Copenhagen meeting , it is not responsible to act in such a way that we shall not have a leadership in place for the Commission .
At a time when we need to deal with all the arrangements and legislation on financial markets , the alternative of saying ' no ' to a new Commission is not responsible .
And to act in a way that we cannot start the political process for economic recovery when jobs are threatened all over Europe is not responsible .
Madam President , this vote tomorrow is very much a vote about the standing of the European Parliament .
We , as parliamentarians , are saying that we want Europe to have leadership in the world , but we can never have global leadership if we cannot ensure leadership of the European Union .
We will give you our support , and we will scrutinise the proposals , and we will discuss with you , because we have confidence in democracy and the majority we have in this Parliament .
Good luck tomorrow .
( Applause )

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Barroso , following this debate I am even more convinced that I am right to back the proposal put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to support your candidacy , and as Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , I would like to offer you my modest contribution : Mr Barroso , I endorse your objectives and the priorities you set out , but allow me to suggest two areas of greater focus , in particular with regard to what you refer to as moving out of this economic and financial crisis .


I believe , as you do , that this crisis is also , and above all , a crisis of our values , of the basic values of our society .
Over the next five years , the European Commission will have to address major challenges .
The geopolitical framework has undergone radical change .
The emerging countries , the emerging economies such as India , Brazil and Africa , now play a significant role in the real economy .
On the one hand , this affords us new opportunities for growth , while on the other , it exposes us to the risk of market hegemonies which , in the long term , could produce higher levels of poverty .
In this regard , the role of Europe , its civilisation and its wisdom is essential to foster widespread , balanced growth and encourage the attainment of civil rights .
It represents the genuine integration of different roots and cultures .
I am referring to our roots , our Christian roots , which could be the tool with which we can tackle the value aspect of this extremely serious crisis , but only if we use them as a guide in the promotion of development and the integration of everyone 's rights and duties .
On the financial level , Mr Barroso , we must assess the need for reform of monetary and fiscal policy in order to defuse the struggle between our currency , the euro , and the old hegemony of the dollar , and also the struggle with the emerging currencies of China and India ; to obtain stricter regulation of the financial market together with bans on speculation in energy commodities and , above all , food commodities , whose prices can starve many economies ; to bring finance back to its main role of serving production ; and to replace or support the traditional economic contributions in depressed European regions with tax incentives .
With regard to the citizens ' Europe which you propose to develop by intensifying dialogue and distributing information , I feel personally involved as Chairman of the Committee on Petitions .
Therefore , this committee should be called upon if Parliament follows up on the resolution adopted during the previous parliamentary term .
The Committee on Petitions is the first point of contact between the European institutions and citizens .
It seeks solutions , provides explanations and promotes actions in response to the numerous and varied complaints made by European citizens .
In this connection , Mr Barroso , I urge you to strengthen relations between the Commission which you have the honour to lead and the committee which I chair , the Committee on Petitions , and establish a specific commissioner for it .
You have already announced the creation of two new commissioner posts .
A Europe which focuses its work programme on its citizens , as you stated , is a Europe which must provide this committee - which is the forum , the place where citizens ' rights have a voice - with greater rights and greater dignity .

( FR ) Madam President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I have examined the guidelines of your programme and I welcome your ambition in each of the major policy areas , including economic policy , with the continuation and creation of activities ; the recovery plan ; social cohesion ; environmental policy , and especially sustainable development ; the projects aimed at our young people ; the strengthening of European defence ; and the continuation of a strong and sustained agricultural policy .
I applaud your ambition to have a conquering , united and protective Europe , as we want .
However , I question the European Union 's financial standing as regards all of your projects .
The Union must have the financial resources for its ambitions .
Some of my fellow Members have already stressed this point .
It is vital , in my view , Mr Barroso , that we see you undertake to encourage the Member States to increase their contributions to the Community budget substantially from 2014 .
It is true that the crisis is putting the Member States ' budgets under pressure at the moment .
All the same , we must look ahead to the post-crisis period and start work now on a Community budget that will meet the needs of European action .
I know that you are conscious of this need , as you addressed it in your programme .
All that remains today is for you to commit yourself to ensuring that , in future , we , Parliament and the Council will have the resources needed to apply our policies .
( LV ) I should like to confirm that the Members of the Group of the European People 's Party from Latvia will support President J. M. Barroso 's candidature .
We shall support you because we hope that you , Mr Barroso , will continue as President of the European Commission to work for a fairer Europe .
We consider that fairness should be achieved between all Member States as regards support for farmers , regardless of how long they have been members of the European Union .
We also expect that you will take the leadership role in reform of the common agricultural policy and in securing the possibility of fair competition for all Member States .
We call upon you to take the lead in the further liberalisation of the European services market .
Europe will only emerge successfully from the crisis if it bases its strategy on a strong single market and a level playing field .
European institutions do indeed have a stabilising role in overcoming the crisis in those Member States most severely affected , and Latvia knows this .
I would like to thank the European Commission for working with us .
The European single currency has proved its stabilising role in these crisis conditions .
The Baltic States have set themselves the goal of accession to the euro area , but during the global downturn , this is a very stiff task .
That is why we are calling on the Commission to promote a sensible , flexible approach to the application of the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact and the Maastricht criteria , appropriate to the crisis .
I am convinced that the earlier inclusion of the Baltic States and of all European countries in the euro area is in the interests of Europe as a whole .
Mr President , we urge you to move faster in developing a common energy policy to reduce Europe 's dependence on monopolies .
I wish you success in the vote tomorrow .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , as a member of the French delegation of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and as a representative of the Nouveau Centre , a French political party born out of the UDF , I was keen to address you directly today .
Above all , I should like to remind you of the support of the President of the Republic and of the French Government and to applaud the way in which you were able to contribute to the success of the French Presidency .
Mr Barnier and all of my parliamentary colleagues from the French presidential majority now expect that our mission to build a political Europe that can influence the major global issues of the future will be taken up and shared by your Commission .
In order to build this political Europe , Mr Barroso , two pitfalls must be avoided in our view .
Firstly , that of presenting competition as an absolute and insurmountable dogma .
Yes , Europe needs industrial policy , agricultural policy , energy policy , or energy policy that promotes new technologies as much as it needs competition policy .
The second pitfall to avoid is that of turning this Commission into a mere general secretariat of the Council .
We need a Commission that is strong , that makes proposals , that innovates and that drives this European integration .
Thus , despite the reservations that may have been expressed by my own political party in France , I am willing today to support your action and to accompany you on this purposeful path on which you seem to want to embark , not least in terms of sustainable development and of the fight against climate change .
However , to ensure that my vote , and that of several of my parliamentary colleagues who still have some questions today , can be as informed as possible , I would like you to make two strong commitments in this House .
Firstly , to implement a really purposeful policy in favour of our industries , of our territories and of everything that forges a European identity .
Secondly , to do everything possible to ensure that the European model is the one that best reconciles the market economy with the requirement for solidarity among Member States , regions and populations .
Mr Barroso , today 's young people need a Europe that supports them in globalisation and that embodies a new hope , and , as the youngest of the French MEPs , I am thoroughly convinced that these young people want a Europe that both protects them and offers them a new ambition .
In the future , it is our task to build Europe together .
I am counting on you just as you can count on me .
( PL ) Madam President , Europe is united .
It is a Europe of peace , freedom and democracy .
We observe human rights and we want to realise a programme of social market economy - a programme which puts people at the centre of our attention .
However , Europe is also diversified .
We have many very poor regions , and there is , therefore , a need for a genuine Cohesion Policy .
The common agricultural policy actually sanctions two Europes - the old and the new .
This requires changes and the creation of a genuine , unified , united and cohesive Europe .
You , Mr President , know this best of all .
What action do you intend to take in this area , in order to change this situation ?
( FI ) Madam President , President Barroso , in my opinion you have succeeded magnificently in the role of President of the Commission .
It is easy to criticise but we have to give credit where credit is due .
Leading 27 different countries in a pluralist Europe is a challenging task and you have done it well .
You have been a balancing factor between the large and small countries , so in this connection I would like to borrow the words of my party 's Chairman , Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen , who said that you deserved a further term of office .
I am greatly in favour of your further term and I will vote for it .
What you have accomplished in five years speaks for itself .
In my view , there is no longer any need for proposals for new programmes because actions speak for themselves and I hope that the Finnish Commissioner , Olli Rehn , will also enjoy a good and strong position in the next Commission .
Most important of all , however , is that tomorrow we will vote in favour of your being able to establish a new Commission .
I wish you every success .
Madam President , Mr Barroso has spoken quite often about the extraordinary times we live in , the important issues faced and the leadership the EU has to show in the financial market sector .
However , Mr Barroso , there is one thing I should like to ask you about - and you mention it in the paper you presented to us - namely the European Union 's own financial resources .
You do not say where they should come from .
In this connection , there is one question that I asked you about at the hearing we had with the Greens / EFA Group last week .
Unfortunately I did not get an answer from you ; hopefully I will now .
My question is : what about a financial transaction tax ?
Even Mr Sarkozy has now proposed this , and Mr Steinmeier and others are talking about it now .
Belgium and France already have legal instruments to implement it , so why not talk and bring pressure to bear with a view to a Commission proposal on a financial transaction tax ?

( EL ) Madam President , I have listened twice to Mr Barroso , once in plenary and once at a conference with the European United Left , and I have read his planning positions .
I have one specific comment : we know Mr Barroso 's position on the modified policies .
We have not seen his position on modified products .
Does that mean the importation and marketing of contaminated products is to be tolerated in Europe ?
Generally , while maintaining that he is promoting the new ideas which Europe needs , Mr Barroso is essentially promoting and proposing the same failed , neo-liberal recipes which led to depression in Europe , unemployment in Europe and serious social inequalities in Europe .
This approach , by which I mean your approach , Mr Barroso , and your Commission 's approach , has created a confidence gap between the leadership of the European Union and European citizens , which was clearly reflected in the last elections , with the massive numbers of European citizens who abstained .
Finally , as you call everyone who does not agree with your programme anti-European , you will not have the ear of all Europeans , especially those who want a different Europe , which is why , in my opinion , Mr Barroso , you are not suited to this position .
( NL ) Mr Barroso , you have not managed to gain the support of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament or the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - which actually speaks in your favour .
It will be an exciting election : if I have a look , you can count on approximately half of the votes , so every vote counts .
Of course you would like our vote too , that of the second-largest Dutch party in Parliament , the Party for Freedom .
We are prepared to give you our vote , but you need to promise to stop the negotiations with Turkey , to make sure that the Netherlands is no longer the largest net contributor to this bureaucratic EU , and to work towards a Europe of sovereign Member States rather than the federal superstate to which you aspire .
I invite you to pay us a visit at 22.00 today to discuss this .
Who knows , you may make these promises , obtain our support and be able to continue with your work - just in a completely different way from the last five years .
Madam President , I would first of all like to wish Mr Barroso well for tomorrow in the vote .
Unfortunately , I was of the opinion that the vote should have been held in July so as not to allow a lacuna of uncertainty to develop .
However , in saying that , I think the political guidelines which you have produced , Mr Barroso , clearly outline the kind of vision and ideas that you have for getting things back on the road .
Maybe my biggest appeal to you - not only about coming back to Parliament - would also be to be a bit more critical of governments when they fail to live up to their commitments because , even if we look at the Lisbon Strategy , 90 % of the Lisbon Strategy has failed to be implemented because Member States have failed to take action to make us the most competitive and the most dynamic economy of the future .
I know it is difficult to try and pinpoint any one individual state .
I would not dare to do so , but if we are leading by example , and , if we are putting down ideas between Parliament and the Commission about the ways we can see of regenerating new growth and about being innovative within the new economy , then the Member States must also step up to the plate and take those actions .
Finally , it saddens me , at a time when there are unprecedented economic difficulties throughout the globe , when we in Europe are seen to take the lead with regard to banking regulation and other areas like that , that we have lost the opportunity because of juvenile political games among certain groups .
( ES ) Mr Barroso , you are regarded as a champion of environmental protection , and I congratulate you for it .
In fact , last week we had good news because it was finally decided that bluefin tuna , which is facing collapse , would be protected by including it in the list of species protected by CITES .
In this respect , I call for this temporary support to become permanent support .
The problem and global paradox in all this is that it is the neoliberal policies that you have advocated to date which have led us into this situation , because they are policies which simply privatise profit and socialise costs .
In this respect , we are facing a serious problem with the environment .
For years we have been subsidising fleets , which have depleted our seas and which , in this precise context , are , in many cases , jointly responsible for the disaster .
They are now asking for money to overcome the situation which we have caused .
This is absurd and truly difficult to justify democratically .
We cannot make these mistakes with people 's money .
We therefore call for the common fisheries policy to be revised , specifically based on these new principles .

Madam President , I am very confident that Mr Barroso will tomorrow secure another five-year mandate as the next president of the Commission .
I believe he is the right person for the job and his track record has been impressive .
I also believe that the EU will operate more effectively if the Lisbon Treaty is passed in my country .
Those opposing the Treaty in Ireland are spreading scurrilous information about the minimum wage to be EUR 1.84 .
People speak of green shoots as part of the economic recovery in Europe .
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty is a green shoot in itself .
The investment community and people who create jobs want the Lisbon Treaty enacted .
The fact that we in Ireland , since the last referendum , have secured the right to nominate one member of the European Commission into the future is a serious change .
In addition to that , the legal guarantees relating to neutrality , tax , the right to life , education and the family are important .
These guarantees are important to us .
Protocols are the same as the Treaty and , of course , Ireland needs Europe ; Europe needs Ireland .
( GA ) I wish you the very best of luck tomorrow .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Union is suffering from a dramatic democratic deficit .
Unfortunately nothing has changed in this respect during the last five years under the leadership of Mr Barroso .
During his period of office , we have fallen into a very severe economic crisis and it has become clear that all the warnings relating to the instability of the financial system were simply ignored .
These warnings were definitely made .
Mr Barroso talks in his speech about the need to change the architecture of the financial system and to reform the bonus system for managers .
I would like to say clearly : Mr Barroso , that was your task during the last five years and you have not done it .
For this reason , I will be voting you out of office .
Personally , I would like to see a young Commission President who takes on the role with plenty of creativity , with the courage to make major changes and , above all , with independence : someone who turns Europe into a true democracy .
I am certain that Europe needs a new mood of optimism and this certainly will not come about with Mr Barroso , but only without him .
( HU ) Thank you for this opportunity to speak .
I would like to ask President Barroso two questions .
The first one is as follows : In your speech , you clearly linked your political future with the Lisbon Treaty coming into force .
Does this also mean that if you are elected tomorrow and the Lisbon Treaty fails to be accepted by the Irish referendum , you will then resign ?
My second question is the following . You have declared war on national egoism which , according to your definition , stems from anxiety and turns into extremism .
My question is : who will decide whether people , organisations or parties are still involved in this harmful activity ?
Or is it about them , as in our case , having as their objective the promotion of national awareness , the necessary preservation of national self-determination ?
In other words , does this provide us with a basis for talking here in Europe about national cultures , languages and diversity ?
Madam President , I would like to begin with a procedural issue .
I wish to say , in particular to the non-attached Members , that I did not go to see their group because they did not invite me .
It is as simple as that .
Of course , I have strong differences of opinion with some of these Members and with others too , but I went to see all of the groups who invited me , all of the legitimately formed groups .
I went there for a democratic debate .
I like democratic debate .
Let us be clear on that .
I shall try to respond quickly to a large number of questions .
Moreover , I can see that , at times , Members are no longer here to listen to me , but I am going to make an effort all the same .
I will begin with the issue of bonuses , which was the last question .
I would draw your attention to the fact that , at the end of 2004 , the Commission - my Commission - made a recommendation on excessive remuneration , not only in banks , but also in the economic system in general .
Unfortunately , at that time , no one paid attention to our recommendation .
I am glad that this issue of bonuses and excessive remuneration is now becoming more of a priority and I hope that we will be able to find a solution , on the basis , I might add , of the proposals that we have submitted to the Council .
They are on the table : a recommendation , but also a binding part of the Directive on capital requirements for banks .
Many questions focused on energy security : those of Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Mr Marinescu and others .
Energy security was , in fact , one of the main priorities of this College , and I also intend to include it in the priorities of the next Commission , if I have your Parliament 's consent , since it is to the Commission that Europeans look , and not just the Europeans of the Union .
When there was the problem between Russia and Ukraine , President Putin decided to call me specifically to inform me of that problem , and you know just how much time and energy we at the Commission , together with other partners , have put into trying to find a solution to a problem that concerned Russia and Ukraine but which has had consequences for European consumers .
I personally am very committed to these issues .
That is why , I might add , we launched the interconnections programme in the Baltic states , and that is why it was the Commission that broke the deadlock on the Nabucco issue - and let us be clear , it was completely deadlocked .
I shall therefore include these issues among the Commission 's main priorities , but there is , in fact , resistance to the creation of a real internal energy market .
I hope that during the next term , with your support , we are going to overcome this resistance that - let us be frank and sincere - does still exist , in order to establish a real integrated energy market in Europe .
You can count on me at the Commission to be uncompromising in my defence of the European interest .
What is more , I believe that this problem of energy security is also crucial to the issue of combating climate change .
I will say it again , in particular for the benefit of the Members of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance : one can always be more ambitious but , frankly , I believe that we should welcome the fact that the European Union , acting on the basis of a Commission proposal , is spearheading the fight against climate change .
It is clear that , subsequently , we would not have had the agreement of all the Member States were it not for the work - and I want to make this point - of Mrs Merkel 's presidency , and then of Mr Sarkozy 's presidency , since they worked to achieve this too , and it is only right to acknowledge it .
All the Member States made an effort , but it was on the basis of an ambitious proposal by the Commission that we were able to conduct this fight against global warming , and I am very much counting on your efforts so that we can keep Europe in the vanguard of this fight .
With regard to the social issues , I have already said my piece : I have already given some very concrete undertakings on the issues relating to the posting of workers and on the problems concerning public services .
I will be willing to work with you on these principles that I have mentioned and that I have spelt out very clearly today : against social dumping , for the social market economy .
I am well aware that this is an interesting ideological debate , but I believe that we have the answer in Europe .
We need an internal market - it is our strength - and , at the same time , a high level of social cohesion .
This is a European creation ; it is a contribution .
In the quotation I included at the start of my document , I quoted a great European contemporary historian , Tony Judt , who lectures at New York University .
He said : ' The United States may have the most powerful army in the world , China may sell cheaper goods , but only Europe has a model that can serve as an inspiration to the rest of the world ' .
The 21st century could well be Europe 's century .
I believe that .
I believe that we can manage this globalisation not by force but with inspiration .
We have a social market economy that is not the property of the Christian Democrats , the Social Democrats or the Liberals .
It was created by Europe , particularly after the Second World War : not only the European integration process , but also this social market economy aimed at combining free markets , open markets .
Europe is the world 's biggest export power .
We Europeans must therefore reject protectionism and , at the same time , must promote the European social dialogue model , the European social security model .
When I hear certain ' declinists ' - the ' crisis-lovers ' - say that it is now the Americans and the Chinese who are controlling everything , I say to them : be that as it may , but what is President Obama doing ?
President Obama is currently attempting - I wish him well - to introduce a national health care system , which we have practically everywhere in Europe , with some differences .
It is the Americans who are now taking inspiration from the European model .
What are the Chinese doing ?
They are now considering - with the additional aim of boosting demand - the introduction of a social security system , and I believe that they will have this system , because there will be a rise in prosperity in that country , and this rising prosperity in China is good for the entire world .
What are the Americans and other major powers doing today ?
They are starting to talk to us about combating climate change .
I clearly recall that , when we spoke with them before , the Americans flatly refused to make any kind of target-related commitment in the fight against climate change .
As you can see , I cannot be as pessimistic as some of those who have spoken here today .
Of course , we have problems in Europe , consistency problems .
In terms of political will , we must work harder to achieve more consistency .
We also have a very clear problem , a social problem , which is the most serious of all : the rise in unemployment .
Let us be clear , however : it is not Europe , it is not the European Commission that created this financial crisis .
You all know where this crisis came from .
Immediately after , we reacted .
We reacted with concrete proposals .
I was in the United States with the French President , when it was the French Presidency , to propose the launch of this G20 process to the US President .
It was Europe that instigated this response .
I said at Camp David that just as open societies need the rule of law , legal rules , in the same way , the markets also need rules in order to be legitimate , credible and ethical .
That is the European position .
I believe in fact that we should be proud of the proposals we have made .
They are on the table .
I hope that they will be adopted , and we will see as we go along whether an additional effort is needed .
On the subject of the environment , I believe that this Commission 's track record is well known .
Someone said that biodiversity is not in there .
Re-read my document and you will see that it is in there .
Furthermore , one Member of this House applauded our measures to protect bluefin tuna , and I thank them for that .
I believe that we have some good credentials there .
With regard to Mrs Beňová 's question about fundamental rights , it is precisely in order to give this new sign of commitment that I decided to create - and I would add that the proposal came from the European Parliament , even though I was already convinced on the matter - the post of commissioner responsible for fundamental rights and individual freedoms .
The commissioner will also deal with the issue of minorities , of course , and he or she will be able to report to the Committee on Petitions , which was mentioned here .
I also believe that , as in the national systems , where there is normally a minister for justice and a minister for the interior , we should have a commissioner in charge of justice , fundamental rights and freedoms .
There will be another commissioner - because we must also be serious about this , we must also see that there are problems to do with insecurity in Europe and that there are things that we can do together with the added value of Europe - who will also look at other issues , but always with the same spirit : the spirit of security , with full respect shown for individual freedoms and with full respect shown for fundamental rights .
That , once again , is what makes Europe .
Someone spoke of Guantánamo .
I was one of the first , if not the first , politician in office within a government to call on the US President - this was during the Austrian Presidency - to close Guantánamo .
I said this publicly because I believe that we Europeans are against an anti-terrorism campaign that does not respect fundamental rights , as that is how moral authority is lost .
On the subject of fundamental rights , I believe that we may have certain disagreements , but that there are no fundamental disagreements with some of the Members who raised this issue .
I myself do not need advice from anyone on this issue .
At the age of sixteen , I had already taken to the streets of my country to fight against a dictatorship , against the colonial system .
Therefore I do not need anyone 's advice on how to show commitment to fundamental rights .
Thank you , anyway .
With regard to the question on Northern Ireland - thank you , Mrs Dodds : it is true that we have made a great - discreet - effort for Northern Ireland .
We set up a special working group and , back when a dialogue had not yet been established between the parties , we helped to bring about this reconciliation .
With regard to the question put by Mr López Aguilar , yes , I believe that now is the time for a new social ambition .
That is obvious .
We have an unemployment problem that is much greater than before .
If you look at the statistics , the truth is that , until the financial crisis , employment was rising everywhere .
The Lisbon Strategy , which some criticise , was actually heading in the right direction , overall .
There was job creation and growth in Europe .
It is just with the financial crisis that we have seen the reverse of the trend in most countries , including your own , Spain .
It is the global financial crisis that has put us in a different position .
So , now , in this state of social anxiety - not only are there people who are unemployed but there are others who are liable to become so - it is obvious that we must make a social investment .
That is why I have called for a new social ambition .
I believed that it would be possible to unite the large majority of Parliament around this priority , and I still believe it .
Mrs in ' t Veld told me that I had not convinced her .
You are very difficult to convince , Mrs in ' t Veld .
I will do my best , but I will tell you one thing : I will always do my best , not just to convince you , but because I genuinely believe in fundamental rights , freedoms and guarantees .
I believe that the Commission has a role in this matter , not only in terms of legislation , but also regarding the signals we send out .
I can tell you that , whenever there is a problem in the world , be it Guantánamo or when I meet with Mr Putin , each time I ask him : ' What is happening with Mrs Politkovskaya 's killers ?
How is it possible that a system such as the Russian system , which has the greatest security system in the world , never finds the killers of journalists ? '
I put the question to President Putin , just as I am currently putting questions to the prime ministers , including even the Chinese Prime Minister , when I speak to him , and just as I am always asking questions about human rights .
I am even asking the Japanese Prime Minister why Japan is now carrying out capital punishment again , when there was a moratorium .
Therefore , the Commission is important , not only through legislation , but also through the signals sent out by the Commission and the Commission President , such as the time of the crisis concerning the cartoons in Denmark , where I unequivocally defended and upheld the right to freedom of expression .
I believe , in fact , that we can find a fundamental line of agreement on this .
Mr Abad asked some very practical questions , and I would say to him that I support his suggestions and I believe that they are important .
I believe that we need an industrial base in Europe .
We do not want relocation , but it is important for this industrial base to adapt to the new constraints of global competition and , above all , to the major challenges of climate change and of more sustainable growth .
I believe that we have the means to achieve this .
That is why I am proposing that , in future , more resources be put into this at European level .
With regard to the budget-related question that someone asked , let us try , above all , to reach a consensus on the main principles .
I believe that it would be a mistake to start by talking about the amounts for the future budget .
That would cause divisions .
We must first see where there is European added value and , afterwards , decide what the priorities will be .
However , I believe that research , innovation and cohesion policy clearly must be important priorities , especially when the new generations are considered .
For the benefit of the youngest member of the French delegation , I hope that the young people of this Parliament will support this movement .
Someone asked me a question about the global financial tax , about the tax on financial movements .
If it is global , I support it , obviously .
I think that it would be an excellent idea but , in any case , let us be clear : I see no point in driving out the financial services that we have now in Europe , whether they be in London , Frankfurt or Paris .
We are world leaders when it comes to financial services .
What is the point of handing over the leadership to Dubai ?
I do not see what the point would be .
Let us be clear on that .
However , if there were a global tax on financial transactions , I think that would be an excellent idea .
I believe that there are already quite a number of reasons in favour of that : to prevent , for example , starvation in the world , for it is scandalous what is happening in the 21st century ; to help Europe achieve the Millennium Goals ; and to fight for more solidarity in Europe .
You may not know , but I proposed to the Council that we increase a facility that we have within Europe to provide food aid , because there are poor and newly poor people in Europe , but it was rejected .
Those are many reasons , if you will , for a tax , provided that it is genuinely global and that it does not undermine Europe 's competitiveness .
To conclude , I would like to say something very important to you .
Some have said : ' Why should we elect you ?
You are the only candidate .
Is that democratic ? '
I myself have very often wondered why I am the only candidate .
Frankly , I believe that it was wrong for me to be the only candidate , because , let us be clear , as I am the only candidate , I have been the only one attacked for all this time , the only one criticised .
Every time you compare me with your ideal candidate , I lose , obviously .
I lose to an ideal candidate .
I lose to an ideal candidate from each group .
Yet Europe is not built with ideal candidates .
Europe is an exercise in responsibility .
I believe that there has been no other candidate for the simple reason that the support needed to be a candidate was lacking .
That is the reason .
A fair few names were mentioned , but I succeeded in achieving a consensus and I am proud of that , because building Europe today , as we have seen in the debate , is - as all of you will admit - an extremely difficult and extremely hard exercise .
Europe is very diverse .
There are many constraints and many priorities , and so I am proud to be the candidate that has been supported by the party that won the elections , to be the candidate that has received the support of democratically elected Heads of State or Government , from across the political spectrum , and I do not see that as negative .
That said , I am no one 's secretary-general , and the Commission is an independent institution .
I can assure you of that .
The Commission over which I preside and over which I will preside if I have your backing will be independent in its uncompromising defence of the European general interest .
I fully understand , as Mrs Estrela and others have said , that the support of those who will be willing to back me is not a blank cheque .
I am grateful to all those who have supported me ; I cannot name them all .
Some of them are still here .
I am grateful to you .
Your support is not a blank cheque .
I think highly of Parliament .
Some say : ' You are too close to the governments ' .
You forget one thing : before becoming Prime Minister , I was leader of the opposition , and before becoming leader of the opposition , I sat on the benches .
I was elected for the first time to the Portuguese parliament when I was 29 years old .
I am a politician ; I am not a technocrat or a bureaucrat .
I defend parliaments and I want to engage with you in this debate .
Therefore , your demands can help me and can help the Commission to do better .
This is what I shall aim to do if I have your support .
( Applause )
I would like to thank the President-designate of the European Commission .
I would also like to thank all those present , as well as those who spoke earlier , for an exceptionally animated discussion .
I would also like to thank Mrs Malmström for being with us in this session .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are bringing in new principles of action , new institutional solutions for the European Union .
Please remember that the President-designate has told us about the directions of political action for the next five years .
He has done this here , in Parliament , where he has met with all the political groups .
He has given us information which is very important , both for us and for our citizens .
We will vote tomorrow , after today 's long , exhaustive and wise discussion .
( The President continued in English )
Thank you very much once again , Mr President-designate .
This was a great opportunity to have your political guidelines and discussion in political groups and also in the plenary session .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr Barroso 's programme is ambitious and demonstrates an overwhelming desire to give our crisis-hit Europe the boost it sorely needs .
In my opinion , it would be wrong to blame Mr Barroso personally for all the troubles that have characterised the previous period .
Compromising with an enlarged Commission in which decisions are now taken by the 27 , and tackling a financial and economic crisis against a backdrop of difficult institutional reform , has certainly not made President Barroso 's job any easier .
Admittedly , one might have hoped , in these difficult times , to have heard him speak with a more assertive European voice .
I believe , however , that he has learnt from his mistakes and that , in future , he will make great efforts both for Europe as a whole and for the small countries .
By making social issues a more important part of his programme , he appears to want to respond to the people of Europe , who are yearning for a more social Europe .
The idea of a genuine partnership between Parliament and the Commission is a commendable one and is an opportunity to be seized .
For this reason I support Mr Barroso 's candidacy , but this support is not a blank cheque .
I am pleased to say that , as a Portuguese and a Member of the European Parliament , I will vote in favour of the re-election of José Manuel Durão Barroso as President of the European Commission .
I believe his performance during the current mandate , which has been beset by so many political , financial and social difficulties , and the experience he has acquired in this post , justify the support of the governments and the renewed confidence of this House .
I deplore the many attempts - not all of them open or serious - to prevent his candidacy from succeeding , and I note that they were frustrated not only by a lack of any credible alternative but also by the foolishness of their arguments .
I regret that Members from my own country cannot resist taking that path , which is as easy as it is inconsequential .
I hope the second Barroso Commission can combine technical competence with that ' something extra ' .
I also hope it will effectively respect and make use of the principle of subsidiarity , and will choose the safety and solidity of taking small steps , as recommended by Jean Monnet , rather than adopting the fast-track approach that has promised much but contributed little to the real progress of the European project and dream .
However much we aim for the horizon , we only get there by putting one foot in front of the other .
Let us go the right way .
What is also at stake in this election is the direction the EU will take in the next few years .
The current President of the Commission , who is standing for another term of office , symbolises one possible direction : the EU he represents is that of the interests of the major economic groups .
That is the EU of undemocratic red tape ; of political and ideological conservatism ; of the accentuation and institutionalisation of profound inequalities and relations of social , regional and national domination ; of militarism and external interventionism ; and of the institutionalisation of neoliberalism as the only acceptable economic system .
That , however , is not and never has been the only possible direction .
The alternative to that direction is that of a social Europe , the Europe of workers and peoples .
It is an EU that values democracy in its participatory aspects , not reducing it to the formal representational sphere .
It is an EU which respects the will of its peoples and the decisions that they democratically express , and which protects public services and workers ' rights as essential tools for social development and cohesion .
It is an EU of free , sovereign states with equal rights , which supports and promotes the protection of nature , peace and cooperation among peoples .
The statement that Mr Barroso has just made as President-designate of the Commission is a reaffirmation of the basic pillars of the European Union that we know .
It also confirms the capitalist , federalist and militarist integration of Europe enshrined in the Treaties of Maastricht and Nice , which the draft Treaty of Lisbon wishes to take even further .
If there were any doubt , his statements are there on the importance of the draft Treaty of Lisbon .
They come , in fact , after the anti-democratic pressure exerted by European leaders - which he observed - on the Irish people , who are being forced to have a new referendum , to be held on 2 October .
Even if he now tries to promise to remedy the serious attacks on social and workers ' rights that the European Commission , of which he is still the President , carried out in the previous term of office , he has never got to the bottom of those issues or the causes of the current crisis of capitalism that we are experiencing .
In practice , what he is proposing is to carry on with the same policy that prioritises free competition , militarism and the interests of economic and financial groups , particularly those of the most powerful countries , as was clear when he said we are the champions of globalisation .
Mr President , I would like to guarantee President Barroso my support as the European People 's Party 's delegate , and express the hope that the present Europe Commission will be able to continue the job which has been started involving the social integration of the Roma .
Important results have been achieved during this cycle , mainly during the last two years , but we are expecting a significantly deeper commitment and a greater sense of initiative in the future from this body which , as the exclusive initiator of Community legislation , can be the driving force in the battle against the poverty and exclusion affecting Europe 's largest minority , the Roma .
I hope that the creation of a new commissioner 's portfolio for justice , fundamental rights and civil liberties will encourage the Commission 's organisation to do more and in a more coordinated manner .
I also hope that President Barroso will continue to actively promote his personal commitment to Roma affairs , which he has also expressed on several occasions , and that he will do his utmost to ensure that Heads of State or Government will assume a more vigorous role in devising a comprehensive , integrated programme spanning parties and cycles .
The social challenges affecting Roma and non-Roma alike are so serious and the consequences of inaction are so dangerous that we cannot afford to have the apathy and slip-ups of the previous cycle .
We are expecting immediate , brave deeds and a radical change to the attitude held up until now from the past-present President , and for the Commission 's to be the flagship of a pan-European Roma Strategy to be developed as soon as possible , based on regulatory norms , a stable budget and clear political commitment .
If there is one thing that nobody questions across all parties , it is that we are going through a period of economic crisis , which affects countries and makes government decision making difficult .
Since that is the case , having a validated Commission whose president has been elected or a provisional Commission in which this decisive decision is always being postponed makes a difference to how effectively the European Union can combat the crisis .
In view of that , even though they do not deny the evidence of the crisis and even refer to it repeatedly , the arguments put forward by all those who reject and seek to prevent José Manuel Durão Barroso from being chosen as President of the European Commission become mere rhetoric .
In other words , those who think and act in that way have little or no concern for the effects of the crisis , but think only , or almost only , of gaining advantage through some kind of party political manoeuvring which , in these circumstances at least , should justifiably be avoided .
Support for Mr Barroso from the conservative , liberal and social democrat MEPs follows his unanimous designation as the only common candidate of all the governments of the EU , both neo-conservative and social democrat .
The anti-working class policy of the EU does not depend on persons or on the President of the Commission ; it is determined above all by its very character as an imperialist union of capital .
The political guidelines presented by Mr Barroso summarise the strategic ambitions of European monopoly capital and form the political programme applied by the political forces of the European one-way street throughout the EU , including by both New Democracy and PASOK in Greece , regardless of whether they are in government or opposition .
The primary objective of this political programme is to shift the burden of the crisis on to the working classes , thereby ensuring that the European monopoly groups are free to safeguard and increase their profits , so that they can reinforce their position as global imperialist competitors when the capitalist economy revives following the recession .
This objective will be achieved by adapting to the new conditions of the anti-labour Lisbon Strategy by 2020 and through an even more vicious attack on the workers ' labour , wage , social and insurance rights .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0203 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : Protection of the textile and clothing industries in the context of international trade
The grave predicament of the textile and clothing industries in certain EU Member States , including Portugal , calls for a coherent and concerted public policy strategy in favour of investment in innovation , differentiation , training and conversion .
However , such measures also imply the need , in the context of international trade , to take the necessary actions to protect industry in the Member States , especially in the case of the more vulnerable areas such as textiles and clothing .
What measures is the Commission taking for the protection of the textile and clothing sector in the EU Member States in the context of new free-trade agreements with third countries , especially in Asia and as in the case of South Korea ?
What measures is the Commission taking in the context of the urgent need for market regulation in the context of trade , on a worldwide basis and going beyond regulation of the financial markets alone ?
Member of the Commission . - We follow very closely the effects of the financial crisis on our industrial sectors , including of course the textile and clothing sector , an important and strong industry in the European Union .
We reacted to this crisis by setting up the European Recovery Plan complemented by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the Temporary Community framework for State aid matters .
These measures have also been relevant for the textile and clothing industry : for instance , the Globalisation Fund support has been used to reintegrate workers laid off in mostly small and medium-sized enterprises of the sector in Italy , Malta , Spain , Portugal , Lithuania and Belgium .
The textile and clothing sector comes from decades of managed trade .
Since early 2009 , trade in this sector has been fully liberalised .
The sector has lived up to the challenge of liberalisation and has undertaken a process of restructuring and modernisation , which has not been easy .
The sector has reduced mass production and concentrated on products with higher value added and technological content .
Today European textiles are known in the world for their innovation and technical performance .
The sector has been evolving successfully and has maintained a world-class export performance .
Market access issues are therefore a priority for it , and I am happy that our renewed market access strategy has been taken up by this industry with positive results .
And , of course , in our trade negotiations , such as the free trade agreement with Korea or the multilateral trade talks , we do take into account the sensitivities of the different industrial sectors , including the textile sector , and we aim for balanced deals .
( PT ) Just yesterday we were talking here about the problem of the free trade agreement with South Korea , and the Commissioner knows that she needs business organisations .
I would like to tell her that I myself have met with the various business organisations in Portugal and they have told me of their great concern at the clauses of this free trade agreement with South Korea .
There are also great concerns across Europe .
The trade unions also have their concerns , and anyone who knows the countries of southern Europe , such as Portugal and Spain , and the areas where these industrial sectors predominate , will be well aware of how serious unemployment has become .
In some municipalities , Commissioner , it is now over 20 % , particularly in the north of Portugal .
There are municipalities with textile mills where unemployment is over 20 % !
We are afraid that this situation may get worse , in a country where there is already considerable poverty .
I therefore ask you what specifically is going to be done ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
It is to Mrs Figueiredo 's credit that she shows such concern about the social impact of the closure of textile mills and the damage being done to the industry .
But will the Commissioner agree with me that the South Korean Free Trade Agreement actually provides as many opportunities for European textile manufacturers as threats , and indeed gives our quality textiles access to the Korean market ?
Member of the Commission . - I understand very well the strength of feeling .
This is a very important industry and I agree completely with David Martin who has studied the detail of the deal with South Korea .
There is no doubt that we export far more clothing to Korea than they do to us , so there are real opportunities in the market .
It is absolutely right that in thinking about everything we do on trade , we need to be mindful of the impact on industries , and that is exactly what we do .
I would be more than happy to continue this dialogue and to provide more information about how we approach this , because I agree completely with the view that we have to support our industries through this economic recession , be mindful of the poverty and deprivation that can occur , and give new trading opportunities that will actually help boost those economies and those sectors .
That is precisely what we are seeking to do .
Subject : EU priorities for Intergovernmental Conference on Climate Change
What will be the specific priorities for the European Union in the context of the United Nations Intergovernmental Conference on Climate Change which will be held in Copenhagen this coming December ?
Member of the Commission . - This is a very timely question and I could answer very briefly that the priorities are agreement in Copenhagen for reduction commitments by developed countries , nationally appropriate mitigation actions by developing countries , and finance .
I would , however , like to say a few more words .
We now have less than three months until Copenhagen and the climate talks have now entered into a crucial phase .
With 250 pages of negotiating text on the table , the negotiations have not yet gathered sufficient momentum to come to an agreement that is ambitious and detailed enough .
However , among most parties there is a sense of urgency and the willingness to focus on areas of convergence .
The ultimate objective of the climate agreement is to keep global warming below 2 degrees Celsius , an objective that was endorsed at the last G8 summit and the Major Economies Forum .
We need comparable and more ambitious emission reduction targets for the group of developed countries , which in aggregate today offer less than 15 % reduction as compared with 1990 .
This falls short of the 25-40 % reduction required by science .
We welcome the fact that Japan will strengthen its target .
The EU has offered to take up a 30 % reduction target if others make comparable commitments .
Developing countries should take appropriate mitigation actions to curb the growth of their emissions to 15-30 % below business as usual by 2020 .
The EU proposes that developing countries ( except Least Developed Countries ) design and implement low carbon growth plans containing their key mitigation actions .
These plans would then form the basis for targeted financial and other support .
Adequate international financing will be essential to reach an effective agreement in Copenhagen .
Money will make or break the deal .
We need to mobilise private investment and promote the establishment of a robust international carbon market , but substantial public funding will also be required .
In this respect , it is worth mentioning the global partnership on technology , which aims at doubling investment in low carbon technologies .
Furthermore , we have to strengthen support to the poorest and most vulnerable countries to adapt to the increasing adverse effects of climate change .
Last week , on 10 September 2009 , the Commission adopted a communication on stepping up international climate finance , which aims at speeding up the international negotiations .
There is a daunting task ahead of us , with intense negotiations over the coming months - but failure is not an option .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Dimas for his answer .
Very briefly , do we know what the real position of the United States of America is , now that there is a new administration , and are they using the same reduction figures that the EU is proposing ?
Secondly , with regard to Brazil , Russia , India and China , which are huge producers of CO2 emissions and other emissions , what role will they play , and what pressures can we in the European Union put on them to meet the same standards that we are demanding of our own ?
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , whenever we talk about climate change , we talk about measures for adapting to climate change , as well as for reducing the causes leading to climate change .
I would like to ask the following question with the Copenhagen conference in mind : what priority is given to energy efficiency growth , including for developing countries , and also , what discussions are you having about the drinking water crisis , and obviously , the food crisis ?
( DE ) Is there an impact assessment of the changes to European competitiveness which will result from a reduction of 20 % or 30 % and of how that will affect small and medium-sized businesses and , above all , jobs ?
Member of the Commission . - Regarding the United States , the new Administration has committed to reductions which are considerably more ambitious than those of the previous administration .
However , they are still not as ambitious as those to which the European Union has committed , and fall below the level that science is telling us is required in order to keep global warming below 2 ° C , as was agreed by all the leaders of the major economies in July 2009 in L 'Aquila , including the Americans , the Chinese and the leaders of the other countries that you mentioned .
But the discussions in the United States are ongoing .
The Markey-Waxman bill has been voted on in the House and is now going to be voted on in the Senate .
There are quite a lot of provisions which need clarification , and we have to see what the net result will be at the end , because this bill could be more ambitious than it appears to be today .
For example , if the calculation of emission reductions includes those achieved by investments in ' avoided deforestation ' - depending on whether this is calculated in the United States ' emission reduction target , or in the financing , or whatever - this is something which must be clarified in order to determine the comparability between the targets of the United States and the European Union and other developed countries .
The fact is that we are encountering a very positive attitude from this Administration , we are working closely with them , and we hope that together we shall work for a good result in Copenhagen , namely an agreement with the elements that I described previously .
Regarding Brazil , China , India , Mexico and other developing countries , of course we expect from them a reduction in the rate of growth of their emissions of the order of 15 % to 30 % below ' business as usual ' .
This is again what science is telling us is necessary in order to keep global warming below 2 ° C. Reductions by developed countries alone will not suffice .
Some of these countries have already taken national measures which will lead to reductions in emissions , either by energy efficiency measures or investments in renewable sources of energy , but we need to intensify our cooperation with them - exchange of information , cooperation regarding technologies and transfer of technology - in order to achieve the reductions that we need .
Regarding cost reduction and , as you mentioned , energy efficiency , clearly all investments in energy efficiency are win-win-win situations .
For example , by reducing the consumption of imported oil , not only do you save money , and you do not pay it to the oil-producing countries , but you also reduce CO2 emissions .
In many countries , especially developing countries , where there are problems with air pollution - the air pollution problem in China , for example , is very well known - there will be the collateral benefit of improving air quality .
Concerning the related problem of water and food , both of these are objectives of the European Union 's policies .
We do support policies that will improve the sanitary quality and supply of water , especially in very poor countries .
Regarding food , we were very careful , for example , when we examined the Biofuels Directive , that there should be no competition between feedstocks for food and biofuel .
We always take account of these important issues .
Regarding the impact assessment and the issues of competitiveness , these were discussed at length when we adopted the Energy and Climate Package .
Many studies have been carried out not only by the Commission but also by industry and by various sectors .
The provisions that we have in our legislation will provide the assurances needed to preserve the competitiveness of other European industries , especially small and medium-sized enterprises by , for example , granting free allowances , in many cases up to 100 % of their emissions .
So this is something that we are taking into account and , of course , the same applies when we go to 30 % .
Additionally , if we go to 30 % , it will mean that we shall have an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen where all developed countries will undertake similar comparable reduction targets to the European Union and developing countries will accept mitigation actions which will create a level playing field for the whole world .
We shall then have comparable reduction obligations which will mean that the problem of competitiveness will not exist .
Subject : Measures to stimulate investment in increasing energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies
The European Environment Agency recently presented provisional statistics for the year 2008 concerning the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
According to those statistics , emissions in the EU-15 fell by 1.3 % , and those in the EU-27 by 1.5 % , over 2007 levels , which represents an important step towards achieving the Kyoto Protocol objectives of an 8 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2012 over those in 1990 , the reference year .
In view of the fact that the reduction in CO2 emissions is mainly due to the increase in energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies in the transport and housing sectors , and in energy-intensive industries , can the European Commission state what concrete measures it has in mind to help the Member States stimulate investment in increasing energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies ?
Mr President , the honourable member of Parliament has rightly highlighted the ongoing improvement in terms of the reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases , which is due in part to energy efficiency measures and the increased use of renewable sources of energy in the transport and housing sectors .
The Commission would point out that energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy also serve other political objectives , such as improving the security of the energy supply of the European Union , strengthening its competitiveness , creating jobs and improving citizens ' standard of living .
On account of all these benefits , the Commission is continuing to improve the legislation and programmes of the European Union in this specific sector and to provide financial support .
( RO ) Given that we have a timeframe of 10 years until 2020 and that notable results for reducing greenhouse gas emissions may be achieved in the area of energy performance in buildings and the transport sector , and that we are in the midst of an economic crisis and people are losing their jobs , we must emphasise that the green economy can create millions of jobs .
We must come up with specific solutions for specific situations .
This is why I hope that the solution will be that you , the European Commission , will join efforts with Parliament , and we will be able to find innovative solutions for increasing investments in energy efficiency .
Parliament has proposed interesting solutions : an increase in the European Regional Development Fund 's rate from 2014 , the creation of a new special fund commencing in 2014 and the opportunity to apply a reduced VAT rate , with energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies in mind .
Perhaps you could tell us more about this .
A simple question : how does the Commission suggest that Member States should balance the increased use of renewables with the need to keep electricity prices low for competitive purposes ?
( DE ) What investment incentives should be put in place to speed up the move to renewable energy sources in private households and not just in industrial and commercial enterprises ?
Mr President , in answer to Mr Kelly 's question , greenhouse gas emissions trading is expected to generate a lot of money for the Member States ' treasuries and measures which governments can take include using some of this money to support people on low wages or people who are ' fuel poor " .
There is therefore a way and the money is there , apart from anything else , to reply to Mr Kelly 's question .
The new Directive on renewable energy sources requires the Member States to provide support and to introduce reforms at administrative level and to infrastructures , so as to facilitate the development of renewable energy sources .
Every Member State has undertaken to achieve certain targets by 2020 and must submit a national action plan by June next year on renewable energy , analysing how the targets will be achieved .
As far as the review of the Directive on the energy performance of buildings is concerned , the Commission has also undertaken to provide even more Community financing and to propose new financing to support the implementation of this directive .
The Commission is already providing direct funding for various projects relating to energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy , such as :
a series of research and development endeavours based on the research and technological development framework programme ;
EUR 727 million for the period 2007-2013 under the programme entitled ' Intelligent Energy - Europe ' , to help remove obstacles to the development of renewable sources of energy , improve the business environment and raise public awareness ;
over EUR 500 million for projects relating to offshore wind farms under the European economic recovery programme , to give impetus to private investment in this particular sector , and
the initiative to finance sustainable energy , which is being managed jointly by the Commission and the European Investment Bank , has a budget of EUR 15 million for 2009 and is designed to mobilise funds from the capital markets and the Marguerite Fund , the European Fund for Energy , Climate Change and Infrastructure , which is being managed by the European Investment Bank .
The Commission is also encouraging the Member States to use a large part of the money available from EU cohesion policy funds to support projects relating to energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy .
Subject : Development assistance in an economic crisis
In this current period , when we are having to contend with an economic crisis , is there a realistic chance of putting in place specific conditions to help the countries most affected ?
I am referring above all to the very poor countries of the third world .
Would it be possible to increase the aid for developing countries ?
If our own internal problems , such as an insufficient budget or a lack of time , do not allow us to do that , then what is being done to speed up the take-up of funds that have already been assigned to developing countries ?
My question is essentially whether it is possible to simplify the procedure for allowing this assistance to be increased .
Member of the Commission . - Within its field of competence , the Commission has so far responded rapidly to help prevent disastrous social consequences in developing countries , in particular in the least-developed countries , most of which are ACP states .
These measures include honouring aid commitments and leveraging new resources , acting counter-cyclically , improving aid effectiveness , sustaining economic activity and employment , revitalising agriculture , investing in green growth , stimulating trade and private investment , working together for economic governance and stability , and protecting the most vulnerable in developing countries .
Concrete actions and procedures have already been put in place to speed up delivery of aid .
An ad hoc ' Vulnerability FLEX ' instrument will mobilise EUR 500 million from the European Development Fund .
This V-FLEX is complementary to actions taken by the World Bank and the IMF , and will target the most vulnerable countries with poor resilience capacity , giving rapid grant assistance to help them to maintain priority spending , notably in the social sectors .
As the V-FLEX utilises previously unallocated reserve funds , it represents additional financing for these highly vulnerable countries .
EUR 80 million has also been mobilised for the funding under the existing EDF FLEX mechanism for countries that suffered significant export losses in 2008 .
In addition , the mid-term review of cooperation strategies for countries funded from the EC budget is currently under way , and the mid-term review for ACP countries funded from the EDF has been accelerated in order to re-define and adjust the national strategies and allocations in early 2010 .
Nevertheless , it is important to recall that development policy is a shared competence within the EU .
The prime responsibility for delivering on the ODA commitments lies with the Member States themselves .
I strongly believe that the crisis should not be an excuse for our Member States to water down donors ' aid and promises , and I will insist on remaining committed to delivering the promised aid levels , both for EU Member States as well as for other donors .
In this regard , we very publicly monitor Member State ODA through our annual Monterrey survey .
On the basis of the information gathered from Member States , we foresee the EU collective ODA increasing from EUR 49 billion in 2008 to EUR 53.4 billion in 2009 and EUR 58.7 billion in 2010 .

This also means that , without additional steps by Member States to fulfil their individual targets , the collective targets for 2010 will not be achieved .
Moreover this crisis has also shown that we have to strengthen the mechanisms for delivering ODA , as the honourable Member rightly pointed out .
The International Aid Effectiveness Agenda embodied in the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action are now more important than ever .
In these difficult economic times , we have a particular responsibility towards the world 's poor to make sure our development assistance is being channelled effectively .
I will defend this approach personally at the November Development Council , and the global financial crisis will be at the centre of my political concerns during the weeks ahead .
( PL ) Thank you for your explanation .
Should the EU not be more active at international level ?
I am thinking of financial institutions , like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , which should be more flexible when determining aid levels and granting aid during the crisis .
How can we eliminate tax irregularities and the illegal transfer of profits out of poor countries by various firms ?
Finally , how can we fairly liberalise commercial exchange to benefit those who deserve help ?
( DE ) Particularly at times when resources are in short supply , it is important to take targeted action in order to provide the right amount of aid to the right people at the right time .
Therefore , my question is : What future measures are planned to evaluate the efficiency and quantify the effect of economic assistance ?
Member of the Commission . - As far as the first question is concerned , the cooperation with international institutions - the IMF , World Bank - we are working very closely together with those institutions , for example , for the vulnerability flex .
In fact , it is together that we have been identifying the countries that should primarily take profit from this new instrument .
We have also insisted repeatedly to the institutions to grant more loans to the developing countries and , out of the USD 280 billion drawing rights , USD 8 billion will go to the developing countries .

So I think we are really at the forefront of influencing the international institutions going in that direction and that will also be the stance of the Commission , of Mr Almunia and me in the meetings of the World Bank and the IMF at the beginning of October in Istanbul .
As far as the second question is concerned , I honestly think that this was the subject of my first reply .
I detailed how this should happen .
I am ready , of course , to repeat it , but it comes down to the fact that we especially have to pay attention that the aid is used in the proper manner .
Subject : Demographics and development policy in Africa
According to a United Nations study , the population of the African continent could double to two billion by the year 2050 , at which point the population of Africa would be double that of the continent of Europe .
The average fertility rate in Africa is five children per woman , compared to 1.7 in the Far East and 1.47 in the European Union .
What measures does the Commission intend to propose , in relation to long-term immigration and environment policies among others , to adjust external relations and development cooperation policy to take account of this data ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission shares the concern of the honourable Member that population growth in Africa and the long-term impact of high fertility rates could contribute significantly to increased pressure on Africa 's natural resources and determining the development trajectory of the African continent .
Fertility rates tell an important part of the story ; according to the UN Population Division , Africa 's overall population today is 8 % lower than if its fertility rate had stayed at its 1970 levels .
Indeed , its fertility rate is expected to decline even below 2.5 % by 2050 .
In urban parts of the continent , an emergent middle class is having fewer children at rates comparable with Europeans .
This story is one of promise , of the countries which have attained political stability and achieved impressive economic growth .
Aware of these challenges , the European Commission has a development policy geared to fight poverty , promote sustainable development and tackle political challenges in order to help foster stability .
In this field , the Commission is also bound by the strategy endorsed by the 1994 international conference on population and development , further reviewed in 1999 .
The strategy has extended the concept of family planning to that of sexual and reproductive health and rights .
It emphasises human rights , the empowerment of women , the importance of investing in health and education and the provision of comprehensive reproductive health services to all those who need them .
In particular , the education of women has an impact on their reproductive behaviour .
Many studies have found a strong correlation between education and fertility ; as literacy improves , fertility rates tend to decrease .


Across all of its programmes the Commission expects to commit around EUR 1.7 billion to education for the years 2007-2013 ; more generally , we are firmly engaged in increasing the level and effectiveness of the collective EU aid to health systems delivering universal coverage of basic services including reproductive health .
In this respect , under the EU agenda for action on MDGs - Millennium Development Goals - the EU has undertaken to contribute an additional EUR 8 billion , of which EUR 6 billion for Africa , to health , providing that all aid commitments are fully met .
In order to address environmental pressure , it is of key importance to ensure that local livelihoods are sustainable .
This means combating desertification and land degradation and enhancing agricultural productivity , halting over-exploitation of biodiversity , forests and other natural resources including oceans and inland waters ; and , finally , ensuring that climate change remains within certain limits and assisting African populations to adapt to climate change .
The Commission , together with the EU Member States , is working on an environmental integration strategy to ensure that development cooperation efforts contribute to these objectives .
Our preparations for the Copenhagen Climate Change Summit are to be seen in this light .
At present , the EU is working with the African Union and other regional organisations to strengthen their capacity to address environment and climate change issues .
It promotes important initiatives to enhance forest governance , especially through forest law enforcement , governance and trade .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my question was meant to highlight one particular aspect : that global population growth has an impact both on the use of raw materials and on pollution .
However , in developing countries this demographic increase is particularly large , with social and economic consequences too .
My question is : would it not be possible to implement aid policies for developing countries in conjunction with family planning policies , possibly through the NGO system ?
( DE ) It is an interesting fact that two thirds of the population of Africa live in only eight of the 53 states .
The problem of overpopulation in Africa is clearly limited to individual countries .
To what extent are these facts influencing the development policy of the European Union ?
Member of the Commission . - We do not have a specific family planning policy , but this can and does happen at the request of the governments concerned .
A lot of maternal deaths result from abortions in unacceptable circumstances .
In countries where the legislation allows abortion , the Commission will also support these programmes .
So whether or not we take such measures really depends on the countries concerned .
With respect to the second question ; I must say that when you look at the African continent and the birth rates , as I explained in my introduction , there is a clear relationship between economic development , the degree of urbanisation and fertility rates .
This is not a new phenomenon .
We have seen it in all countries all over the globe .
One can expect , with global urbanisation and , hopefully , increased growth figures , that the fertility rates might go down .
This is not limited , as the honourable Member is suggesting , to some countries .
It is rather a phenomenon that is linked to the development of the country concerned .
Subject : Suspension of negotiations on free trade agreement between the EU and Colombia
In the light of the clear evidence that there continue to be killings of trade union activists in Colombia , and particularly in the light of the fact that in 2008 , there was an increase of 25 % in such killings , is the Commission prepared to recommend a suspension of negotiations on a free trade agreement between the EU and Colombia ?
Member of the Commission . - The protection of human rights is of the highest priority in the European Union 's relations with Colombia .
We are therefore following the situation in Colombia very closely .
We are well aware of the difficulties confronting trade unionism in Colombia , and the continued killings of , and threats against , union leaders and members .
We know this from our information sources , from the reports and statements issued by international treaty bodies , as well as from my own discussions with bodies such as the European Trade Union Confederation .
Serious concerns remain concerning the effective application of the ILO core conventions in the country .
We are consistently urging the Government to step up efforts to protect the most vulnerable population groups and to investigate and punish all human rights violations .
Recent attacks on human rights defenders and trade unionists have been the subject of démarches by the EU troika ambassadors in Bogotá and were also raised during recent high-level meetings between European Union and Colombian officials .
Moreover , we have recently launched a bilateral human rights dialogue with the Colombian Government which provides a channel for a more regular and systematic exchange of information and experience in the human rights field , and will help inform technical cooperation .
Furthermore , we are seeking to include additional guarantees in the planned multiparty trade agreement in order to improve implementation of core labour and environmental conventions in Colombia as part of the Sustainable Development Chapter .
We are also proposing monitoring by civil society institutions on the implementation of labour laws .
We hope that in this manner the agreement will help to improve the situation for labour rights activists in Colombia .
I know that human rights are a high priority , and I am at a loss to understand why the European Union , which prides itself on being the champion of human rights in the world , should even contemplate a trade agreement with a regime like that of Colombia .
Twenty-seven trade unionists have been murdered since the beginning of January 2009 .
This figure speaks for itself , and it has been proven in the past that the way to get the message across is to hurt these countries economically , as happened in the case of the sanctions against South Africa .
I genuinely believe that we should be sending a delegation to Colombia to see the actual situation at first hand , rather than holding a dialogue with them .
We should have people out there on the ground , and we should suspend any trade negotiations with Colombia until such time as we are assured that human rights there are on a par with the rest of the world .
I am very pleased that Mr Higgins has asked his question .
He is absolutely right about the situation he has described and you yourself , Commissioner , have now acknowledged the facts of the case .
Will the Commission , in the light of this , firstly suspend their GSP + agreement with Colombia and , secondly , suspend our negotiations for a free trade agreement , until we get the assurances from the Colombian Government that trade unionists , human rights activists and others can go about their business safely in that country ?
Member of the Commission . - I am grateful to both , and I understand the passion and strength of feeling .
I am not convinced that suspending negotiations will achieve what both honourable Members would wish to achieve .
What I think we have to do is to continue the dialogue , continue working to include in our discussions and , more importantly , in our agreements , an absolute guarantee along the lines that both honourable Members are looking for .
That is the approach that I have taken .
It does not mean , I hasten to add , that I have not invited those who have already talked to me to continue with their contribution to making sure that we are on the right lines , and , of course , I keep it under review , but at the present time , that is the course of action I have decided upon .
Subject : International trade recovery
The visible slowdown in international trade growth figures in 2008 was followed by a further contraction in 2009 , far exceeding the actual extent of the economic recession .
The European Council ( Brussels , 19-20 March 2009 ) ' recognising that free and fair trade is a key element for global recovery ' , called for ' a swift conclusion of bilateral trade negotiations and of the WTO Doha Development Agenda ' .
Can the Commission provide the following information :
What trade funding initiatives has it taken ?
What progress has been made by current trade negotiations and what measures are being envisaged to consolidate EU external trade flows ?
Member of the Commission . - It is true , of course , that international trade has been particularly deeply affected by the crisis .
The World Trade Organisation secretariat estimates that global trade will drop by 10 % in 2009 , with a 14 % decline in developed countries and about 7 % for emerging countries .
This calls for ambitious reactions , which is what we have been doing , both on trade finance , multilateral negotiations and bilateral negotiations .
Together with Member States , we have taken a number of important steps to increase the availability of trade finance .
Where commercial parties were no longer willing or able to provide export finance insurance , Member States have stepped in via the export credit agencies .
With regard to short-term insurance , this has been facilitated by the Commission decision to temporarily relax the conditions to offer such support .
We furthermore agree to temporary relaxation of the OECD rules on medium- to long-term credit insurance .
At the multilateral level , we strongly endorse the commitments made in the G20 context for national export credit agencies to make available sufficient government export credit insurance capacity where this is needed , and we also support the efforts by multilateral financing organisations to make available new trade financing facilities or increase the envelopes of existing ones .
To make sure we consolidate and increase exports , we are continuing to pursue the various trade negotiations we have engaged in .
Honourable Members know that the priority on the multilateral front is , and remains , an ambitious , balanced and comprehensive conclusion to the Doha Round , which would reap great benefits for the world and , of course , for the European economy .
The recent meeting in New Delhi which I attended has provided new political momentum and , together with the upcoming G20 Summit in Pittsburgh , it will hopefully enable us to conclude the deal in 2010 .
We are calling for real engagement with key World Trade Organisation partners in the months ahead in order to move the negotiations forward on the basis of the package which has been tentatively negotiated up until this point .
As Members know , we are pursuing a range of bilateral agreements in conjunction with this .
( EL ) Mr President , under pressure from the economic crisis , many states are introducing measures to invigorate their domestic industries .
The most recent example is the decision by US President Barack Obama to impose duties on tyre imports from China .
Has the Commission evaluated the impact on European exports of the policies of our third country trading partners , such as the ' Buy American ' or ' Buy Chinese ' campaigns ?
Member of the Commission . - I have indeed been discussing with the United States and with China - from which I came last week - ' Buy American ' and ' Buy Chinese ' - two very different programmes ; at least that is what I am reliably informed .
I have read the legislation for ' Buy American ' .
I am concerned much more about the implementation by individual states in the United States than I am by what it actually said .
' Buy Chinese ' is a different proposition .
I am reassured to some extent by what both the Trade Minister , Chen Deming , and the Vice-Premier , Tang Jiaxuan , said to me last week about the objective and the way in which European businesses would be treated , but I remain vigilant to make sure that neither directly nor indirectly does European business suffer .
In terms of the current position on tyres , which I think the honourable Member is referring to , we are just watching that at the moment to see exactly what will happen .
The honourable Member is right to point to it as an important area that we need to keep an eye on and see what happens and obviously I am happy to keep in touch on that .
In the absence of Mr Moraes , I am afraid Question 27 falls .
Subject : Marketing European beef and lamb products
What measures is the European Union pursuing to help market the sale of European beef and lamb products in third countries and does the Commission intend to bring forward any new initiatives to help in this process ?
Member of the Commission . - We work actively to tackle what are very complex vital sanitary barriers , and with this to help market the sale of European products like Irish beef and lamb .
The Market Access Strategy , and particularly the Market Access Partnership launched in 2007 , is the centrepiece of the Commission 's work in that respect .
The Market Access Strategy sets up a stronger partnership between the Commission , Member States and business to enhance the work of detecting , analysing , prioritising and removing barriers .
The specificity of this strategy is that it is done through the right mix of various trade policy instruments .
That means using multilateral and bilateral channels and complementing the more formal medium to long-term policy instruments with political contacts and with joint trade diplomacy .
Our efforts in relation to this market access have been stepped up considerably in recent years , and we have several success stories to show we are going in the right direction .
For example , we managed to confine a few countries and lift the ban on EU exports of meat due to the dioxin and PCBs contamination incident in Ireland in December 2008 , and recently we were successful in opening Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Philippines to the import of EU beef and to treat certain SPS issues in a more trade-friendly manner with Egypt and Israel .
We keep insisting on the different levels with countries such as Indonesia , Malaysia and Korea , to bring some of their legislation fully in line with the requirements of the SPS agreement and of the international standards of the World Organisation for Animal Health .
We have asked EU beef businesses to come forward with their specific concerns and to make suggestions on how we might tackle barriers in key markets .
It has recently had very positive feedback , and a presentation made by an Irish business association will help us in setting priorities and continuing our work .
Can I ask the Commissioner if she would consider a thorough and full examination of the food promotion budget ?
It has been in operation since the 1970s , is very restrictive and needs to be reformed .
Furthermore , would the Commissioner agree that improving the competitiveness of the European Union food sector will help the European Union pull itself out of the economic recession ?
It is well known that European beef and lamb products comply with the highest standards .
What measures is the Commission taking , if any , to encourage or demand that similar standards apply to trading partners , particularly in Brazil ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I am not familiar with the particular area that the honourable Member mentioned , so , if I may , I will come back to him in writing about that .
However , I agree completely on the question of the value and importance of the industry to the European Union and to trade .
Indeed , it is an area where we have increasingly to look and focus .
I work very closely with Commissioner Fischer Boel when looking at trade agreements to make sure that the agriculture side of our agreements represents a real strength and a real opportunity .
I hope that , as our negotiations unfold , the honourable Member will see more of the value that we place on this .
In terms of the reciprocity principle , we are negotiating with and training third-country officials so that they understand what the EU system is , so as to build their confidence in the level of protection offered to EU consumers and to their consumers alike .
We insist that third countries respect their international obligations , notably the World Trade Organisation SPS agreement , making sure that , when setting requirements , they respect international standards or base their requirements on science .
Subject : Environmental damage caused by lignite mining in the Czech Republic and central Germany
What view does the Commission take of the environmental damage caused by opencast lignite mining and lignite-burning power stations in the Czech Republic and central Germany , and of the progress with plans to decommission lignite plants and return affected land to nature ?
Mr President , the environmental damage which may be caused by the mining and use of lignite in power plants is an issue which is adequately addressed under Community legislation .
Under the Mining Waste Directive , units which process mining waste must have authorisation which includes a waste management plan and a plan for the closure and rehabilitation of facilities .
These units have to provide a financial guarantee to cover the cost of rehabilitation of the land .
The directive makes provision for inspections to be carried out by the competent authorities and includes obligations relating to the prevention of air , water and land pollution .
The directive has applied to new facilities since May 2008 .
Facilities which already existed must obtain authorisation , in accordance with the directive , by May 2012 .
The Member States must also prepare a list of abandoned and decommissioned facilities which cause or may cause environmental damage by mid-2012 .
The regulatory framework of the European Union also includes other directives , such as the ΙPPC Directive and the Large Combustion Plant Directive .
As far as environmental liability is concerned , the Land Directive is before the Council , but has not progressed .
Of these , the most important is , of course , the ΙPPC Directive , which requires large combustion plants to obtain an authorisation based on the application of best available practices .
At the same time , the Large Combustion Plant Directive sets minimum limit values on emissions for the most important atmospheric pollutants .
If a plant ceases to operate , the ΙPPC requires the operator to take measures to prevent any risk of pollution and to take measures to rehabilitate the area .
This legal framework safeguards a high level of environmental protection in the event of possible environmental damage from lignite-fuelled plants .
Now , as far as the closure of plants is concerned , this will be judged depending on whether plants comply with statutory requirements .
( DE ) Thank you for your accurate and comprehensive answer .
However , I did also ask specifically about the border areas , in other words Germany and the Czech Republic , Germany and Poland , Poland and the Czech Republic .
There are many of these cases in these areas .
I would like to ask whether you believe that there is sufficient cross-border cooperation between the relevant states and whether the Commission is providing support for cross-border measures in these areas , in particular as part of the regional programmes .
Mr President , first there are various sources of financing , both for the Czech Republic post-2007 and for Germany .
I must , of course , also remind you that , with the energy and climate package approved last December , there will be sufficient money from the scheme to trade greenhouse gas emissions which , under the agreement reached , must be reduced by 50 % in order to combat climate change and other related uses .
This means that facilities , especially outdoor lignite mining facilities , by definition destroy the environment and nature with various problems caused not only to the natural state of the land , but also to water from other pollutants and , as we know , from the generation of large quantities of carbon dioxide , given that lignite is , from this point of view , the worst fuel .
On a scale from one to ten , it is perhaps one of the worst in terms of carbon dioxide emissions .
I should like to say that money can also be obtained from emissions trading and , as far as Germany in particular is concerned , I have to say that emissions are being traded even as we speak .
Consequently , there is also money from this source .
However , apart from that , I should like to say that there is Community financing which can also contribute to the restoration of environmental damage from mining activities .
The regional operational programmes for the period 2000-2006 funded projects to regenerate areas which had been badly affected by the mining of brown coal in certain federal states in former East Germany , such as Saxony , Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia .
Provision is made for this type of support to continue in the relevant programming documents for the 2007-2013 period .
As far as the Czech Republic is concerned , the North-West regional operational programme for the period 2007-2013 finances actions to regenerate and rehabilitate abandoned mining areas .
The ' Environment ' operational programme also makes provision , as one of its priorities , for the regeneration of abandoned mining areas and , of course , cooperation not only between countries , but also between regional organisations , benefits both sides .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 20.00 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.05 )
Appointments to interparliamentary delegations ( deadline for tabling amendments ) : see Minutes
Forest fires in the summer of 2009 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
G20 Summit in Pittsburgh ( 24-25 September ) ( debate )
The next item is the comments of the Council and the Commission on the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh , to be held on 24-25 September 2009 .
Mr President , it is a great pleasure for me to be here today representing the Swedish Presidency .
The Presidency and the Commission will jointly represent the EU at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh on 24-25 September .
We will hold an informal European Council in Brussels tomorrow to prepare the EU 's common position .
As you will all be aware , the global financial crisis has necessitated unprecedented global measures :
Firstly , rapid and forceful financial and monetary policy measures to support the financial sector and the real economy .
Secondly , coordination of global efforts and development of the role of the G20 as a forum for such coordination , including for measures concerning regulation of the financial markets .
The financial and monetary policy measures that were able to be taken quickly were entirely necessary to get us through the worst of the crisis .
The overall support to the EU economy this year and next year is estimated at 5 % of GDP .
The central banks have responded to the crisis by keeping interest rates close to zero .
Today we are cautiously optimistic that the worst is behind us as far as the acute problems of the financial sector are concerned , but the economic situation remains unstable and there is a considerable risk of further setbacks .
We are very aware that rising unemployment will be a very dominant issue in the time ahead .
The situation remains uncertain , but it could have been much worse .
Coordination and cooperation at international level will be incredibly important if we are to ensure a broad recovery and to set the tone for a return to long-term , sustainable growth based on a firm foundation .
The G20 has played , and will continue to play , a central part in this .
The G20 will also work with the international financial institutions of the IMF and the World Bank to guarantee that they have sufficient resources and a well-functioning internal organisation so as to be able to support economic growth and ensure financial stability throughout the world .
The G20 process has had the following significant results :
Firstly , that we have a common analysis of the problems that have affected our economies .
That may not sound like great progress , but a shared view of the financial sector and the real economic problems that lie behind the crisis is essential for effective countermeasures .
Secondly , we have made real progress with a number of specific measures that we agreed on in London at the spring summit .
These include a comprehensive stimulus package for our economies and a strengthening of cooperation on the supervision and regulation of the financial markets .
Furthermore , we have ensured that the International Monetary Fund has sufficient resources to meet demand for borrowing .
We have also undertaken to improve the ability of the international financial institutions to give warning in good time should similar problems arise in the future .
Much remains to be done , but we have made clear progress that has been driven forward by coordinated international commitments .
I feel that we in the EU , along with the other members of the G20 , have made great progress on a number of central issues that are crucial if we are to provide a strategic response to the economic and financial crisis .
Our coordinated EU strategy means that Europe is leading the debate , rather than following it .
It is our solutions that are being noted when global solutions are drawn up .
That is why the Presidency is inviting the Heads of State or Government to a dinner tomorrow evening .
The aim is to build further on the successful work of the informal Ecofin lunch and the meeting of G20 finance ministers in London , so that we will be well prepared on arrival in Pittsburgh .
I expect the meeting tomorrow and the summit in Pittsburgh to continue to result in progress on the main issues that I have mentioned , but also in a few other areas besides .
One issue that has been raised in strong terms by a number of European finance ministers is the question of the part played by bonus systems in financial stability .
EU finance ministers are unanimous that we should lead demands for effective global standards to ensure that such bonus systems do not have destabilising effects and that the bonus payments are reasonable in relation to performance .
This is an important part of the overall initiative to ensure greater transparency and better supervision of the financial sector and it is crucial if we are to be able to secure future stability .
The Financial Stability Board has been asked to report to the Pittsburgh Summit regarding its work on developing principles for bonus systems .
I hope that this report will contain specific strategies that can be implemented in practice and which guarantee the introduction by financial institutions of sensible , responsible remuneration and bonus structures .
Moreover , I hope that we can agree to continue to provide the necessary stimulus to our economies as long as it is needed , but it is also important that we undertake to remove the measures when they are no longer required so that we can return to balanced public finances when the recovery comes .
We have only just begun to reflect on these exit strategies .
Their form and coordination , and how they are implemented , will be a highly important component if we are to achieve a balanced , long-term economic recovery .
Employment is another major challenge .
We need to carefully design the measures required , while at the same time maintaining a good balance between financial and structural policy .
I am sure that we will also repeat the need to maintain a stand against protectionism and to ensure fair play on the global markets .
This will require significant coordination of financial regulation and supervision , but also as regards the removal of extraordinary measures taken to support the financial sector .
Extensive work will continue to be required both at national and EU level .
Discussions concerning reform of financial institutions will continue tomorrow and in Pittsburgh , but also during the rest of the year .
We want them to be strong , with sufficient resources , the right mandate , with political guidance and management structures that correctly reflect their composition .
These matters are complex and interlinked , but we must get to grips with them as a matter of urgency so that the financial institutions can do this work which is becoming increasingly important .
Finally , I would like to say that naturally there is a great need for political decisiveness if we are to make progress in the discussions ahead of the climate summit in Copenhagen .
This is a very high priority for the Swedish Presidency .
We want to ensure that the right incentives are in place for everyone to take action to limit global warming and to adapt economic strategies so as to favour climate-friendly development .
Our goal is for the Pittsburgh Summit to make progress on guidelines for financing global climate measures .
I cannot promise that we will achieve everything we want to , because these issues are highly complex , but we promise that the Presidency will assert and defend the EU 's views in a responsible manner .
In this spirit I look forward to fruitful discussions with the Heads of State or Government tomorrow evening and the real results that the world is expecting from Pittsburgh next week .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , this is my first time before the House in this new legislative term .
I want to start by congratulating all of you on your election , or re-election in many cases .
I am sure that we all share a sense of responsibility with regard to tackling one of the greatest political challenges of our generation : how to overcome this deep economic and financial crisis .
We have to restore confidence and stability for our citizens , while increasing their opportunities and ensuring the highest possible level of social cohesion for everyone .
The issue that will be on the table at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh next week is at the heart of this challenge and this concern .
I am convinced that this issue will keep coming up throughout the next period and throughout this Parliament 's legislative term , regardless of whether these issues are discussed at G20 summits or European Councils , in your own debates or in the proposed initiatives that the next Commission will bring before this House .
The G20 Summit in Pittsburgh is the third to be convened at the level of Heads of State or Government since the collapse , one year and one day ago , of Lehman Brothers and the start of a crisis of proportions not seen for many decades .
In light of the first two top-level G20 meetings in Washington last November and in London in April of this year , it is clear that the G20 is playing a decisive role in coordinating the global response to this crisis .
The G20 's contribution to the development of a coordinated response has been vital in avoiding an even deeper recession than the one we are currently experiencing .
It has also been vital in establishing the foundations of an economic and financial system that will , in the future , prevent a repeat of the imbalances and excesses that have led us to the current situation .
The European Union has played an active and decisive role in encouraging the G20 in this respect .
As recalled yesterday in this House by President Barroso , the first summit in Washington was a European initiative by the French Presidency and President Sarkozy , together with the Commission .
The European Union also made a decisive contribution in terms of setting ambitious objectives for the two previous summits and actively participating in the preparatory work for these summits , in order to achieve not only declarations of principle , but also concrete results and commitments .
All Europeans , as well as the European institutions , should feel satisfied about all this .
We can also be reasonably satisfied about the level of coordination that has existed between the various European representatives on the G20 : the European countries that are G20 members and participate in the G20 meetings as such , plus the Presidency of the European Union together with the Commission , the latter representing the voice of all Europeans and the common position of all Member States .
The Washington Summit last November allowed the world 's main economies - the G20 countries account for around 90 % of world GDP - to agree on the implementation of stimulus plans to support economic activity at that time , last autumn , when credit , international trade and investment came to a sudden halt as a result of the tremendous financial shock , which first occurred in August 2007 and which then gained incredible momentum in September 2008 .
A few days after the Washington Summit last year , the Commission proposed the European Economic Recovery Plan , which received the political support of the European Council in December .
This plan has formed the basis of the European response in terms of fiscal policies and policies to stimulate demand through instruments which are in the hands of national governments and parliaments , or which are in the hands of the European institutions themselves .
Based on the most recent information available , these discretionary fiscal stimuli , together with the action of the automatic stabilisers , which are very important in the European countries due to the weight of our taxes and social welfare system , are predicted to add , as a contribution to total demand , the equivalent of 5.5 % of EU GDP between 2009 and 2010 .
The new US administration has also adopted a very significant stimulus plan .
Given that its automatic stabilisers are not as extensive as ours in Europe , the total sum of direct stimuli plus automatic stabilisers means that similar support is being given on both sides of the Atlantic .
In addition , countries such as Japan , China , Canada and other G20 members have also adopted equivalent fiscal stimuli .
The London Summit at the beginning of April insisted , in this respect , on the need to quickly put these plans into practice .
It called for close monitoring of these plans and said that , if necessary , they should be supplemented by additional measures .
We can now confirm that these stimulus plans , together with the very significant monetary stimuli adopted by the central banks , plus the mobilisation of public resources in support of financial institutions , particularly the banks , have managed to halt the economy 's freefall .
They are also now allowing us to see , this autumn , the first signs of stabilisation , as is apparent from the economic forecasts that I had the opportunity to present two days ago in Brussels .
For the first time in two years , these forecasts have not revised the previous forecast downwards .
However , we are not yet able to say that economic activity could sustain itself if these stimuli were removed .
It is also true that , even with the stimuli that are being applied , there are risks of a relapse given the extremely worrying rise in unemployment and the as-yet unresolved weaknesses in the financial system .
As a result , one of the messages that the G20 Finance Ministers agreed on with regard to the Pittsburgh Summit , when they met in London at the beginning of this month , was the need , for the time being , to maintain the temporary support measures , without ignoring the need to start developing a coordinated exit strategy .
I will come back to this briefly at the end of my speech .
The first two G20 summits in Washington and London were also decisive in terms of setting a global agenda for reforms in the systems of financial regulation and supervision .
It may be said that we are witnessing a radical change in tone after nearly three decades dominated by the model of deregulation and theories on the alleged infallibility of the financial markets .
In Washington , the G20 countries established the foundations , laid down the principles and defined the agenda for subjecting the financial markets to stricter and more effective regulation and supervision , leaving no areas , products or financial players outside the control of the regulatory and supervisory authorities .
These authorities must cooperate and coordinate their actions with one another much more closely in order to rectify the evident ineffectiveness of national supervisory systems vis-à-vis globalised markets and financial institutions operating across borders in these markets .
Extensive work was carried out at the London Summit in April to bring about concrete and significant progress in the implementation of this reform agenda .
From prudential accounting rules , applicable to financial institutions , to the firm requirement for transparency in non-cooperative jurisdictions , namely tax havens , and including the regulation of hedge funds or other financial institutions , the organisation of transparent derivative markets , and the adoption of rules on the pay of senior executives of financial institutions and traders operating on the markets , the London G20 Summit took definitive steps towards fulfilling the promise of reform .
As a result , the European Union has performed a very important task not only in promoting these agreements at G20 level , but also in applying these G20 agreements .
This has involved intensive regulatory work over the last year .
Some of these proposals have already been adopted here in this Parliament and by the Council .
Others are currently being discussed in this House and by the Council and , by the end of the year , the Commission plans to adopt another series of proposals , starting next week , one day before the Pittsburgh Summit , with the proposal to create the European Systemic Risk Board and three European micro-supervisory authorities , based on the recommendations of the de Larosière report , which both the Council and the Commission have taken on board .
The US administration has also revealed an ambitious financial reform plan , which President Obama confirmed this week as a priority of his term of office .
He has recognised the responsibility of the United States as being the place where this crisis was born and developed .
The objectives set for the Pittsburgh Summit include checking on the positive progress of these reforms and ensuring the necessary regulatory convergence on both sides of the Atlantic .
Any regulatory divergence will or could be used in the future by investors for arbitration strategies , which could once again create major distortions in the markets .
However , in addition to ensuring compliance with what has already been agreed and encouraging the implementation of the measures adopted , the Pittsburgh Summit must send out a clear political message .
The absolute desire of governments , political leaders , institutions , our own countries and the European Union to establish a solid regulatory framework with a firm commitment and dissuasive message must now be made clear .
This message must say that ' no one should think that , having got over the worst part of this crisis , those former practices which led to the crisis can be allowed to redevelop , as if nothing had happened ' .
The public expect guarantees that the financial institutions and their executives will be required to comply with rules , particularly on pay , which will prevent them from once again endangering the financial system and the real economy as a whole .
It must be said that the European Union is totally united on this point .
Another issue that has been high up on the agenda of the various G20 summits is the reform of the international financial institutions , as already mentioned by Mrs Malmström .
The only point I wish to add is that an extremely important step forward was taken in London in terms of the financial capacity of these institutions , particularly the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
Its lending capacity has been increased by no less than USD 500 billion , as a result of which the total funds now available to the IMF for its operations are USD 750 billion .

In addition to that , it was agreed to distribute between all the IMF 's member countries , in proportion to their quota , special drawing rights amounting to USD 250 billion .
On top of that , it was also agreed to increase the IMF 's financial capacity in order to boost its concessionary loans to the poorest countries .
All that is already in hand .
A great deal more progress has been made in the space of six months than over many years before that .
As a result , the European Union has , of course , agreed to duly contribute to this increase in the IMF 's funds .
The Member States of the European Union have agreed to add EUR 125 billion to their usual contributions , in proportion to the financing of the new objectives .
The G20 leaders will also discuss changing the representation of the various countries on the governing bodies of the international financial institutions .
Emerging and developing countries quite rightly aspire to a more appropriate representation .
This is an aspiration that the European Union supports , but it must be translated into concrete agreements .
That is why the European Commission - although this is not the official position of the Presidency of the European Union - continues to say that , in line with what this Parliament has thought to date , the best representation for the European Union on these bodies is a single representation .
The Pittsburgh Summit agenda will also cover other issues : financing of climate change , in preparation for the Copenhagen Summit ; the need to resume international trade negotiations and not to give in to protectionist tendencies ; and increased support for the weakest and most vulnerable countries in tackling this crisis .
As you know , the Commission adopted a communication on the financing of climate change last week .
Finally , please allow me to conclude by mentioning the wish expressed at the last meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers , and which will be discussed at the Pittsburgh Summit : the need to establish the foundations of a future model of more balanced and sustainable growth .
This will firstly involve developing exit strategies , not to be applied immediately , but to be applied when appropriate and in a coordinated manner .
This is because the development of such strategies is not only key to a sustainable exit from this crisis , but also to offering , at the same time , a prospect of medium-to-long-term sustainability following the profound effect that the crisis has had on public finances , on levels of employment and on the capacity for growth of our economies .
Mr President , Minister Malmström , Commissioner Almunia , we are in a global crisis .
We have a financial sector that operates on a global basis and we therefore need , as far as possible , to agree binding rules for the sector on a global basis .
That is why the G20 in Pittsburgh is so important , though the European Union itself should , of course , take vigorous action .
Efforts must be focussed on restoring the balance between freedom and responsibility , the values that form the basis of our social market economy , the core of our electoral platform in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Mr President , the G20 Summit is an important summit where it is more than vision that will be needed - I am happy that you have said so too .
It is a summit where decisions have to be taken .
This relates to structural reformation in risk management , more transparency and better rules for financial supervision .
Commissioner Almunia , you said that there are proposals in place for hedge funds .
What do you hope to achieve in this regard at the G20 Summit ?
A rapid reform of the IMF and the World Bank is also very much needed , and - I am pleased that you have both said this too - there must be timely work on a coordinated exit strategy , or new problems will arise once again .
Mr President , it is of the greatest importance that the flawed bonus culture be tackled with binding rules , as bonuses that reward short-term profits pose a great risk to the stability of financial institutions .
That is not all , however , as there is rightly a great deal of public indignation and , for that reason , too , it is very important that we show ourselves to be decisive in this regard .
Mr President , the summit will only be a success if binding agreements are reached .
I have talked about financial regulation , but climate change , preparing for a successful Copenhagen Summit and fighting protectionism in the interests of jobs are , of course , very important issues .
You , the European Union , all of us together , must play a pioneering role in this regard , and it is therefore important that you get the Member States to pull together .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost , there can be no ' as you were ' in the current economic situation .
That will only allow us to make a slow recovery and we shall see a further dramatic increase in unemployment figures , including here in Europe .
You must therefore be bold .
That is the most important message this Parliament can give the Pittsburgh delegates .
Be bold !
Mr Almunia , I have listened to a refreshing speech from you , on which I should like to congratulate you .
Now you need to start putting it into practice .
It is good to start with the bonus systems , but it is not enough .
We need a gear shift wherever short-term speculators are at an advantage on the international financial market , because the rules are wrong , over those who wish to make long-term investments in jobs , in products of excellence and in the long-term success of their company .
It is right to say that no risky players , no risky financial centre can remain without reasonable regulation , which is why we need regulation of the offshore centres from which dubious products are flooding the entire world .
That is the most important task that we must now set ourselves .
Nor should you be frightened of discussing fiscal policy - it is not prohibited .
A global transaction tax which benefits long-term investors would take us forward in this discussion as a whole .
We need strong , improved coordination of our international , as well as our European , economic policy .
It is right to think about an exit strategy , but it is even more important at the moment that we work out how we can give more solid support to the economy and improve the coordination of our economic policy .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , we clearly appreciate all the efforts that you have mentioned and which have , in fact , already gone quite far , but we want more .
We want a number of the G20 's elements and commitments to be formalised .
In particular , I would like to draw your attention to the gap between the rather encouraging figures in the financial sector and the terrible unemployment figures in the European Union .
If we have long-term unemployment , we will have , firstly , a human tragedy , and also a burden on public finance and no hope of a recovery through consumption .
We , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , very much fear a Japanese scenario and a sort of sluggish growth for several years .
I think that your country , Mrs Malmström , Sweden , has unfortunately also had experience of this .
Please help us to take advantage of this experience .
For me , there are three essential tasks .
Firstly , we have to carry on cooperating internationally , and carry on fighting against protectionism and strengthening global institutions such as the IMF .
We cannot get out of this on our own .
Europe must hammer home this message tirelessly .
Secondly , we must successfully put in place effective supervision and a much more demanding form of bank stabilisation .
In this respect , we should be wary of the G20 's publicity stunts .
There are executive powers , but there is work to be done at a legislative level and , for us , Mr Almunia , the Commission 's proposals on supervision are a step in the right direction , but they are not enough .
Ultimately , we want more European entities .
Then I think we will have to consider joint strategies for exiting the crisis while preserving the euro , making sure that the deficits do not place a strain on common monetary discipline .
To conclude , I would like to thank Commissioner Almunia for saying that he was in favour of the European Union as a body adopting positions in international institutions , thus defending the Community method .
We are counting on you to make sure that it is not only the large States that make their voices heard , but that the whole of the European Union and the whole of the internal market are defended .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his speech .
I have several concerns .
The first is that the Committee on Development in this House drafted a motion for a resolution .
I quote from that . It ' notes with great concern that the crisis already bears major human costs , and has devastating effects for the vulnerable in the poorest countries with an expected increase of 23 million more unemployed , up to 90 million more extreme poor in 2009 alone , life-saving drug treatment for up to 1.7 million people under threat , and 200 000-400 000 more infant deaths per year on average between 2009 and 2015 ' .
Unfortunately , this motion was not passed , although it was written together by all groups of this House .
We strongly deplore and we think it is a shame that this House was not able to draft a resolution on the G20 on development issues .
The big question is how to finance the consequences of the crisis , and there the German Minister of Finance , together with the Chancellor , suggested that the G20 discuss the possibility of a global transaction tax .
I ask the Commission , and I also ask the Presidency of the Council . Do you support this proposal ?
The second question is about tax havens .
The G20 wants to tackle it on the basis of case-by-case information exchange .
We know that this will not work .
The Development Committee suggested a country-by-country reporting regime so that transnational corporations have to report back on a country-by-country basis .
We suggest introducing automatic information exchange so that information really flows between the different countries .
A global financial system needs transparency .
We also want to know your position on these concrete proposals to get out of the crisis and finance the consequences .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , thank you for the speeches we have had this morning .
I was particularly pleased to hear Mrs Malmström 's comments about the G20 Pittsburgh representatives needing to agree to significant coordination in the continued support of stimulus measures , in the unwinding of these support measures when appropriate , and a determined coordinated effort on future regulation .
However , the backdrop to this summit is nations spending trillions of dollars on bailouts and stimulus packages and in two of the largest world economies we are seeing some protectionist measures , particularly with regard to tyres and poultry , as well as two of the most complicated regulatory structures in the world , namely the EU and the US , looking to completely overhaul their financial systems .
Therefore , I hope that the important issues of how to coordinate financial services , particularly now that some countries are showing early signs of coming out of this period of negative growth , will be the main topic of discussion and not the distraction of controlling bankers ' bonuses .
This summit should focus on how we achieve a common regulatory framework in a common timescale so that we do not create an opportunity for competitive advantage by individual nations or regulatory arbitrage opportunity for speculative trading .
There will be no first-mover advantage in financial regulation .
A global , coordinated approach is the only one which would benefit the businesses looking to raise funds in Wales , the EU and beyond .
If my Welsh businesses cannot access funds from the US , if the banks they rely on will require so much capital that the taxpayers of the EU need to take even more risk , we will not be thanked for moving first on overly burdensome regulation .
My plea is that a global , coordinated approach is adopted at all times and maintained to ensure the future access to capital for all our businesses in Wales , the EU and beyond .
In Portugal , bank profits grew by 18 % in the first quarter of this year .
The only thing that rose more than bank profits was unemployment .
Portugal is not an exception , but an example of an unfulfilled promise made by the G20 , which was that we would resolve this crisis with a new economic and world order .
That is not true , and 50 million more people out of work and 200 million more people in poverty prove that it is not so .
That is why I call on the Commission and Mrs Malmström to deal with bonuses and hedge funds , certainly , but most of all to deal with what we have not mentioned here : the end of off-shore banking , tax havens , the tax on financial transactions and the end of banking secrecy .
They should do anything that can be seen if they want people to believe in them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how can the people have faith in financial market regulation when it is entrusted to the high priests of the global financial temples such as Mario Draghi ?

In the United States , a popular uprising , a new conservative revolution of the people against the financial oligarchies , is taking place .
We the people do not believe in making taxpayers fund policies to rescue the financial powers , whether in the United States or in Europe .
Rather , European governments should give adequate resources to the real economy ; they should worry about production and jobs .
We can see the results of the G20 : they include nothing about ceilings and bonuses , nothing about the elimination of tax havens !
The measures are instead aimed solely at rescuing those responsible for the financial bubble : EUR 23 trillion have already been spent , EUR 5 trillion of which were spent by the European Central Bank .
The money in our economy has been gifted to those responsible for the financial bubble .
In comparison with the EUR 850 billion given to the banks , only EUR 50 billion has been earmarked for welfare support provisions and production incentives .
The reality is that high finance gives the orders and politics obeys them .
In the United States as in Europe , politicians appear merely as servants of the global banking power .
Wake up , Europe !
Follow the example of the US population , which is starting a second major revolution : the conservative people 's revolution !
( DE ) Mr President , we need democratic revolution .
That is clear from this process , which has luckily gained momentum with what is presently the G20 , because more may join ; one could even imagine a G3 .
How would it be if the Council helped in establishing a democratic control mechanism , especially given its tradition of consensus ?
It need not be a world parliament straight away , but what is being promoted needs democratic scrutiny by elected parliamentarians within a far bigger forum than the European Parliament .
I should also like to specifically point out that the question of systemic risks must be approached at its core .
With reference in particular to the tiresome situation we keep finding ourselves in , starting back in 1998 , with LTCM , Hypo Real Estate and , of course , Lehman , and the knock-on effects , rules should emerge from this that make it impossible to end up with the basic problem of ' too big to fail ' .
This can , of course , be done through cartel legislation , but it is certainly also a fundamental global question .
As far as a global transaction tax is concerned , the Tobin tax group was set up here in the European Parliament back in 1999 .
It is good that there has been progress here .
As far as the supervisory package is concerned , we urgently need to act on a European scale and not to allow ourselves to be held back by those who want the wrong Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the statistics are improving .
However , the multiple causes of the crisis - and it is not just a question of loopholes in regulations - are far from being removed .
For that , political will , decisiveness and courage must not fail us ; on the contrary .
Today we are talking about the G20 .
It is a good process .
We need new or different structures , priorities and bases for valuation in order to build up a global economy and a financial , social and judicial order in the world .
There are three conditions for this : firstly , we need to develop a democratic , parliamentary legitimisation process ; secondly , we need more EU in Europe and more Europe in the world , which also means that the values of our Charter of Fundamental Rights are our export articles , that our model of a responsible eco-social market economy is the basis for our global order and , thirdly , European regulation is needed in areas in which no agreement is in sight within the framework of the G20 .
We say yes to integrated European rather than simply coordinated financial market supervision on the basis of the model of the European Central Bank .
The de Larosière report is too little .
We say yes to the debate on bonus payments , but changing the payment methods is not the right way to go about it .
We must change the basis for assessment and , wherever there is a bonus , it must also have a penalty component .
As far as I am concerned , the debate on pro-cyclicity is too brief at the moment .
We need to remove the procyclic effects of the crisis and the current regulations for 2009 and 2010 .
The political will must not fail us .
That is why , following the speeches of the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner , we are going to Pittsburgh with optimism .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , one year on from the collapse of Lehman Brothers , the position that the European Union adopts at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh is absolutely critical if we want to prevent a repeat of past events and want the dynamic of change to remain at the top of the agenda .
I have four observations on this matter .
Firstly , at the G20 Summit in London last April , the Heads of State or Government made a commitment to increase the IMF 's funds .
Very well .
We have seen that there was significant support to fulfil this objective .
I fear that behind this there has been less determination to play a part in the much-needed reform of the governance of the IMF .
My second observation is that we must not fall for gimmicks .
I would not like the omnipresent debate on the bonuses and salaries of both CEOs and traders - which is absolutely critical if we want to develop the system into one which focuses less on the short term and more on long-term investment - to overshadow what is an equally important campaign concerning the eradication of tax havens , which was the highlight of the London Summit .
My third observation - and this picks up on what Mr Bullmann said earlier - is that this is an historic moment for us to raise the question again of the banks ' contribution to financing the aftershocks of the crisis .
This will enable us to reopen the debate on the taxation of transactions , which itself must also allow funds to be made available for long-term investment .
Once again , given the way the banks have been supported and assisted to cope with this crisis , the only right , proper and effective course of action is for them to contribute today to the financing of the economy .
My final observation is that , when we look at the employment picture , I think that from the start , our G20 meetings have fallen short when it comes to tackling the macroeconomic question , the question of a global pact for employment , and the question of a return to a strategy which , tomorrow , will enable us to correct the global imbalances that caused this crisis .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fast and decisive reaction of the G20 to the global financial crisis .
A great deal has happened .
The fire appears to have been put out , but the foundations of our financial system are still shaky .
The citizens are unsettled .
Profits are being ploughed back for the benefit of shareholders and losses are being socialised , that is how the citizens see it .
In the meantime , it is back to business as usual for more and more market players , who are making big moves , rather than focusing on what they should really be doing as service providers , namely supporting the real economy .
Financial ethics and responsibility appear , as ever , to be foreign words to many of them .
I am expecting specific - and fast - measures from the G20 .
I hope that the EU Member States will all pull together .
In addition to new supervisory structures , we also need bigger equity bases , which increase in line with the risk , long-term - not short-term - incentive systems , a coordinated exit strategy from State aid , contained protectionism , congruent regulation , rather than regulation arbitrage , an end to pro-cyclicity and a solution to the ' too big to fail ' problem and , above all , we must abide by the tried and tested social market economy .
Mr President , so far the G20 has concentrated on measures for the financial sector .
However , everyone seems to forget that the real economy also suffers from greed and an obsession with short-term profits .
I have deep respect for small enterprises which , against all odds , try to survive .
They deserve to get the loans to which they are entitled .
However , I have no respect at all for the management of some of the bigger companies which have no affinity with the products or services they deliver and can only think in terms of expansion and speculation .
I therefore call upon the G20 to discuss ways of making the economy more democratic and how to make sure that , within the company , workers and others who represent the general interest have enough power to control the management .
Within the EU , we have to look again at the statute for a European company .
We should make sure that it becomes impossible for shareholders and management to engage in speculative growth strategies to the detriment of the long-term interest of the companies themselves and of those who work for these companies .
Mr President , the majority of Europeans are not corporate leaders and not bankers but family farmers , small entrepreneurs , state employees .
The majority of Europe is completely fed up with the present system , in which global multinational corporations and banks rule the world .
They need , and they want , a fundamentally new paradigm , in which there must be a shift from globalisation to localisation , from completely profit- and money-centred decision making to human-centred and community-centred decision making , from WTO-ruled free trade agriculture to food sovereignty , local production and local farming .
Please do not fail to represent at the G20 Summit the views of the majority of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , who should regulate whom and how ?
That will be one of the controversial questions at the G20 Summit .
Even if there is unanimity on the fact that there can be no return to unbridled developments on the financial market , the methods and extent of regulation are still the subject of fierce argument .
It will still be possible to reach agreement on equity rules , on rating agencies , possibly even on questions in connection with derivates and their licensing , but there will be argument on the question of unfair competition , taxes and control .
There will be arguments over bonuses and there will be arguments over Europe 's demand for a Tobin tax .
In other words , as Europeans we have a responsibility to do our own homework , regardless of the outcome of the G20 Summit and the Commission is on the right path by not relying solely on it .
The motto must be : no financial market players , no financial products and no financial centre with no supervision in future .
However , global economic recovery is also on the agenda .
We cannot carry on here as in the past and maintain the imbalances in the world for the benefit of the US and for the benefit of the large industrial countries .
We must devote ourselves to overcoming poverty and hunger in the world and the G20 Summit must give new momentum to this .
I should like to add one point that no one , with the exception of Commissioner Almunia , has addressed so far .
It will be necessary to abide by the Stability and Growth Pact in Europe , not to bury it .
It is only because we had this pact , because we revised and maintained it , that it was at all possible for Europe to remain capable of action .
This should remain a European objective : a fast exit strategy out of excessive debt into a stable economy , to the Stability and Growth Pact as we know it .
( MT ) Mr President , currently , one of the most popular topics , at least on the news tied to the G20 Summit , is that of bonuses .
It is evidently a much talked about issue , yet we have to understand that the actual problem is rather more complex .
What has to be said is that if these bonuses are to put the financial system at risk then , undoubtedly , they must be checked .
However , we must keep in mind that there were large deficits in the external trade between countries that led to this crisis , as well as other internal fiscal deficits .
We must also take employment into consideration .
We know that the employment lag approximately requires about a year or so to catch up with the impact of previous GDP performance .
Therefore , when analysing employment issues , fiscal stimulus packages that are applied must keep being applied until positive results begin to emerge .
The Commission should ensure that there are no inconsistencies and should require that a reduction in deficit be registered before doing so .
( EL ) Mr President , the G20 Summit , the main topic at which was bonus management , does not by any stretch of the imagination get to the root of the problem and , unfortunately , is not a step towards improving the present system .
The series of proposals to amend the regulations is confined to an analysis of superficial issues and does not focus on social objectives .
The objective should be a total overhaul of the financial system and public and social control , a more democratic summit which would include all states and would address issues such as increased unemployment and the spiralling cost of basic goods and fuel , a summit which would take fundamental decisions to intervene in the market in order to put a stop to continual privatisation and the destruction of the social state .
These are the people 's real needs .
Citizens today want overall structural change , far from a neo-liberal system which leads to under-development instead of development , far from the rampant speculation which works against the people 's interests .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome your determination .
Europe has begun to put in place effective regulation , but Europe must not find itself isolated .
Close international cooperation is necessary , and this is exactly what we expect of the G20 .
It must pursue the reforms , which were initiated at previous meetings , with rigour and vigour .
The international framework for regulating the financial sector must be completed , so that it can aid investment , growth and employment .
Guiding principles must be affirmed .
The crisis is not over .
We must not return to the situation ex ante and abandon measures needed to avoid , as far as possible , the renewal of crises which are particularly damaging to the real economy , growth and employment .
The strengthening of supervision and regulation is equally necessary .
The obligations for supervision should reflect the level of systematic risk that the financial institutions impose on this sector .
Speculative activities , which represent a significant risk , should be discouraged by increasing the capital requirements and applying the Basel rules internationally .
As for salaries in the financial sector , we should recommend pay committees , increase transparency of these salaries with stricter disclosure requirements and supervise variable salaries , notably bonuses .
The strengthening of global financial institutions is likewise an imperative , as is the reform of governance and representation at the IMF .
Commissioner , these are some of the expectations citizens have of the next G20 , where Europe must speak with one voice , with determination and conviction .

( ES ) Commissioner Almunia , Mrs Malmström , I would ask you not to forget in Pittsburgh that we are experiencing not only a financial and economic crisis of unprecedented dimensions , but also a huge social crisis with devastating effects on those most in need , on those who only have their job , on small entrepreneurs , and on the most disadvantaged regions and countries .
I hope it is made clear in Pittsburgh that the economy is important , but that people are more important and that the economy serves the people .
Furthermore , Commissioner , Minister , please do not forget in Pittsburgh that Europe exists .
Please make your voices heard above those of the three tenors .
I have here the letter of 3 September from the three European Prime Ministers .
There is not one word on Europe .
They say that it is important that Europe speaks with one voice , but they keep drowning out Europe 's voice .
You must speak louder than them .
You must make clear that Europe has a right and an obligation , and that our vision of the social market economy is the solution to this crisis , and to preventing its reoccurrence .
( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , I agree with many of the points that have been made , but must qualify some others .
I agree that it is too soon to take away the patient 's crutches , but that it is time to get him ready to walk without them .
We still have to absorb excess liquidity in the markets , correct the imbalance in public finances and re-establish respect for competition rules .
In Pittsburgh we must do several things that we cannot do alone : we have to set up early warning mechanisms that work , because those that we had did not work ; we have to revise the regulatory framework , because the existing framework has not worked .
I agree that it is important to regulate bonuses and tax havens .
These are all necessary , but inadequate , measures .
In my opinion , it is more important to re-build the muscle of financial institutions , limit debt and set up reserves in good times so that we can weather the bad times .
It is more important to make an effort in terms of supervision .
The Commissioner knows that I supported the de Larosière report , although I felt it was inadequate , because I would support more centralised supervision .
However , it is clear that European supervision cannot function without close coordination with the supervisory authorities of the other major economic areas of the world .
We also need to do something about trade .
It is all well and good helping the emerging countries , but it is more important to lift the barriers that are still preventing trade in goods .
Commissioner , the most important point is that we need to establish the foundations for stable and sustained growth over a generation .
For this we need free markets , markets open to innovation , markets open to entrepreneurs , but also markets subject to a certain level of regulation .
I will end with a quotation , which will be familiar to my compatriot Mr Almunia : ' Publish not many edicts ; when you do enact pragmatics and decrees , see that they be good ones and , above all , that they are well observed ' , so said Don Quixote to his friend Sancho .

Mr President , I thank the Commissioner .
I especially agree with him on his Charter for Sustainable Economic Activity .
I think this is what we must take to the G20 but I do not agree that we should use all our capital to focus on bankers ' bonuses .
I think this is a distraction in many ways although it should be dealt with .
Neither is a wish list for solving the world 's problems frankly likely to win the day .
The financial services industry is on fire .
We need first to make sure that we have put out that fire and that it stays out .
For this we need a consistent approach .
The G20 is a leading forum , but we also need permanent structures in place as well like the Transatlantic Economic Council to deal with issues like IFRS .
If systemic risk is to be truly dealt with , we need to stop looking in the rear-view mirror and start focusing on the road ahead .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis that we are going through is profound and long lasting .
It is therefore urgent and absolutely essential to put in place the necessary regulations and supervision of the financial sector and the banks , to prevent an even more drastic repeat of today 's crisis .
The financial system must once again serve the real economy and not continue to destroy it .
From this point of view , the last G20 Summit in London , which has been mentioned , ended in what were , to say the least , partial proposals , but , above all , the words have not been turned into deeds , and the financial drift is there once again .
In view of this situation , and so that the Pittsburgh G20 Summit really is useful , the European Union must defend strong regulatory measures that have real consequences .
Beyond the essential measures to supervise finance listed by a number of my fellow Members , I personally would like to raise the issues of trade and development , because in Pittsburgh there will also be talk of relaunching the Doha Round .
Relaunch it , yes , but with the condition that the initial and central objective of this Round , that is to say development , is not sidelined again .
Our southern partners , quite rightly , will not accept that their concerns continue to remain unanswered .
The issue at stake in this G20 goes beyond that of the financial crisis : it is about laying the foundations of new global governance .

( ES ) Mrs Malmström , Mr Almunia , I will give you three ideas in one minute .
Firstly , we need more Europe .
This is because , given the global situation , Europe must be united and strong .
If we fail to achieve this , Europe will not count and will not be involved .
Secondly , we need more State .
This is because , in addition to developing a new governance for the world , in addition to new regulation and supervision , and also greater international coordination , we need to put an end to tax havens and review transnational taxation .
This , in my opinion , is an urgent issue for the future .
Finally , we need a better market .
I feel it is vital to reiterate the need for new business ethics and also the need to encourage a new culture of corporate responsibility .
I believe this is essential .
Companies must become part of society and , as such , must be held liable to these interest groups and to these stakeholders .

( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Mr Almunia , first of all , on 3 September , Germany , the United Kingdom and France reached an agreement , spoke with one voice to express a European consensus on the matter of the supervision of traders ' bonuses .
On Thursday , the 27 members of the Council will meet to prepare for the G20 .
I encourage you to work actively to find a solution , a common response , but one that is especially ambitious as regards the matter of traders ' salaries .
Indeed , the rules enacted and the decisions taken at the last G20 , in April , have not been respected , as the banks , which had also received State aid , swiftly set aside sums to pay traders .
European citizens cannot and would not understand why such breaches have not been punished , when measures were taken at the time of the G20 Summit .
When it is a matter of State aid , breaches absolutely must be punished .
It is therefore essential that concrete and , above all , joint measures be adopted at Pittsburgh .
We cannot be the only virtuous ones .
In short , salaries must be better supervised through rules of transparency , governance and responsibility , and penalties must be applied where these rules are breached .
( SK ) In my opinion , what you have presented here is a rather ambitious plan , which you want to present to the G20 .
I am concerned , however , as to what the conclusions of the G20 will be and what the real effects will be on society , since the results that have filtered through at the level of EU Member States are so far neither tangible nor visible .
Mrs Malmström was saying that the issue is one of proportionate levels of pay for managers , but it must be said that all of the data indicates that it is precisely in those sectors which we supported financially and which we protected from ruin that managers receive disproportionate levels of pay .
In addition , nothing has happened with offshore banking - the mechanism has simply not been brought into play .
All of this leads to mounting unemployment and problems for small and medium-sized enterprises and , in my opinion , we should perhaps focus on fewer issues in the future while ensuring that those issues we do focus on are implemented in full .
( FR ) Mr President , you spoke of the governance of the IMF .
I would also like to know if you intend to raise the issue , at the G20 , of the conditionality of the money that the IMF lends to states .
We have seen that what were previously very liberal conditions have not been changed , and this applies in particular to the loans that were granted to some European States .
What is your position on this ?
My second question is : what is the position of the Commission and the Council on the Chinese proposal to put in place a slightly different international currency , in an effort to regulate the financial system using an alternative to the dollar ?
My third question is : the G20 is also part of the preparations for Copenhagen .
The Commission has proposed a total sum of between EUR 2 and 15 billion to help the countries of the South adapt to climate change .
What is the Council 's position ?
What sum will you put on the table at the G20 next week ?
Mr President , the G20 came up with many sensible responses : the need to rewrite financial regulation and supervision , and the need to act in a coordinated fashion .
Our national politicians are saying one thing , but here in the EU we seem to be doing another .
The detail of the regulation that is already being considered by some of my colleagues shows divergence both in the timetable of implementation and in the detail of the regulation .
Our economies are still very fragile .
Unemployment is rising , and access to finance is a huge concern , especially for small and medium-sized businesses .
Do we want our British or European businesses to be at a competitive disadvantage when they need working capital ?
Do we want to make it so expensive to borrow from a European bank that our customers , our corporates , just go and borrow from Wall Street and end up handing another coup to Wall Street at the expense of European banks ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to approach this subject from one of the perversities of the crisis .
Hungary 's citizens were shocked that , while the country is currently subsisting on aid from the IMF and EU , following seven years of socialist government , Hungarian banks ' half-year profits reached two-thirds of their pre-crisis level .
The banks are also able to amend unilaterally their agreements , thereby putting in a vulnerable position citizens who have taken out foreign currency loans in the hope of buying their own flat .
I firmly believe that we must take action against such trends .
We should subject the banks and other financial market operators to proper supervision .
We should prevent the continuation of the damaging bonus culture prevalent before the crisis .
We should set in stone rules of professional ethics because we have seen where we end up with excessive deregulation .
Let us create a world which gives rewards , not for making a quick , short-term profit and immoderation , but for proper work , and which regards social responsibility as a basic value .
We must work together on sensible rules to win over our G20 partners .
( HU ) There is a clear message from what has been said so far , namely , that in order to regain the trust of ordinary citizens , we must take action against bonuses and tax havens .
I would like to ask Commissioner Almunia and Mrs Malmström about when the European financial supervisory authority proposed by the Hungarian Prime Minister will come into operation .
I would also like to point out that it would be an extremely important task for this Parliament , nothing to do with G20 , to protect the interests of European consumers and citizens .
They are completely at the mercy of the banks , which do not provide sufficient reliable information .
A code of ethics has been drawn up in Hungary .
I would suggest a code of ethics in Europe at EU level , governing the behaviour of citizens and banks , because I strongly believe that there are a huge number of innocent victims as ordinary citizens do not understand the risk entailed when obtaining credit .
This is an extremely important task for Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , the very ambitious programme you have presented to us is interesting , but do you not think that we ought to tackle the issue of the advantage that is still to be gained , today , by favouring very short-term transactions and very short-term profitability over the medium and long term ?
The lack of funding for our businesses , particularly in Europe , is precisely due to the advantage that is still to be gained by very short-term investments .
Do you not think we should tackle this issue ?
Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members who have contributed to this debate .
I feel there is a very high level of agreement in this House about what is important in the European position and which issues we must concentrate on ahead of the G20 .
The EU now speaks with a clear , coordinated voice on the international stage and I really would like to thank the Commission and , in particular , Joaquín Almunia , for the work that he has done to help bring about this consensus .
Many Members have raised the issues that both I and the Commissioner have looked at .
Yes , we need better supervision and better regulation of the financial markets .
We hope that a supervisory system can be put in place as soon as possible .
We will base this on the Larosière report and see how quickly we can get it into place .
We need more coordinated global solutions and effective and functioning international institutions .
We need clear principles for bonus systems .
I have great faith in the Financial Stability Board and I am confident that it will come up with specific realisable proposals that we can discuss .
We would also like to take up the matter of climate financing .
We will call upon all countries to shoulder their responsibilities , but I am not sure that it is realistic to expect to be able to discuss figures at the summit in Pittsburgh .
Naturally , we will work towards this , because it would be a good thing .
We also need global solutions .
We cannot separate EU solutions from this system , but instead must ensure that we get as many global solutions in place as possible .
Unemployment is perhaps the most noticeable aspect of the economic and financial crisis to the people of Europe .
Unemployment is here to stay for some time in most of our countries and that is a very , very serious situation .
It calls for European and national solutions .
We must have a strong labour market policy , we must make it easier for companies and entrepreneurs to take the risk of employing people and to dare to invest and we must ensure that people are employable by investing in education and research .
We will be having a special discussion on unemployment at Ecofin in October .
We also have to discuss exit strategies . Otherwise , there is a risk that the measures that we have taken will have negative effects on unemployment and growth in particular , and will result in deficits and inflation .
It is always the most vulnerable in our society who suffer first .
When it comes to the poorest countries , we are very , very aware that it is they who are the biggest losers in the international crisis .
It is hitting the poorest in the world hard .
We have discussed and are continuing to discuss how we can ease the situation of these people .
It is important that the Multilateral Development Banks ( MDBs ) have sufficient resources to be able to provide what are known as soft loans .
It is also important that we ensure that the international trading system works properly and that there is no protectionism inherent in it .
Consequently , the various discussions concerning global taxes and various kinds of Tobin tax are only meaningful if they can actually be realised globally , and at the moment that is not the case .
As a result , they would only be counterproductive and would not help our economies .
Many Members have raised the matter of hedge funds and new financial regulation .
These are priority issues for the Swedish Presidency .
We will decide these matters alongside you and we look forward to working very closely with the European Parliament to get directives on hedge funds and financial regulation in place as soon as possible .
I am aware that it is difficult and complex - that there are many aspects to take into consideration - but we are prepared to work with you as closely as possible to get this in place .
In summary , naturally the G20 Summit cannot solve all the problems that we have discussed .
Nonetheless , I have good reason to hope that we can make substantial progress on the issues that we have discussed .
There is pressure from the citizens of Europe , but there are also people around the world who expect us to demonstrate our leadership and increase the stability of the financial systems , to do our utmost to avoid this type of crisis in the future and ensure that we come out of this crisis stronger than we went into it .
The EU is united , the EU is strong , and I can assure you that the Swedish Presidency will do its utmost to defend and assert the views of Europe at the G20 Summit next week .
Thank you very much for a highly interesting debate .
Mr President , I believe we are all agreed that , in the current situation in which we still have to tackle huge and extensive challenges as a result of the crisis , the success of the G20 Pittsburgh Summit and the belief that , as a result of these meetings , we will start to find and apply solutions to the problems and challenges facing us , are extraordinarily important .
We are , in fact , starting to see some significant signs of improvement in certain economic indicators , particularly in the growth of international trade and in the confidence of consumers and investors .
As a result , all the items on the summit 's agenda should be , must be and I hope will be agreed by the Heads of State or Government and implemented following the meeting next week .
One of the most important points , mentioned by many of you , is the need for clarification , for a clear message as to how the world 's major economies intend to keep coordinating their actions .
The next step in the coordination of economic policy must be to define an exit strategy and commit to a decision as to when and how this strategy will be applied in a coordinated manner .
We must learn - and I believe we have learnt - the lesson from the crisis of the twenty-ninth that the stimulus measures cannot be withdrawn too quickly , when the economy - as some of you have said - still needs crutches .
However , we must also not use these stimulus measures for longer than necessary because , in that case , we would be repeating the conditions that led to the bubbles and imbalances which were the cause of this crisis .
This is a very important issue , which must be clarified by the Pittsburgh Summit .
We must avoid repeating the errors of the past , not only in terms of macroeconomic policies , but also in terms of financial regulation and supervision .
I believe that this commitment has been made very clear at previous summits .
We must keep developing this commitment and honour those undertakings already made at both global level and , as in our case , at European level .
In this respect , I agree with those who have said in this morning 's debate that not everything should be reduced to the issue of pay .
However , I also fully agree with those who say that the issue of pay is extremely important in economic , social , political and ethical terms .
I believe that Europe is showing its leadership on this issue - as it has done on other issues on the G20 agenda - both through each of the Heads of State or Government and also through the European institutions themselves , the Presidency of the European Union and the Commission .
We should not forget that , in April of this year , the European Commission presented the Member States with recommendations on pay , which are almost exactly the same as those that the whole world is now proposing .
We must continue to pay attention to the problems of the financial system - more capital , restructuring and correction of bank balance sheets - at both the European and global levels .
When you have a fully interconnected financial system , there is no point in us solving our problems within our borders if no one else is solving their problems at the same time .
You must remember how , one year ago , on the day before the Lehman Brothers crisis , we still thought that we could avoid the worst problems of the financial crisis created in the United States .
At the same time , it is absolutely true , as many of you have said , that , in the end , the political objective is not just to sort out the balance sheet of one bank or capitalise its liabilities .
The fundamental problems are employment , the situation of our small and medium-sized enterprises , and the sustainability of our public services and social welfare systems .
However , without a functioning financial system , nothing else can be sustained .
That is the challenge that must be tackled by the Pittsburgh Summit , or which the G20 must continue tackling at the Pittsburgh Summit .
Finally , I should like to comment on an issue that was raised in many of your speeches .
While I agree with other items on the G20 agenda , which many of you have mentioned , I want to refer to just one : the issue of tax havens and non-cooperative jurisdictions .
It is true that the G20 meeting in London failed to find solutions to all the problems posed by tax havens .
It would be very difficult to find all the solutions in one day to a problem that has been around for many years .
However , it is also absolutely true that , since the London Summit in April , many more problems have been solved over these six months than were or could have been solved over many years before the London Summit .
On this particular point , agreement has been reached on the exchange of information needed to prevent tax avoidance and to prevent economic and financial activities being hidden from the public authorities by utilising the protection of tax havens .
It is therefore true that not everything has been solved in these six months .
However , in these six months , we have achieved a great deal on an issue which is very important in terms of preventing those financial activities , which are hidden from the regulatory and supervisory authorities , from once again creating distortions in the system .
This is also extraordinarily important in terms of the message that we are sending to our citizens about the distribution of responsibility and the efforts needed to tackle this crisis .
Lastly , someone said that the EU 's voice must be heard above the voices of the European members of the G20 .
I can assure you that , under the Swedish Presidency and using the voice of the European Commission , the EU 's voice is being heard .
It is being listened to very attentively and respectfully because Europe , and not just one or two European countries , but the European Union was the organisation that started this process of global coordination .
This clearly shows that more effective results can be achieved when there is true coordination .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first October part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
It is expected that the approaching G20 Summit will place a predominant emphasis on the Copenhagen climate talks .
There are still many undecided questions standing in the way of a post-Kyoto agreement .
Allow me to express a few thoughts I have on this subject . Number one .
Instead of vague long-term promises , we need binding medium-term undertakings .
These undertakings must be realistic , fair and accountable .
When establishing these undertakings , apart from factors like economic development and natural assets , it is important also to take into consideration the extent to which the Kyoto commitments have been fulfilled so far .
Number two . Support should be given for the notion that the EU should assist the developing countries financially as well in achieving their climate policy objectives .
A specific financial pledge is needed to achieve this .
However , in order to ensure transparency , the developing countries must also make binding commitments and draw up detailed action plans .
Number three . Flexibility mechanisms must continue to be given an important role .
In order to promote investment , agreement must be reached as quickly as possible on the way in which the certificates deriving from the projects carried out so far can be included .
Number four . Market-based instruments must be given more scope in the post-Kyoto system .
For example , extending the emissions trading or green certificate schemes may help achieve a reduction in emissions in places incurring the minimum cost .
I believe that the economic crisis is not an obstacle to the Copenhagen compromise .
A decent medium-term agreement may somehow boost the European economy 's competitiveness , while also reducing the burden on the environment .
Five years ago , on their accession to the EU , every new Member State committed to adopting the euro .
At present , four of them have already achieved this .
The other countries have drifted and are lagging behind in this area due to various economic policy considerations and mistakes , not to mention that the economic and financial crisis has put them in a vulnerable position .
The economic downturn has fuelled protectionist ambitions , which threatens to undermine the operation of the single market .
The current economic crisis has highlighted the fact that the euro has assumed a prominent role in the close economic ties established with the euro area members , but the States hoping to adopt the euro have now ended up in an extremely vulnerable position due to the protracted preparations .
Many believe , myself included , that in the critical currency situation that has evolved , the key to the solution would be to speed up the introduction of the euro for these Member States .
However , economic policy conditions must be stipulated for this , but even with the previously stipulated conditions it would still take years for the euro to be introduced .
In my view , we should not only check that the convergence criteria have remained unchanged , but that the EU is also handling the regulation governing the time which must be spent in the ERM II exchange rate mechanism in a more flexible manner than it does now .
I also think that it is very important to examine how the process for joining the euro area could be accelerated , while fulfilling the conditions which can be fulfilled .
This could then stabilise the situation in the affected countries , not to mention safeguard the EU 's entire internal market .
Otherwise , the possible international insolvency of the countries outside the euro area may , in a worst case scenario , bring down the euro area with it as well .
Mr President , the market economy is a good slave but a bad master .
Recently , though , the roles have become rather confused .
It is the custom at international conferences to speak trivia , but now we need action , and fast .
The world now has a historic opportunity at the Pittsburgh G20 Summit to agree once again on the rules of the global economy .
There has been a lot of talk in the press about bankers ' bonuses , but they are only the tip of the iceberg .
The global economy is in need of complete renovation and the keyword is transparency .
We have to try and do away with the risk economy and move towards the real economy .
Only binding international rules can guarantee that there will be no repetition of the casino economy we have witnessed in recent years .
In future , the taxpayer should not be made to pay for the damage .
There is always the risk with mechanisms like wealth taxes that someone in the global economy will turn out to be a freeloader .
I think , however , that we should at least look into how relevant they might be .
The G20 Summit in Pittsburgh will be taking place practically on the first anniversary of the collapse of Lehman Brothers bank .
This is the background against which world leaders should operate .
The repercussions of the crisis have been felt by the inhabitants of almost every part of the globe .
The primary aim of the G20 Summit should be to minimise the risk of the crisis caused by the deregulation of the financial markets from repeating itself .
The G20 leaders face the task of creating regulation which will prevent further speculative banks from emerging and , to put it bluntly , swindling millions of customers of financial institutions all over the world .
In the last few months , we have been getting increasingly bad news about managers who brought their firms to the brink of collapse consuming public aid .
In the last few years , we in Europe have been witnessing an unprecedented income gap not previously seen in the European social model .
One of the tasks of the G20 group should be to level out incomes in Europe and on a world scale .
The financial sector needs to have rules making bonuses dependent not on short-term profits , but on long-term returns on investments .
The leaders of several European countries as well as of the European Union as a whole will be present at Pittsburgh .
That is why Europe should speak with one voice at the summit .
I appeal to the representative of the European Union to remember that the interests of the Community include the interests of Member States which will not have national representatives at the summit .
On Monday this week , it was a questionable honour to work on what is a sort of anniversary : exactly a year before , the investment bank Lehman Brothers had collapsed .
The collapse is regarded as having actually precipitated the current deep global recession and the financial crisis .
At a point in time so close to the anniversary and the approaching Pittsburgh G20 meeting , it is worth stopping to reflect on what has been learned and what can still be learned from the crisis .
I see something crucial emerging from the crisis , and that is an opportunity to overhaul thoroughly the international financial architecture .
There have already been steps taken in this direction .
The G20 meeting last spring served as a good basis for action and guidance for global consensus on the measures required .
The United States of America very recently announced a huge financial legislative package .
The European Commission is expected to make a proposal for building the European financial architecture and its supervision next week .
The key phrase here is ' global approach ' .
We have to establish internationally binding rules on the reform of the International Monetary Fund , regulations on solvency , and new rules on the payment of options .
The legislation must extend to all financial products , and it needs to be flexible so that it can always react to a changing sector , and one that launches new products .
In the grip of a crisis that is wrecking people 's basic security , livelihoods and welfare , it is also constructive to think about new ways of measuring wealth .
The final conclusions published by the commission that President Sarkozy recently appointed recommend a switch from measuring prosperity based on GDP to new methods which take account especially of a society 's ability in economic terms to safeguard its citizens ' well-being and environmental sustainability .
in writing . - I agree with those who spoke about the need for a global co-ordinated approach .
This is essential if we are to change the power structures of the global financial system .
However neither the Commission or the Council made comment about the concept of ' living wills ' for the banking sector .
This week marks the anniversary of the collapse of Lehman brothers .
It is estimated that it will take ten years for the investment bank to be wound up .
This is in contrast to the Dunfermline Building Society which had a life will enabling its assets to be clearly identified .
Transparency is essential if we are to bring consumer confidence back to the banking sector .
SWIFT ( debate )
The next item is the Council statement on SWIFT .
Mr President , in the overall fight against terrorism , the key question is how are such activities financed .
Preventing the financing of terrorism and tracking clues that such transactions may leave behind can both prevent terrorist crimes and be important in the investigation of such crimes .
In order to do this , we need international cooperation .
Here , we should take up the challenge laid down in the UN 's 1999 Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the conventions of the European Council in this area .
Members who participated in the in camera meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 3 September 2009 heard how the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme , the TFTP , has helped to improve security for EU citizens as well as others .
In recent years , information from the TFTP has contributed to revealing and investigating terrorist crimes and has also succeeded in preventing terrorist attacks on European soil .
The Presidency was given a unanimous negotiation mandate by the Council on 27 July 2009 that is based on a proposal from the Commission .
It would have been better if the negotiations with the US could have taken place on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon . The European Parliament could then have participated fully , but as you are aware , that is not yet possible .
Since SWIFT is moving its database from the US to Europe at the end of the year , it is essential that the EU concludes a short-term agreement with the US as soon as possible so that there is no risk of the exchange of information being interrupted .
That is in everyone 's interest .
I would like to stress that this is an interim agreement for the period until a permanent agreement can be concluded .
It must have a term of no more than twelve months and the Commission has advised that it intends to submit a proposal for a permanent agreement as soon as a new Treaty is in place .
If the TFTP is to be of use to the EU and the Member States , the US must continue to provide the respective authorised authorities within the EU with information from the TFTP in the same way as previously .
This is indeed what will happen .
Moreover , the interim agreement will provide an express opportunity for the EU 's crime prevention authorities to request information themselves from TFTP databases in the investigation of terrorist crimes .
The Presidency is convinced of the benefit of information from the TFTP .
At the same time , we are clear that the interim agreement must contain the necessary mechanisms to guarantee the protection of individuals ' privacy , the rule of law and data protection .
The draft agreement therefore contains a provision stating that there must be a separate EU authority to receive , process and approve any request from the US to obtain information from SWIFT .
It is equally important that the interim agreement contains detailed provisions on data protection for the information that the US receives from SWIFT via the European authority .
Here , the agreement will go further than was previously the case in the unilateral commitments to the EU made by the US in the TFTP representations of 2007 , as published in the Official Journal of the European Union .
Allow me to mention certain other provisions that we will demand are included in the agreement .
Data must be stored securely , all access to data shall be logged , all searches in the TFTP database shall be restricted and shall only cover persons or information where there are good grounds for suspicion or there is a clear link to a terrorist crime .
The storage period for the information reviewed shall be limited and information shall be deleted from the database after five years at most , or earlier if possible .
We can clearly state that the TFTP will be permitted to be used only in investigations of terrorist crimes , including the financing of terrorism .
Neither the US nor the EU may use the system to investigate other kinds of crime or for other purposes .
Naturally , it is also important that the transfer of information from the EU to the US under the TFTP is proportionate .
In addition to the rules concerning the European authority that I mentioned previously , the agreement therefore also contains a provision stating that the system must be appraised by an independent appraisal body .
Where the EU is concerned , this body will consist of representatives of the Presidency , the Commission , and two people from the Member States ' national data protection authorities .
The task of the appraisal body will be to check compliance with the agreement , to check the correct application of the provisions on data protection and to check that the transfer of data is proportionate .
We have a common responsibility to ensure that the crime prevention authorities can counter terrorism effectively .
We also have a common responsibility to ensure that this takes place with legal certainty while respecting fundamental rights .
The Presidency is convinced that the exchange of information with the US within the framework of the TFTP increases protection from terrorism , and that we can achieve both an interim agreement and eventually a long-term agreement which not only meets our stringent requirements of data protection but which also respects fundamental rights .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would firstly like sincerely to thank Mrs Ask for giving us a summary of all the developments concerning SWIFT and of the negotiations under way with the United States on the continuation of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme , the TFTP .
I myself had the opportunity , during the meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 22 July , to explain the workings of the TFTP and why we need an interim solution to prevent its interruption .
The joint meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 3 September took place with the Swedish Presidency , the Director-General of the Directorate-General for Justice , Freedom and Security , Mr Faull , and Mr Bruguière in attendance .
I believe that this meeting allowed a number of still open issues to be clarified .
I would like briefly to underline some aspects .
The added value of the evaluation , by the US Treasury , of data within the context of the TFTP has been confirmed by Mr Bruguière 's report , which the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs were able to examine at the joint meeting at the beginning of September .
As the Presidency has also reminded us , this analysis of the data has enabled the US authorities to prevent attacks and to facilitate investigations concerning terrorist attacks , both in the United States and in Europe .
Moreover , Judge Bruguière 's report confirmed that the US authorities had honoured the commitments they made in 2007 regarding data protection , namely - as Mrs Ask explained very well just now - to limit data preservation and to limit access to the data , so that they are used only where terrorist financing is suspected .
In short , Mr Bruguière said that the commitments have been honoured .
It is clear , however , that the judicial framework negotiated in 2007 will no longer be operational since the data will no longer be located in the United States , after the change in the architecture of SWIFT , scheduled for the end of the year .
An interim international agreement between the European Union and the United States is needed so that the US authorities can continue to analyse data concerning inter-European transactions taking place in the Netherlands .
The inclusion in this agreement of all the guarantees necessary to safeguard the fundamental rights of our citizens , notably that of the protection of personal data , is absolutely imperative .
Of course , we support the Presidency wholeheartedly in its efforts to that end .
Moving on , I would like , above all , to say to the House , Mr President , that , as the Minister has just mentioned , we are talking about an interim agreement , the duration of which cannot exceed a maximum of 12 months .
This means that it can be renegotiated immediately once the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , with the full involvement of the European Parliament .
I can genuinely assure you , here , that the Commission will , of course , continue to keep Parliament constantly informed of the progress of this matter .
I would add that we are pleased to be able to prepare this agreement , which will be a permanent agreement , a long-term agreement , by demanding , of course , full reciprocity from our US partners .
The fight against terrorism concerns us , too , and there is no reason why there should not be full and complete reciprocity .
That is why I believe the involvement of Parliament in this negotiation of a future long-term agreement will be beneficial .
That is what I believe in all honesty .
I would once more like to thank the Swedish Presidency and Mrs Ask for giving us a thorough overview of the situation , which has today given rise to this , once again , interim agreement .
Mr President , Mrs Ask , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the US is an important partner in the fight against terrorism .
However , on the question of sensitive data in particular , we want European regulations on data security , on civil rights and on the individual rights of our citizens as far as data is concerned , in cooperation with the Americans .
That is why we in the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are calling for a number of basic criteria for concluding this sort of contract .
Firstly , there must be a balance between civil security and civil rights .
Secondly , we need legal certainty for the companies concerned and for our citizens .
Thirdly , we welcome the co-legislator role of the European Parliament and therefore also welcome the intention of concluding a transitional agreement .
We wish you , Mrs Ask , and the Commission , success here in the coming weeks .
Fourthly , we believe that internal European data sets should be handled in accordance with European law , both in the transitional agreement and in the final agreement .
Fifthly , we want a similar instrument to the TFTP , to be introduced in addition at EU level , and , sixthly , we are of the opinion that this is the precondition to reciprocity .
These are our thoughts and we trust that they will meet with a broad consensus in plenary .
Once the transitional agreement has been concluded , we will need to negotiate and conclude the final agreement quickly .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , SWIFT has clearly become a testing ground for getting the balance right between our cooperation with the United States , fighting terrorism and protecting our fundamental rights .
When , in our resolutions of 2006 and 2007 , Parliament asked for the mirroring site of SWIFT to be moved from US to EU soil , it was obviously because we thought that the protection offered by the US framework to EU citizens was not in line with EU standards and would have to be improved .
So it is a positive development , and our group welcomes the fact that SWIFT 's two new servers will now be moved to Europe and that a new legal framework will be set up in order for the US TFTP to continue using and processing data in cooperation with our law enforcement authorities .
My group can also see that the recommendation adopted by the Council tries to address some of Parliament 's and the European Data Protection Supervisor 's concerns .
But there are some key questions left open .
If US legal standards continue to apply on EU soil for the processing of EU data , how can we guarantee respect for EU standards regarding procedural rights and the protection of personal data ?
To which judge can an EU citizen or an EU enterprise go in the case of criminal prosecution ?
Of course , one of the most important issues is the timing of the agreement and the interim nature of the agreement , as the Council and Commission have set out .
The choice of a third-pillar legal base , coupled with its interim character , leaves Parliament - and , therefore , EU citizens - completely out of the legislative process .
The Socialist and Democrat Group is clear that this interim agreement should apply only for 12 months and that a new agreement should be negotiated with Parliament as co-legislator so that we in this House can ensure that delicate balance of protecting the fundamental rights of European citizens in the important and critical fight against terrorism .
Mr President , after all these warm words , I am going to put a cat among the pigeons !
I am not going to say anything about the content , as I think it is self-evident that what has been negotiated is in line with European standards of legal protection and the protection of personal data , but I do now want to get a couple of answers about the process , as this is the umpteenth example of the Council taking decisions affecting citizens behind closed doors .
The governments of Europe and the United States want to know everything about our private lives , but we , as citizens , do not get to know what the Council does .
For me , that is a little bit back-to-front .
The fight against terror has practically become a kind of runaway train , with the Council showing utter contempt for European citizens and parliamentary democracy .
Every time , whether the current case relates to Swift , PNR , data retention or whatever else , we are told that ' this is indispensable to the fight against terror ' .
I dare say , Minister , but when will we actually get some facts for once , when will we do some evaluation ?
There are also a number of questions that I would really like to see answered in relation to Swift , as they were not answered on 3 September .
Why not ?
It was known back in 2007 that the architecture of Swift needed to be reformed .
Why did the Council only come up with this plan at the very last minute in the summer , while Parliament was still to get started ?
Why have you not consulted the national parliaments on the mandate ?
Why ?
Is this not a case of policy laundering , Minister , where it is actually the case that European governments are trying to get access to our data via the US government ?
Just come out and say it !
Finally , let me deal with transparency .
The documents , and specifically the legal advice from the Council 's own Legal Service , must be made public , and not just in a small room only accessible to MEPs - since we have already found them next to the photocopier , we already know what they say - but for the citizens of Europe .
That is real transparency .
Mr President , the Presidency and the Commission talk constantly of strengthening civil rights and of a Europe of the citizens .
In fact , however , fundamental rights are being eroded and proper public debate on them frustrated .
Every effort is being made to exclude parliaments and hold back information .
This sort of untransparent approach is unacceptable for a democratic Europe .
It is not enough to just tap at the door ; a responsible parliament must stop this undesirable development .
The Presidency must interrupt negotiations until it can guarantee the rights of citizens and parliaments .
The horse-trading which you are planning for banking data , with no binding protection mechanism , will sell the data protection rights of Europe 's citizens down the river and create a preventive general suspicion towards all citizens .
We Greens will have nothing to do with this .
Not even temporarily and certainly not if we have servers here in Europe and no longer just in the US , because the data will continue to be sent to the US nonetheless and legal protection will not be guaranteed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to speak for the first time in this House on behalf of the millions of Europeans who want a different Europe .
The SWIFT affair is symptomatic of the security blunders imposed in the name of terrorism , where utter contempt is shown for the most fundamental rights of our fellow citizens .
In this affair , the United States plundered bank data , without legal basis and without even the slightest information from the authorities in Europe .
The scandal has made the European authorities sit up and take notice .
An agreement has been signed with the US Government .
An expert has made an assessment of this agreement .
Which expert , though ?
A French anti-terror judge , Judge Bruguière , whose errors in the area of fundamental rights are well known in France .
We are therefore sceptical about the quality of his report .
Apart from the matter of principle , the proposal for a resolution put before us includes numerous warnings that we agree with , but they are insufficient .
We propose amendments to reinforce the demands that the European Parliament has a duty to make .
We must go further and call for the suspension of the agreement if the principles set out are infringed .
We would like to know why it has taken the European authorities so long to inform Parliament and why there has been such a rush to conclude this new agreement .
We are counting on the Swedish Presidency .
We will continually monitor respect for human rights .
Yes , our fellow citizens have a right to security , but this must be done without us being forced to live in a big brother society where everyone knows everything about us .
Mr President , thank you for these important points of view .
I will try to answer some of the questions in the short time available .
The first question that arises is , of course , how we can guarantee that the US will abide by the agreement .
I would like to say that first we have the Bruguière report , which provides a good description of compliance with the terms of what has been agreed to date .
Secondly , the draft agreement mentions an appraisal body , which I described to you , and also the Presidency , the Commission and representatives of national data protection authorities , the involvement of which is intended to check that the matter is dealt with correctly .
Obviously , it is crucial that the information is reliable .
It is also important that everyone realises that when information is transferred in this data programme , it is not the case that people can go in at any time and look at whatever they like .
There has to be a suspected terrorist crime or the financing of such in order to gain access to this information .
Naturally , this restricts how the information can be used .
As regards the criticism as to why this is being brought up now , during the summer , I would point out that the Presidency has asked more or less the same questions as the Members of the European Parliament are asking .
We were tasked with preparing the matter thoroughly and analysing - among other things - this report , which answers some questions , but also with other matters .
The reality is that it was not us that decided that SWIFT was to be moved to Europe ; this is happening on the basis of other decisions .
However , the US is keen to be able to use this tool in its fight against terrorism and we also think the equivalent information would be useful to us .
In order for this to happen , we need an agreement .
Since the Treaty of Lisbon has not entered into force , we felt it was necessary to provide a temporary solution .
That is what we are negotiating and that is what we have been mandated by the Council to do .
That is what I have attempted to describe .
Neither is it the case that the Presidency wishes to unnecessarily restrict insight or debate in any respect .
Firstly , this is a public debate after all , and secondly , we are , of course , happy to talk about how the discussions are going .
However , during negotiations , it is not possible to provide continual access to documents since the very nature of negotiations is that things get changed and then changed again .
However , I have tried to describe our starting point and the clear mandate that we have from the Council .
In this , we are very determined to combine a high level of effectiveness and practical use with the stringent requirements of legal certainty and respect for civil liberties and human rights .
I am entirely convinced that we will achieve this .
If - contrary to expectation - we do not , then there will be no agreement .


Mr President , I would simply like to confirm the remarks made by the Minister , who , incidentally , has drawn a very clear conclusion : if we did not really have the data protection assurances we need , for the lasting agreement that the Presidency will have to negotiate and for which the Commission will lend its support , there would not be an agreement .
That being the case , I believe that we should be able to reconcile matters and so conduct a campaign against terrorism , with respect shown , of course , for the great values and the great principles which mean that we in Europe attach much importance to the protection of privacy , on the one hand , and to the prevention of all commercial espionage , on the other .
I would simply say that , as far as I am concerned , since taking up my duties , I have obviously noted the fact that the Council asked Judge Bruguière to go and carry out this fact-finding mission in the United States .
The Bruguière Report , which dates from December 2008 , was handed to me in January 2009 .
This report was presented to the European Parliament and the JHA Council in February 2009 .
It was at that point that the Commission felt that it had in its hands the essential elements to ensure the continuity of the TFTP in anticipation of a time when , with the Treaty of Lisbon signed and the Parliament a co-legislator , we can really negotiate a long-term agreement with all the guarantees that the Minister mentioned and all the demands for reciprocity that Mr Strasser , in particular , touched on as well .
I believe that in this matter , the Council has just made its will very clear .
The Commission shares this opinion , this firm and clear commitment by the Council to make sure that the European Parliament does indeed become a co-legislator , when the time is right for a lasting agreement .
Mr President , I have a small point of order .
I note that once again we are not getting replies from the Council to the questions that we put .
I asked why the Council waited for two years , until the very last moment , to decide on this deal , and I would also like to know - and we can get the answer in writing - why the national parliaments have been completely excluded from the whole procedure .
Finally , I read your answer , which was fairly vague and seemed to be saying that you will not publish the legal opinion of the Legal Service of the Council .
The debate is closed .
( Vote : 17 September 2009 )
EU strategy for the Baltic Sea area ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea area .
Mr President , I am delighted to have the opportunity to present one of the main priorities of the Swedish Presidency - the development of the strategy for the Baltic Sea area .
This proposal was largely inspired by the initiative taken by the European Parliament back in 2005 in a cross-party working group led by Christopher Beazley .
Sweden intends to use its Presidency to draw up a coherent , comprehensive strategy for the area based on proposals from the Commission .
One of the main events is an extensive high-level meeting that will take place in Stockholm tomorrow and the following day .
Naturally , Sweden and the other countries neighbouring the Baltic have a great interest in the strategy for the area , but we also believe it could serve as a model for other regions and other regional strategies that would be useful to the entire EU .
By working across borders and between different sectors in a particular region , we can deal collectively and more effectively with common challenges such as pollution and environmental destruction .
We can create new business opportunities and new jobs , and improve transport links .
Consequently , it is important that regional strategies form part of a wider European policy .
The proposed strategy for the Baltic Sea area is the result of a request made by the European Council to the Commission in December 2007 and the initiative was supported by the European Parliament in a resolution of 12 December 2007 .
It is hoped that the strategy will gain the backing of the European Council meeting at the end of October .
The aim of the strategy is to improve the environment in the Baltic Sea area and to increase integration and competitiveness in the area .
The strategy addresses four challenges in particular : ensuring a sustainable environment , increasing wealth , improving accessibility and attractiveness , and guaranteeing security and certainty in the area .
Getting to grips with the environmental issues is , of course , one of the main priorities .
There are very serious threats to the Baltic Sea environment which , in turn , means that there is a risk that its economic development will be affected .
This is a very sensitive marine environment that is exposed to various kinds of environmental impact .
Decisive efforts are needed , and quickly .
In particular , overfertilisation and algal blooms caused by excess nutrient run-off are threatening the ecological equilibrium of the Baltic Sea .
At the same time , the Baltic Sea is also affected by pollution from land-based sources , hazardous substances and the effects of climate change .
As a result of these acute and serious environmental threats , the Baltic Sea area is an obvious priority in the area of the environment and we hope that conclusions will be adopted in December .
However , the serious state of health of the Baltic Sea area is not the only challenge faced by the region .
The economic crisis has made the matter of jobs and growth highly topical .
Most of the countries in the Baltic Sea area are small and are dependent on exports .
This means that we must increase integration in order to strengthen competitiveness throughout the entire Baltic Sea region .
Our aims and goals in this respect are clear .
We want the internal market to function better in our region than anywhere else , and we want the new Lisbon strategy for jobs and growth to be implemented effectively in this part of Europe .
We must address the crisis by increasing cooperation and commitment in our immediate area .
Global competitiveness requires cross-border cooperation between countries and enterprises , in research and through innovations .
The aim of the strategy for the Baltic Sea area is not to create new institutions .
Rather , we are endeavouring to use the instruments and policy areas that already exist such that together , they benefit the area in a more strategically coordinated and intelligent way .
Neither does the strategy involve new resources being injected into the area .
It is based on existing EU programmes and existing structures and on finding better ways to coordinate .
Naturally , our objective cannot be achieved overnight , but our goals are ambitious .
We deserve a cleaner Baltic Sea at the centre of an area that offers prospects for sustainable economic development across borders , supported by the entire EU .
If we can achieve this , then I am convinced that we will be serving the interests of the Baltic Sea area , and I hope that we will also create a model that can be adapted and applied effectively in other regions .
I would like to express my thanks for the positive cooperation of the Commission on this matter , and not least the European Parliament - which is , after all , the institution that originally took the initiative and has been a driving force in connection with cooperation in the Baltic Sea area throughout .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Parliament for having included the new strategy for the Baltic Sea region on the agenda of its plenary session .
The high visibility this provides for the strategy is extremely welcome .
Of course , it is not a complete surprise to me that Parliament is taking such an interest in the strategy .
The pioneering work undertaken by Parliament through its Baltic Interparliamentary Group in particular was very much one of the catalysts for the whole macro-regional strategy approach .
The Baltic Sea Strategy has required a completely new approach from the European Commission as it is the first time that we have prepared an integrated strategy for a group of Member States who have to face the same challenges and who may benefit from the same opportunities .
I will not hide the fact that the preparatory work has brought challenges of its own , but these have been overcome successfully .
The four pillars of the strategy provide an overarching framework for improving the overall situation of the Baltic Sea region .
By addressing the environment , the economy , energy and transport and safety and security issues , the strategy provides an integrated approach covering several policy areas while ensuring close interaction among the fields concerned .
Since the Commission adopted the strategy in June , the Swedish Presidency has led positive and constructive discussions in Council which are to lead to conclusions already in October .
This rapid progress is important if we are to maintain momentum as we enter the implementation phase of the strategy .
I would like to underline this point as it must be clear that all our preparatory work on the strategic framework that I have just described will count for nought unless we start to deliver genuine visible concrete results on the ground , hence the importance of the strategy 's action plan which has also been drawn up during the preparatory work .
The implementation of an action plan will require real cooperation , commitment and leadership from Member States and regional stakeholders to deliver the 80 or so projects included at this stage .
In financial terms , although there is no additional financing from the EU budget , the strategy proposes a more coordinated use of existing funds and a more imaginative approach to other funding sources such as the European Investment Bank or the Nordic Investment Bank .
I would now like to say a few words about the planned governance system which is proposed for the operational implementation of the strategy .
This is one area where there has been much discussion among the Member States , but the overall approach is that policy orientations will be taken by the Council . The coordination monitoring and reporting is done by the Commission and the implementation on the ground is led by the Member States or organisations of the Baltic Sea Region .
In addition , the Commission proposes to play the role of a facilitator in the case of difficulties .
However , I would stress that the Commission has neither the capacity nor the desire to lead the delivery of the action plan itself .
Responsibility must rest with the relevant Member States and other stakeholders directly involved on the ground .
This is the only way to ensure that the ownership of a strategy is in the hands of the Member States and other stakeholders .
So what are the next steps ?
Once we have conclusions from the Council and the European Council , we will take forward the implementation phase of the strategy .
Here we expect to see a wave of coordination meetings to kick-start the various priority areas and individual projects included in the action plan .
The first formal assessment of progress made will be presented under the Polish Presidency in the second half of 2011 .
However , prior to that , the first annual forum of the Baltic Sea Strategy will take place next year .
This will give all stakeholders an opportunity to consider how the first months of the strategy have gone and what lessons might already be drawn at that stage .
I would like to conclude by saying that I look forward to continuing to work closely with Parliament on all aspects of strategy .
The Commission very much expects Parliament to be actively involved in events such as the annual forum .
Your backing is crucial to maintain widespread visibility for the strategy to maintain high-level political support for the strategy and to maintain pressure on the Member States and the regional actors to deliver results .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the PPE Group congratulates the Swedish Presidency on its leadership in starting to implement the Baltic Sea Strategy ( BSS ) .
This strategy reflects a fundamental change that took place in this region five years ago .
Since 2004 , the Baltic has become the EU 's internal sea .
That is why the Union needs a comprehensive approach so as to react in a coordinated way to both the opportunities and challenges this new situation presents .
Furthermore , the BSS is an example of excellent cooperation between the main institutions of the EU .
As you might know - and as it has been said - the strategy in question was initiated by Parliament three years ago , more precisely by the Baltic Europe Intergroup under the excellent leadership of Christopher Beazley .
I would also like to express my special gratitude to Commission President Barroso .
His understanding and support since 2007 were crucial in preparing a practical version of the strategy , which resulted in the Commission communication last June .
I would like to make three points .
First , the goal of the initiators was to turn the Baltic Sea area into one of the most competitive and rapidly developing regions of the EU .
Provided we make maximum use of the BSS , this region could well become a success story of what is now called the Lisbon Programme .
Second , just now , more than ever , the region needs better access to and security of energy supplies .
The EU and Member States have to agree on providing alternative channels for energy deliveries .
First and foremost , it comes down to creating a united energy system around the Baltic Sea .
Finally , the issue of the bilateral and primarily political Nord Stream project should be settled through respecting the rightful interests of all states around the Sea and certainly not before the Russian Government joins the Espoo Convention .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the Swedish Presidency has put cooperation in the Baltic Sea area at the top of its agenda .
There is no need for argument here : we need to protect resources and we , too , need to help protect the climate and nature .
On the other hand , we must also focus cooperation in the Baltic Sea area on economic development , of that there can be no question .
You have our full support here .
However , some questions do still arise .
You just said that there are no additional funds .
As we discussed this in committee , all the funds are to be made available under the current cohesion policy .
For me , this raises the question of whether this means under existing projects that are already being financed from cohesion resources or under new projects .
If so , we need to ask which cohesion policy projects already approved will lose funding .
This is a very important point , because I already know that the towns , local authorities and regions will come and ask me , what should we do in order to become involved in the Baltic Sea Strategy ? How do we get the funds to run this sort of project ?
If we do not give them a good answer and cannot indicate how this cooperation is to be organised , then citizens ' enthusiasm for Baltic Sea cooperation will probably quickly turn to frustration .
That is not the objective that we are working together to achieve and we therefore need to hold very intensive talks on how to organise this cooperation .
I therefore ask - and I would ask the Commissioner to take this on board - that not only the Council and the Commission participate in the Baltic Sea Strategy , but also that Parliament is properly involved in this cooperation and in the implementation of this strategy , because we would like other regions to profit as well , as with the Black Sea policy or with cooperation between the states bordering the Danube .
That would be very important to us .
Mr President , my group is very happy that the Commission has drafted the EU 's first Baltic Sea Strategy document .
This is also the first strategy document of its kind for this region and we hope that it will serve in particular to speed up the process of cleaning the eutrophic Baltic Sea .
The region 's problems can best be solved through cooperation between its peoples , countries , organisations and businesses .
My group is especially pleased that Sweden has highlighted the importance of countering the trade in humans and crime .
I wish , in particular , to thank Mrs Malmström for this , because I think that this is also her handiwork .
This is an important issue , and it is rather odd that in 2009 , we should be having to speak about the existence of a trade in humans in the Baltic Sea region .
We now need a Baltic Sea action plan to end this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is excellent that the Commission has drafted a proposal for a Baltic Sea Strategy and that Sweden has added it to its agenda .
I hope that Sweden will acquire something more tangible in its efforts to protect its marine environment , mainly in the areas of agriculture and shipping .
After all , the Baltic Sea is one of the world 's most polluted seas , and its biggest environmental problem is eutrophication .
Agriculture is mainly responsible for that : there is nitrogen and phosphorus runoff from EU fields .
Nitrogen and phosphorus take oxygen from the seabed and feed poisonous algae at the surface .
The question of whether the Baltic Sea is to be cleaned is largely in the hands of the EU .
The Commission recognises this in its strategy , but the proposals for measures are vague .
Virtually the only precise measure is to prohibit the use of phosphates in detergents .
That is a necessary move , but we also badly need new rules for agriculture , so that we can produce food without smothering the Baltic Sea at the same time .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the fact that in its guidelines , Europe 's Baltic Sea Strategy was supposed to promote a comprehensive programme for the development of this part of Europe , inter alia by establishing the most natural and shortest transport routes to balance out the development of the countries of the ' old ' and ' new ' Europe .
That is why I am astonished by the Commission and the Council 's proposal to change the layout of the central European route .
The most economic link between the Adriatic and Baltic Sea is the central European route along the course of the Odra , whose overland route ends at the port of Szczecin-Świnoujście .
I propose a clear memorandum to re-activate the strategy in its original form , which mentions a central European route , one which will not erase from Europe 's development plans major ports such as Szczecin-Świnoujście , which is already suffering from the European Commission 's decision to liquidate its shipbuilding industry .
In exactly 2564 hours , the reactor at Ignalina nuclear power plant in Lithuania - the last remaining independent energy source in Lithuania - will be shut down .
Europe has already invested EUR 200 million in the safety of this power plant .
To decommission it today , European States will have to contribute another EUR 800 million .
From a legal point of view , Europe is probably correct ; every country has to observe the commitments it has made , but is it really right ?
Is it right with respect to the citizens of Lithuania and other states ?
I do not think so .
Money for the decommissioning of the reactor will have to be taken from people hit by the economic crisis .
Is it logical or right , when there is a crisis in Europe , when GDP in Lithuania has fallen by 22 % , when unemployment has reached 15 % , when winter is coming , to close a working nuclear plant which is safe , I repeat safe .
No , this is wrong .
Having given its word , Lithuania will implement the conditions of the accession treaty , but this will be a huge sacrifice .
Following this sacrifice , Lithuania will find it considerably harder to overcome the economic crisis .
Unemployment in the country will grow even more and poverty will increase .
Ladies and gentlemen , tell me , does Europe need such a sacrifice today ?
Do we not have a better way to spend EUR 800 million today ?
Appealing to the conscience , economic logic and common sense of each one of you , I call on you to add to the strategy we are debating today a provision that Ignalina nuclear power plant will remain open until 2012 , i.e. until the end of its safe lifespan .
I hope that by approving President J. Buzek 's political programme in the area of energy , that is , diversification of energy supply and the development of nuclear power in Member States , the European Parliament will make the concrete steps required .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are only 2563 hours and 58 minutes until the reactor is shut down .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in theory , projects such as these on the regional promotion of cross-border cooperation are to be welcomed and make a great deal of sense .
However , strategies often have the disadvantage that , although targets are set and even reached , sustainability is ignored , even during implementation .
Sustainability must therefore be included right from the planning phase .
It is therefore important when implementing this integrated strategy for the Baltic Sea area - a very important exemplary EU project - for regions and organisations to cooperate as a network , because these organisations know best what is important for them in the various sectors , such as nature , social structure and infrastructure ; they know what to do for the best .
This is an area with 100 million inhabitants and an investment budget of EUR 50 billion .
We need to proceed very carefully here if we are to make a success of this pilot project .
This pilot project is , as already mentioned , very important for other projects along the Danube , too , for the states bordering the Danube in central and south-east Europe .
( PL ) What a macroregion needs is a coordinated policy of sustainable development .
This is what the European Parliament , and then the Council , believed in 2007 when it recommended that the European Commission draft a Baltic Sea Strategy and an action plan .
Here I would like to underline the role the then Commissioner Mrs Danuta Hübner played in drafting this strategy .
This policy is now being continued by Commissioner Samecki , to whom I also extend my heartfelt congratulations .
Amongst other things , the strategy responds to the fundamental challenges named here , such as achieving prosperity in a region with little development of innovation or enterprise , or failing to acknowledge the Baltic as a common asset without building a sustainable environment , or security in the region , including energy security , without building new generation facilities and interconnections .
The same is happening with citizens ' security and accessibility of the region thanks to the construction of trans-European communications links .
I would like to stress the huge role - and it really is a vast contribution - played by the opinion makers who were consulted on this draft strategy , particularly citizens ' organisations , local and regional governments , national governments and Baltic organisations .
The active participation of these organisations should be very useful in realising these strategies .
The Baltic Sea Strategy is a good example of how we can use the instruments of Community policy to materialise political will over a large macro-regional area of the European Union .
I would like to make four points , Mr Commissioner .
First of all , I believe it is key to focus on managing the Baltic Sea Strategy in such a way as to avoid eroding interest both at local , as well as at government and European Union level .
We should also concentrate on properly funding the implementation and operation of the strategy itself - on this matter , an amendment to the budget has been agreed .
Secondly , there is the need for full implementation of single market principles in the macroregion , taking into account the experience and engagement at local and regional level .
The two final matters are : institutional support for funding undertakings within the scope of the strategy , and maintaining good relations with our partners in the region , including Russia , Norway and Belarus .
Mr President , I think it is wonderful that both the Commission and now , especially , the Swedish Presidency , has breathed life into Parliament 's ideas and ambitions in this fragile area .
We all know the problems to do with the environment of the Baltic Sea and the specific economic difficulties of the area .
But this Parliament remains ambitious , and I think this Parliament does want to be involved .
One of the mechanisms you did not mention was the possibility of a regular report back to this Parliament so that we may have a debate like today to watch how things are progressing .
For me , I will have the pleasure , as a Vice-President of this House , of participating in the conference that you are organising on Friday .
I think there are concerns still remaining about funding , to make sure that this House sees the results of this strategy that it deserves .
A macro-regional economic strategy could be the way forward in other ways , in other places , in Europe .
Let us hope that this one works well .
( SV ) Mr President , I am delighted that environmental issues are a main priority in the new strategy for the Baltic Sea area .
The Baltic Sea is suffering two major acute environmental problems .
The first - overfertilisation - has already been mentioned by Mrs Hassi .
The second problem is overfishing .
Researchers are entirely unanimous on this .
Relatively recent knowledge suggests that the lack of top predators , i.e. cod , has further worsened the algal blooms .
The problem is that the Baltic Sea needs a healthy ecosystem .
It would therefore be very good if a pilot project - a fast track project - could be established within the new Baltic Sea Strategy involving regional fisheries management in the Baltic Sea area .
We would also need to prohibit the dumping of cod and this should take effect immediately .
At present large volumes of young cod that have just arrived in the Baltic Sea are being dumped .
I call on the Swedish Presidency to take up my challenge and deal with this problem .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was already agreed during the last parliament that the Baltic Sea region was suitable for a pilot project aimed at implementing an internal EU strategy for the macroregion .
I consider it appropriate that this strategy , which is based on the aim of a more consistent application of Community law and the more effective use of EU funds , does not introduce new laws or institutions and does not depend on any special funding .
I can see savings in linking up local and regional bodies .
It is essential in the practical implementation of the Baltic Sea Strategy to rearrange the responsibilities of the various administrative bodies within the system of multi-layered government in order that the activities of the various bodies and organisations do not overlap .
In future discussions on the impending cohesion policy , it would be useful , at the same time , to clarify how the various macro-regional strategies and mainstream EU regional policies will co-exist alongside one another .
It would also be useful to clarify how the Baltic Sea Strategy will affect the planned application of a territorial cohesion policy .
( DA ) Mr President , we are discussing a 1 200 km gas pipeline beneath the Baltic from Vyborg in Russia to Greifswald in Germany through an ecologically sensitive inland sea where there is a large difference in sea bed levels , through an area where undetonated explosives from two world wars , as well as poisonous chemicals from the paper industry , are constantly being found .

Around EUR 100 million have been expended on an environmental analysis performed by the company that is to lay the pipeline , namely Nord Stream - a gas supply agreement between Gerhard Schröder and Vladimir Putin .
I will not even mention the security issues surrounding the great increase this will bring to Russia 's influence in the Baltic , but instead I will stick to the environmental problems this will bring .
Unfortunately , Finland has already approved the project , but on behalf of Timo Soini , as well as for myself , I would now like to establish the whereabouts of the information relating to the project which the citizens of all the countries on the Baltic need before building work takes place .
( LV ) Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the formulation of a strategy for the Baltic Sea region is a very important achievement for Parliament , in which the members of the Baltic intergroup have played a leading role .
This strategy is comparable to the Mediterranean strategy which , in its time , stimulated rapid economic growth in the South .
It will serve as a good instrument for the development of the Baltic region and , as a result , for the whole of the European Union .
Speaking of priorities , I should first wish to mention the development of a common European Union energy policy , including a competitive Baltic energy market .
This involves not only the aspects of security of energy supply and energy efficiency , but also , naturally , the development of renewable energy .
Latvia , Lithuania and Estonia must be integrated into the common regional energy network , including NORDEL .
Our second priority is further infrastructure development .
The roads in some Baltic Sea region countries , given both climatic conditions and also sometimes ineffective policies , are in a quite poor state .
The development of transit corridors and communications networks will stimulate business and create new jobs .
So that we may speak of effective economic development and protection of the environment , the third priority is an innovative economy , which means growth that is balanced and knowledge-based .
In order to carry out the strategy , additional finance is essential , and this must definitely be provided in the next European Union financial framework .
We must now make use both of the EUR 5 billion energy programme and of the globalisation fund and other financial instruments .
An effective mechanism for implementing and monitoring the strategy is also important .
It has to be simple , transparent and free of superfluous bureaucracy .
Regular reviews of the introduction of the strategy and interim reports are essential .
The first should already be produced in 2010 .
I welcome the Swedish Presidency 's active role in getting the strategy going .
Allow me to express the hope that we shall be effective and flexible in carrying out this specific action plan .
( PL ) Mr President , five years ago , the Baltic Sea effectively became an internal sea of the European Union .
Today we are debating a draft strategy which will allow us to unleash the huge dormant potential of the region , a project which was the initiative of the European Parliament .
However , not all the recommendations of this House have been accepted by the Commission .
The most significant was the lack of , and the retreat from , setting up a separate budget line for the Baltic Sea region .
The Commission assures us that funding will come from existing instruments , primarily the structural funds .
However , I fear that without special funding earmarked specifically for this purpose , we will not be able to achieve all our aims .
The authors of the strategy mention the need for close cooperation with Russia .
In this context , however , we should not forget the greatest threat at the moment to the Baltic Sea , namely the construction of the Nord Stream pipeline .
Last year , the European Parliament took a negative stance on this .
I hope that the new Commission , by instituting the action plan associated with the strategy , will bear this resolution in mind too .
Mr President , it is indeed a unique European regional policy initiative and a pioneering project .
Innovation-driven prosperity , the environment , accessibility in terms of transport and energy connections , and security and safety are the four major areas for joint work by all partners who are involved in preparation of the strategy : all three European institutions - Parliament , the Commission , the Council - but also national governments , regional and local authorities , business and academic communities and non-governmental organisations .
The process of the preparation of the strategy has led to a genuine partnership between all of them .
Development challenges increasingly do not respect administrative or political borders .
The strategy will make it possible to replace the often very fragmented and scattered policy responses with a genuine shared response to shared development problems and opportunities .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development , which is the leading committee on this project in Parliament , will give high importance to it in its work .
We will hold the debate on 6 October with the Commission and the Council ; the own-initiative report will be prepared in the months to come .
We will also keep the implementation of the strategy under review and I trust that this action-oriented strategy enhances the Union 's chances to build green , modern and competitive economies .
( FI ) Mr President , the European Union became aware of the Baltic Sea issue quite late on .
A total of 100 million people live by its shoreline , and then there is Russia , which is important .
This strategy will have a strong environmental dimension , and this is only right , because the environmental problems of the Baltic Sea are colossal : eutrophication , fading biodiversity , the waste waters of St Petersburg , the problems of Kaliningrad , and so on .
It has been mentioned here that this will also change the European Union Cohesion Policy , and this , I think , is quite important , and I hope that more will be said about it here .
Minister Malmström says how it will change because the change to the Cohesion Policy will result , for example , in the danger that , when we speak of the Danube Strategy and the Black Sea Strategy , part of Europe , including northern regions , will be ignored and , in fact , Arctic areas right now are undergoing the world 's most rapid changes , and this is important to see .
( FI ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , the Baltic Sea as a region is special in many ways , and so I am very pleased that Sweden has made this strategy one of its priorities during its Presidency .
It is important that we take the strategy forward and thus also implement it .
Not only does the Baltic Sea have a very strong environmental dimension to it ; I think it also has a major impact on regional policy .
During its presidency , Sweden has also integrated these regional policy matters closely with this Baltic Sea Strategy .
The strategy is mainly understood as a document that relates to the countries along its shores and their coastal areas , but it definitely has a robust regional dimension .
How we go about integrating with this strategy environmental technological expertise , issues concerning inland waters , and its huge impact on transport policy , will also have major repercussions for inland areas .
The Baltic Sea Strategy must therefore be made part of the common European agenda .
I hope it gets Parliament 's strong support so that the strategy is not just empty words and so that we can achieve something tangible .
Mr President , as an MEP elected in Latvia , I welcome the fact that the first example of a strategy for a macroregion concerns the Baltic Sea area .
Nevertheless , in my opinion , a number of Community objectives have been forgotten here - for instance , a high level of social protection .
Some of the region 's Member States , including Latvia , have been severely hit by the economic crisis .
Our financial sector is interconnected with the Scandinavian one .
This means that our problems will create problems there , so this is not a national issue .
Recently , Latvia received medium-term financial assistance for balance of payments , provided for by the Commission .
Unfortunately , there are no social conditions for such assistance .
As a result , the government is reducing pensions and benefits , but the Commission tolerates this .
My second concern is about fundamental rights .
Mass statelessness and minority protection still constitute a topical issue in two of the region 's Member States : Latvia and Estonia .
I think that the strategy must be more ambitious and seek to attain all the objectives of the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the Commission and the Swedish Government for the very active role they have played , and I believe that the Baltic Sea Strategy is a good and important one .
Without proper financing , however , the project will not succeed .
In that case , all this will end after the strategy has been adopted .
Parliament has been pondering for many years how financing should be organised , and last year it unanimously agreed on the budget having its own Baltic Sea Strategy heading .
That is the means , the instrument , for gathering together all the countless projects that the Baltic Sea Strategy now needs if it is to go ahead .
I know that the Committee on Budgets has now made proposals for setting aside a little money under the heading , and I hope that the Council and the Commission will also support this , because otherwise the project will simply not succeed .
Something else we need to do if we want to rescue the Baltic Sea environment is to obtain Russia 's commitment to this project .
I find it incomprehensible how some have been prepared to agree to a gas pipeline running through the Baltic Sea without any obligation on the part of Russia even to commit to the conclusions in the Espoo Convention .
That is the least we must do .
Mr President , I welcome the idea of a strategy for the Black Sea region as a pilot project for the macro-regional strategies .
Initiatives of this kind allow the coordination of EU policy instruments in order to have a coherent , stable and sustainable development of the regions involved .
On the occasion of the last Council , it was said that a strategy would have been developed for the Black Sea region by the end of 2009 .
This is an extremely important initiative as it can bring about harmonised development and prosperity for the region that , in comparison with the Black Sea area , is far more complex in terms of actors involved and relevant for security , stability , energy and the environment .
So I would like to ask the Swedish Presidency when such a strategy for the Black Sea region will be delivered , and when Parliament will be informed and involved in this issue .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner Samecki , as a newly elected member from Mecklenburg-Western-Pomerania , I very much support the development of a Baltic Sea Strategy and the associated action plan .
The Commissioner referred earlier to the flagship projects , 80 in total .
Our common objectives are , of course , to improve the competitiveness of our economy in the Baltic Sea area , taking particular account of the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises and of a common energy policy which also takes account of renewable energies .
That raises the question of how we deal with offshore installations in the Baltic Sea .
Maintaining clean water , because that is our foundation and our resource , plays a very , very important role here , when we think of fisheries and when we think of tourism .
That is why investments in treatment plants need to be promoted .
I think a common planning programme needs to be agreed for all Member States in the Baltic Sea area , because we need to answer the following questions : where will traffic routes be positioned in future ?
Where will offshore installations be built ?
How will safety at sea be addressed ?
That is why we also need to be clear on where the energy routes will be for Nord Stream , for the supply of electricity , and on many other things .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members for the great level of support that you have given us for our continued work on the Baltic Sea Strategy .
It is only natural that we should be supported by the European Parliament , because in fact you were the founding fathers of the whole idea of a strategy for the Baltic Sea area and I am pleased that you are also going to ensure that this strategy becomes a reality .
It can only be a success - it can only become real , and not just fine words and rhetoric - if all the Member States genuinely acknowledge ownership and feel a real responsibility for ensuring that the project is realised .
Success will be guaranteed by working on these projects , setting clear timetables for when they are to be realised and carrying out regular checks .
I am sure that , just like the Commission , Parliament will continue to put pressure on us to ensure this actually comes to fruition .
One hundred million people live in this region .
At any given moment , there are 2 000 ships in the Baltic Sea .
It is clear that we face enormous challenges here .
We have had a very broad foundation process and I would like to thank the Commission - first Mrs Hübner and now Commissioner Samecki - for the work they have put in .
There is a great deal of support in civil society and among the municipalities around the Baltic Sea for us to achieve this .
Some Members , Mrs Krehl and Mr Itälä , have raised the matter of resources .
It is not intended that any new funds will be earmarked for the strategy .
However , there are plenty of resources in the region that we can use .
EUR 55 million has been earmarked for the region under the existing budgetary framework .
We also know that we can hope for contributions from international institutions such as the EIB , which has shown great interest in the Baltic Sea region .
The aim is to keep all administrative costs as low as possible and to work with those who have responsibility locally and nationally for the various flagship projects .
One of these concerns trafficking - an area mentioned by Mrs Jäätteenmäki .
There is a project that involves strengthening the training of customs and police officers in the region in order to be better able to identify and work on the issue of trafficking .
Mrs Hassi and Mrs Lövin mentioned the matter of the marine environment , agriculture and fisheries .
There are a number of such projects here and I would very much like to see more of them .
I also believe that the strategy could provide the opportunity to gain a better overview of our environmental efforts and our fisheries and agriculture policy and to ensure that they work towards the same ends .
There are also other partnerships in the Baltic region .
We have an extensive and growing energy policy partnership in which we aim to link up the energy infrastructure in the region , to reduce dependence and improve efficiency .
Naturally , this is something that the Union will continue to work on .
The Ignalina plant has nothing to do with the Baltic Sea Strategy .
That was an old decision that already existed from the time of Lithuania 's accession negotiations .
Neither does Nord Stream have anything to do with this .
Naturally it is related to the Baltic Sea , but it is not part of the strategy .
It is a commercial project that has been examined in accordance with current international environmental conventions and relevant national legislation .
The Baltic Sea Strategy is an internal EU strategy .
It will be what we make it .
However , it is also important - as a number of Members have pointed out - that third countries are involved .
We have ensured that we keep countries such as Russia and Norway involved and that we tell them about our work on the strategy as well as signalling to them that we would like to work in partnership with them on specific projects in which we have a common interest .
We are looking forward to the conference tomorrow and on Friday and are pleased that Vice-President Wallis is coming to Stockholm .
At the conference , we will discuss the strategy for the Baltic Sea area and we hope to gain a strong commitment from the countries concerned to work towards this becoming a reality , as well as discussing macroregions in general .
The Danube region and the Black Sea region have been mentioned in this connection .
I believe that there is a great deal to do here and a great deal that can inspire us .
We hope to be able to move forward in the discussion , although it is a little too early to set actual timetables at present .
Once again , I would like to thank Parliament for its strong support for the Baltic Sea Strategy and I look forward to discussing this with Members on future occasions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their comments and remarks on different aspects of the strategy .
Your level of commitment demonstrates that the strategy will be a subject of interest in the forthcoming years , which is good .
I will be unable to respond to all comments and issues raised in the debate or in your statements .
I would like just to refer to three broad groups of issues .
First , the shape .
I would like to say that the strategy has been designed in line with the objectives and intentions of Member States .
The Commission did not interfere in the selection of priorities .
The Commission did not shape the priorities , so the ideas of including certain projects or modifying certain priorities is , of course , possible .
However , it is to be agreed in the future work related to the implementation of the strategy .
I want to assure you that the strategy is a kind of living animal and it is , to a great extent , exposed to future modifications should Member States and stakeholders wish so .
Second point : on management and governance .
Here I would like to underline that there is a need for a clear division of tasks , for a clear division of labour and responsibilities .
I think that we should not delude ourselves .
The responsibilities of Member States , of the Commission and of other organisations involved in the management .
At this moment , I would also add that we want to involve local governments in the process of implementing the strategy as well as third countries , as was already mentioned by the Minister .
Of course we foresee reporting concerning progress made in relation to implementation to Parliament .
Finally , the last issue is financing .
Several Members mentioned the need for additional funds for new projects etc .
I want to explain that the principle of no new additional financing was adopted at the very beginning of the creation of the strategy .
At present , we have more or less three options .
We can regulate the use of existing EU funds , for example , by changing criteria for selecting new projects .
The second possibility is having recourse to other sources like international financial institutions and finally , although it is difficult at a time of economic recession , we can still try to use national resources .
In this respect , I look forward to the work of the conference to be held in Stockholm because this is the conference which may shape the future approach of Member States and the Commission to the macro-regional approach in the future and it should also embrace the financing of potential future strategies .
That is why I feel that it will be a good moment to look at the overall macro-regional approach in Stockholm in the forthcoming days .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , I would like to thank Sweden , the country to hold the presidency , for having had the courage to make its own region , the Baltic Sea , and matters relating to it , such a major topic in its programme during its EU presidential term .
It is fitting that the Baltic Sea Strategy that we have been preparing for so long is being dealt with now : there is no time to lose .
The central aim of the Baltic Sea Strategy and the Action Programme to improve the region 's environment and competitiveness must be taken seriously in terms of the funding allocated to it and the measures implemented .
The objectives must be realised in practice : the strategy must not just remain a fancy declaration .
We hope in particular that the strategy will expedite the clean up of the Baltic Sea , which is suffering from eutrophication , and help find common solutions to cross border challenges .
It is on account of these very objectives that all eyes are now turned to Finland , where soon it will be decided whether or not to allow the construction of the Nord Stream gas pipeline in its territorial waters .
Under the Baltic Sea Strategy , the environmental impact of projects such as these must be investigated using a procedure that is legally binding internationally so that the matter cannot just be shrugged off .
We must therefore insist that Russia ratifies the Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context that it signed in 1991 , and the Finnish Government should make this a condition of processing the gas pipeline 's construction permit .
Russia , which also benefits from the Baltic Sea Strategy , only acts according to the agreement when it suits it .
This cannot go on any longer : the stakes are too high , and we have to know about projects that are harmful to the Baltic Sea before it is too late .
in writing . - The Baltic Sea Strategy promoted by the Swedish Presidency is very welcome .
It could readily assume a model function for other European macroregions , like the Danube basin .
There is , however , one aspect of the development of the Baltic Sea region that demands urgent reconsideration .
This is the Nord Stream sea-bed pipeline between Russia and Germany .
Not only is the pipeline the source of serious environmental concern , but - even more urgently - it is a project that has been overtaken by time .
The future is not in fixed means of delivering natural gas - via pipelines - but through liquefied natural gas .
Nord Stream has every likelihood of being a wholly unnecessary white elephant , and its protagonists should reconsider the project before more money and more resources , effort and energy are tied up in it .
The Baltic Sea Strategy announced in June 2009 aims to establish it as a region which is environmentally friendly , prosperous , easily accessible , attractive and secure .
This is particularly important in the context of the increasing challenges facing the Baltic since the EU 's enlargement in 2004 .
It is important to take action aimed at improving the region 's environmental situation , as it is one of the most polluted marine areas in the world at the moment .
Thousands of tonnes of toxic warfare agents lie on the sea bed encased in mines , bullets , bombs , containers and barrels .
Estimates as to the quantities of these chemicals range from 30 000 to 60 000 tonnes , of which Yprite alone is estimated to make up 13 000 tonnes .
Chemical weapons were sunk here after World War II in the late 1940s .
They had been captured in the German occupation zones , and as burying them underground was difficult , the decision was made simply to sink them into the sea .
Disturbing the chemical weapons lying at the bottom of the Baltic by building any kind of infrastructure could result in environmental disaster , and particularly the disturbance of chemical weapons from World War II during construction of the Baltic gas pipeline is one of the greatest threats to the ecosystem .
That is why an assessment of the effect of building the pipeline on the natural environment of the Baltic Sea basin is necessary .
1 .
Election of President of Commission ( vote )
( FR ) Mr President ...
( The speaker was interrupted by heckling from the right )
Are you ill or something ?
Are you ill ?
As there were problems with the vote yesterday , I would ask you to check the machines .
It is not such a bad idea , is it , ladies and gentlemen ?
As proposed , we are carrying out a trial vote , i.e. a vote to check that we all have cards , we are all seated properly and that the equipment is working .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to repeat : once every five years the European Parliament decides who will lead another European Union institution .
Today 's agenda includes electing the President of the European Commission .
This election will strengthen the democratic nature of our institution .
It is we , the elected representatives of all European regions , who will do this .
The Council of Europe has nominated José Manuel Barroso as President of the Commission .
In accordance with Rule 105 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , Parliament may approve or reject the nominated candidate by a majority vote .
The ballot is secret .
Let us now proceed to elect the President of the Commission in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be held using the electronic system .
I would like to repeat that you can vote from any position in the plenary hall as long as you place your voting card into the personal voting device .
I say this because there are many new MEPs in the House .
As usual , in the vote you may vote for or against the candidate , or abstain .
( The vote is held )
Here are the results of the vote : 718 Members voted , 382 in favour , 219 against and 117 abstentions .
( Loud applause )
According to the results we will see on the board - they are not visible yet - the Council 's nominee , José Manuel Barroso , has been elected President of the European Commission .
I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to the president-elect on being voted to the position of President of the Commission .
I would like to say that we have plenty of work ahead of us .
We will have to face challenges , and our citizens expect us to act very energetically and to live up to their expectations .
Mr President , I know that you are aware of the priorities of the European Parliament .
Following the discussions , which we also held within our political groups , like yesterday , you know our expectations .
For that reason , we greatly look forward to working with you over the coming five years .
We expect above all to be able to respond to our citizens ' needs .
I congratulate you once again , and you may now take the floor , if you would like to say a few words to us .
Congratulations , and all the best !
( Loud applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my most heartfelt thanks for the great confidence you have shown in me .
I am hugely honoured and very moved by your confidence , and I take it with a great sense of responsibility .
I also take this vote of confidence as a sign that this Parliament agrees with the ambitious agenda that I am presenting for Europe over the next five years .
As I said during the discussions before the vote , I would like to work with all the political groups that sign up to this project , which aspires to a Europe of solidarity and freedom .
I must , however , give special thanks to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which ran the risk of endorsing my programme in Warsaw before the elections , in an attempt right from the outset to give greater expression to European parliamentary democracy .
As I said in this Chamber yesterday and at other times recently , as President of the Commission , my party will be Europe and it will be made up of all those who want to come on this exciting journey to make a united Europe .
These are the people with whom I would like to form the consensus that we need to enhance the European project .
Please also allow me on this occasion to say a few words to my own country , Portugal .
Without the initiative and support of its Government and Prime Minister José Sócrates , I could not have stood for election .
I would like to thank Portugal for its support , which was also passed on to me by the President of the Republic , Professor Cavaco Silva .
I would like to acknowledge the support of every single one of those ardent Europeans who believe in this project for Europe .
Finally , I would like to reiterate to you , Mr President , and to all Members of this House , my sincere determination to work closely with you during the next five years so that you can build a stronger European parliamentary democracy .
I believe that the European Parliament and the European Commission , as typical Community institutions , have a special duty towards our citizens .
That is exactly what I have said I will do and that is exactly what I am going to do - a stronger Europe for freedom and solidarity .
( Applause )
I have an official statement .
Under Rule 105 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I shall inform the Council of our results of 10 minutes ago , and would like to ask the Council and the newly-elected President of the Commission to propose jointly the nominees for the posts of Commissioners .
In view of the amount of work ahead of us , we should work as quickly as possible .
This was the official statement related to the election of Mr Barroso as President of the European Commission .
2 .
Appointments to interparliamentary delegations ( vote )
3 .
Forest fires in the summer of 2009 ( vote )
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Today we are facing an unusually important , but also symbolic vote .
Once every five years , the European Parliament decides who will head another EU institution .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( FR ) Mr President , yesterday the President , quite rightly , made much of respect for the Community method .
This method guarantees the involvement of all Member States , and Community institutions , in the decision-making processes , and this from the very beginning .
The G4 's way of tackling the banking and financial crisis in 2008 was the opposite of respect for the aforementioned method , which Mr Barroso called for yesterday afternoon .
In 2008 , we waited in vain for President Barroso to call for order .
The European Union is of course France , the United Kingdom , the Federal Republic of Germany , and Italy - all members of the G4 - but it is also Austria , Belgium , Estonia , Latvia , Romania , Poland , Hungary , Luxembourg and so on , which were excluded from an important phase in the decision-making process in 2008 .
President Barroso , you should have enforced respect for the Community method in 2008 , via the same statement you made yesterday .
This is why I am unable to support your candidacy .
Mr President , may I add a personal remark .
It is difficult for those who have the floor to speak with this din all around .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after my speech I will say a few words in Neapolitan ( Part not transcribed in this document , since Neapolitan is not an official language ) .
I will do so not for reasons of local colour , but to attract political and media attention to our emergencies : the emergencies of southern Italy .
I voted for President Barroso , not least because I hope that he will be the President of the whole of Europe , including southern Italy .
Located as it is in the middle of the Mediterranean , the South is the gateway to Europe and the link between different worlds .
Through its history , geographical position and culture of hospitality , it can play an important role for the old continent as a whole .
Southern Italy should be treated with the same dignity as other places in Europe and , now that it is experiencing difficulties , Europe must intervene as energetically as when it regularised 150 million citizens from the East , who became EU citizens .
That operation came at a price , and if , today , a worker from Gdańsk earns 28 times more than he earned before , he also owes it to the economic effort of Italy and of southern Italy .
( The speaker continued in Neapolitan )
Mr President , time has , perhaps , habituated us to the hollowness of the ritual that we have just carried out .
Familiar as we are with the EU structures , we have ceased to see how anomalous , how outrageous , it is that we have supreme executive and legislative power in the hands of an unaccountable and unelected bureaucracy .
The majority of laws in the Member States come from a European Commission whom nobody votes for and nobody can get rid of .
The only bit that pretends to democratic authority is the rite that was just carried out in this Chamber , which I cannot help saying put me in mind of one of those occasional meetings of the People 's Assembly in the old Comecon times where we all stand up and congratulate ourselves on having rubber-stamped the decision .
I have no personal problems with José Manuel Barroso .
If we are going to have a federalist President of the Commission - and I can see that is the will of the House - it might as well be him as anyone else .
He seems a nice chap - and , like all British politicians , I am profoundly Lusophile and aware of our relationship with our oldest ally - but there is something farcical about the pretence that there is any democratic involvement in a system that puts a monopoly on the right to initiate law in the hands of people that we cannot vote for and cannot get rid of .
Mr President , like my previous colleague who spoke earlier , I would like to say that I also have my reservations about Mr Barroso being re-elected as President of the Commission .
After all , he more than anyone is committed to further European integration , often against the will of the peoples of Europe .
But he did come to our group meeting , the ECR Group meeting , and explain that he was in favour of smart regulation .
Now , of course , there is much doubt about what ' smart regulation ' means .
Many people believe that smart regulation is bad regulation , or that any regulation is not very smart regulation .
But I would ask him , if he really is in favour of smart regulation , to make sure that , on every directive , the Commission carries out a proper economic impact assessment .
We have going through this House next year the Alternative Investment Fund Management Directive .
The Commission has failed so far to conduct any proper economic impact assessment - in fact they say it cannot be done .
How , under those circumstances , are we going to get smart regulation ?
I ask Mr Barroso to reconsider .
Mr President , I opposed the joint motion for a resolution on forest fires , despite the fact that I agree with European countries cooperating voluntarily to prevent , fight and repair the appalling damage caused by forest fires .
However , I object to the creation of European Union bodies that would exercise power over Member States in areas that are wider than necessary to deal with this problem .
I draw attention to paragraphs 3 , 7 and 8 of the joint motion for a resolution .
This proposal is exploiting admirable humanitarian responses to the appalling tragedies that we have seen in order to take further steps towards the creation of the European protection force called ' Europe Aid ' as outlined in the Barnier report .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained in the final vote on this resolution , although I did do so with some reservation and a number of doubts , as this text does , without doubt , include many positive elements , things that no one can really oppose .
I am thinking , for example , of the support for reinforcing the Member States ' civil protection measures by means of the exchange of experts and working methods .
Last summer , we saw once again that some forest fires assume such a scale that cooperation is necessary , but that cooperation between Member States takes place already .
Such cooperation can , of course , be deepened further , but it is questionable what value there is , for example , in having a separate EU reaction force .
Doing so simply takes resources from the Member States , creates yet another new EU body with its own staff and adds yet more bureaucracy .
Written explanations of vote
President Barroso has made Europe the world leader in the fight against climate change .
The European Union is the only international bloc that has a clear , consistent negotiating position for the Copenhagen conference .
The political guidelines for the next Commission outlined by President Barroso present an ambitious , modern vision for Europe , to which the fight against climate change and the areas of the knowledge triangle are central .
The challenges facing us are complex , and the responses must necessarily be holistic .
For the post-2010 period , therefore , President Barroso is proposing a coordinated and convergent approach involving the Lisbon Strategy , energy and climate policy and social policy .
New sources of growth and social cohesion are proposed , based on a new industrial strategy for Europe , a modern service sector and a dynamic rural economy .
President Barroso thus prioritises the real economy and its modernisation through scientific research , technological development , innovation and the principles of sustainability .
The Commission , under the leadership of President Barroso , in partnership with the European Parliament and the Council , will help to cultivate a prosperous , sustainable and socially advanced European Union .
For the sake of political consistency and out of respect for our electorate , I voted against the re-election of Mr Barroso .
In the five years of his mandate , Mr Barroso , who harnessed the support of certain EU countries for George W. Bush 's war in Iraq , has never been able to revive the European Union or to strengthen it in the face of national self-interest .
He did not measure up to the task when the financial , economic and social crisis occurred .
All he has done in these five years is support the wayward paths taken by financial capitalism instead of proposing the new regulations Europe needs in the 21st century .
The European Commission 's policy needs to be reoriented .
Mr Barroso is not the man for the job .
His programme is no match for the scale of the current crisis : it lacks a European recovery plan , a pact for employment , regulation and effective supervision of the financial markets , and more robust and prompt instruments to correct the current imbalances .
We need a directive on public services and a reoriented policy by the Commission on pay .
If we want to save our European social model , we need a much more ambitious social agenda .
I am pleased to say that , as a Portuguese and a Member of the European Parliament , I voted in favour of the re-election of José Manuel Durão Barroso as President of the European Commission .
I believe his performance during the previous mandate , which was beset by so many political , financial and social difficulties , and the experience he acquired in this post , justified the support of the governments and the renewed confidence of this House .
I deplore the many attempts - not all of them open or serious - to prevent his candidacy from succeeding , and I note that they were frustrated not only by a lack of any credible alternative but also by the foolishness of the arguments on which they were based .
I regret that Members from my own country could not resist taking that path , which is as easy as it is inconsequential .
I hope the second Barroso Commission can combine technical competence with that ' something extra ' .
I also hope it will effectively respect and make use of the principle of subsidiarity , and will choose the safety and solidity of taking small steps , as recommended by Jean Monnet , rather than adopting the fast-track approach that has promised much but contributed little to the real progress of the European project and dream .
However much we aim for the horizon , we only get there by putting one foot in front of the other .
Let us go the right way .
I welcome the result of this vote , which brings Dr José Manuel Durão Barroso back to the European Commission Presidency .
Portugal is proud to have a Portuguese of such recognised ability and quality as Dr Barroso at the head of the Commission .
It is even prouder to see the value of his work during his first mandate , from 2004 to 2009 .
This value has been acknowledged by the European Parliament in this vote .
In fact , he was elected by a very large majority , greater than that required by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Over the last five years , Dr Barroso showed strong , comprehensive leadership .
The energy and climate change dossier , the Services Directive and the regulation on chemical substances are just a few examples of success and leadership .
He was also at the forefront in the search for solutions and in concrete proposals to resolve the economic crisis that is still affecting us .
The European Parliament has just sent out a signal that Europe is strong and has a strong leader .
Therefore , with confidence and hope , we can advance towards a Europe of greater prosperity and solidarity .
The political guidelines for the next mandate of the Commission , which have just been tabled , reveal its President 's intention to continue pursuing the main lines of action that were included in the guidelines of the mandate that is now ending .
Those guidelines lie at the origin of the deep economic and social crisis that we are now experiencing , the tragic consequences of which - unemployment , inequality , poverty and exclusion - have mercilessly afflicted the workers and peoples of Europe .
In Portugal , the consequences of implementing the policies resulting from these guidelines have been the destruction or utter crippling of essential productive sectors - agriculture , fisheries and industry ; the assault on workers ' rights , the devaluation of wages and the corresponding increase in unemployment and insecure work ; inequality in income distribution , which now clearly diverges from the EU average ; and the failure of the policies of deregulation , liberalisation and privatisation of basic sectors , which have dismantled public services and commercialised essential aspects of our collective existence .
Keeping these same guidelines means perpetuating the concentration of wealth , maintaining divergence instead of convergence , and causing further damaging eruptions of a latent systemic crisis to occur sooner rather than later .
We would all like to see a stronger Europe , and for people to be better off !
You do too , judging by the ' Political guidelines for the next Commission ' which you presented to Parliament .
Yet more is expected from a candidate for the future head of the Commission : he is expected to say how he intends to achieve this , rather than just presenting a list of challenges .
In fact , the goals are so wide-ranging that there is the danger of them ruling each other out , and there will definitely come a time when a choice will have to be made as to which of the priorities are ' more important ' .
For example , which would you choose if the aim of European economic competitiveness clashes with the aim of high levels of employment ?
The text you sent us does not make this clear .
I have the impression that your document is simply a wish-list of things that were not achieved in the previous term .
The question is , why not ?
I would , however , like to speak on the point about the Internet in your programme .
You mention the importance of the Internet for economic development and the social cohesion of Europe , and even promise that the new Commission will develop a ' European Digital Agenda ' .
What I would like to know is how you intend to implement this idea in practice , and what the Agenda will contribute which is new compared to previous initiatives ?
Like my friends representing the national movements in Europe , I am one of the 219 MEPs who voted against Mr Barroso .
He is a likeable and cultured man , but most of all he is the symbol of the failure of the European Union .
He has failed to save our economies and our jobs from unfair global competition ; to help European countries come out of the crisis ; to reform the financial system to curb unbridled speculation ; to guarantee democracy ; to ensure food self-sufficiency ; and to curb the accelerated de-industrialisation of our countries .
In a word , he has failed to demonstrate that the Europe of Brussels is more than a machine for grinding down , impoverishing and enslaving nations and peoples .
On closer observation , the election of Mr Barroso is also a symbol : that of the way in which this Europe works .
What sort of uproar would there be if , instead of the President of the Commission , who is going to influence the lives of 500 million Europeans through his policies , it was a Head of State who , despite being the sole candidate , was elected by little more than half of the votes ?
Today I voted against Mr Barroso 's candidacy for three essential reasons .
Firstly , his own track record in the last five years : a Presidency which was weak , conservative and liberal , immobile in the face of the crisis , incapable of stimulating a coordinated recovery , and exclusively attentive to the wishes of the Heads of State or Government .
José Manuel Barroso has certainly not furthered a strong Europe .
Secondly , the inadequacy of his response to the conditions set by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament : providing neither a genuine recovery plan , nor a pact for employment , no regulation , supervision or effective instruments to correct the imbalances in the financial markets , and making not one commitment concerning a framework directive protecting public services .
Finally , the messages sent out by voters during the European elections , which showed us that they no longer want a weakened , incomprehensible Europe , where compromise is considered a superior virtue to political direction .
The election of the President of the European Commission is an extremely important act , and the citizens of the EU should have the right to know their representatives ' choice .
Personally speaking , I regret and condemn the secret ballot procedure that leads to a complete lack of accountability .
Moreover , as I can find no common ground with the policy proposed by Mr Barroso , I confirm that I will not be supporting his appointment as President of the Commission .
At the end of the five-year term ( 2004-2009 ) , the assessment of the European Commission 's activities does not cast President Barroso in a favourable light .
Based on this fact , it seems necessary to abstain from voting , especially at a time when a negative vote would be an unwise political decision , given the lack of any alternative , while a positive vote would be tantamount to expressing unconditional and unjustified confidence in an unsatisfactory programme .
I believe that the support being given to President Barroso by Member States is unarguable proof of the fact that he has not been a strong president , but rather one for whom national interests have taken priority , meaning that it has been national leaders who have set out the guidelines for his mandate .
The European Commission needs a president to support the development of Community policies , constantly strive for integration and promote the concept of a United Europe .
He must not be in any way an advocate for national interests .
From a social-democratic perspective , President Barroso has not fulfilled a large number of the commitments made at the start of his mandate in 2004 .
Very little interest has been shown by the Commission in many of these , including the consolidation of a Social Europe .
Consequently , I chose not to vote for President Barroso 's reappointment .
I voted in favour of appointing Mr Barroso as President of the European Commission .
I have come to this decision for four reasons .
The European Council unanimously proposed Mr Barroso 's candidacy .
In my understanding of democracy , election winners can claim the right to choose one of their own .

There is no other choice but Mr Barroso ; no alternative solution has been seriously considered .
The criticisms directed at the outgoing President are mistaken about an essential fact , namely that the Commission is able to make proposals and that it is the Member States that lay them down .
My support also comes with some expectations .
In the course of his second term of office , Mr Barroso should be a little more independent minded , not least with regard to the large Member States , and the sole objective of his actions should be to serve the general interest of the Community .
I regret that the Commission has a tendency to evolve into a conglomerate of commissioners , free to act as they please .
I would ask Mr Barroso to use his influence to counteract this evolution .
I would like the institution , as ' guardian of treaties ' , to regain its original strength , in other words , its capacity to show the way with rallying projects .
Mr Barroso , the President of the European Commission , is responsible for the current situation of financial , economic , food and environmental crisis in which Europe is immersed .
To date , no one has recognised his error , and the blame has instead been placed on the United States .
To date , the Commission has tried to build a Europe based on policies of privatisation and dismantling of the social state .
The Commission adopted the Lisbon Strategy , which predicted economic growth of 3 % and the creation of 20 million jobs by 2010 .
The failure of this strategy is clear .
Despite that , the Commission is proposing to renew this strategy and continue with these policies , which are the cause of the crisis .
This crisis is not a pandemic ; it is the result of a gamble on one specific policy : the policy adopted by the European Commission .
Its foreign policy programme makes no reference to the Sahara or Palestine .
These issues are not only not its priorities , but the EU is planning to grant advanced status to the Kingdom of Morocco and to upgrade relations with the State of Israel .
The work carried out by President Barroso over the last five years was characterised by great pragmatism , seriousness and firmness in the way he looked after Europe 's top interests .
His world leadership in combating climate change , the timeliness of increasing Europeans ' involvement with the oceans through the launch of the new European maritime policy , and his ability to generate consensus on the financial perspective in a Europe of 27 are a few examples that justify keeping him at the head of the European Commission .
Economic growth , investment in innovation and training , and fighting unemployment are fundamental pillars for Europe 's integration to continue , and they are also Mr Barroso 's priorities for the future .
At a time when the world economic and financial situation is not at its best , Europe needs a strong leader who can breathe life into the European project .
For all the above reasons and many others , I believe Mr Barroso is the ideal president to guide the EU 's destiny in the forthcoming term of office .
Like 381 of my fellow Members , I supported Mr Barroso 's appointment as head of the Commission .
I did so for many reasons , not least because some people are levelling particularly unfair accusations against the candidate .
I hear some dream of a new Delors , while they forget that we have changed the world ... and Europe .
The Europe of the 12 , of Kohl and Mitterrand , is no more and will doubtless never return .
The first President of a Commission of 25 , then of 27 , Mr Barroso had the delicate task of handling the enlargement of 2004 , a mandate marked by consolidation .
The second will be one of ambition .
I hope it will be so and I want to give him the credit for this .
I want to refuse to play the game of sorcerer 's apprentice , to refuse to wait , not for Godot , but for another hypothetical candidate that the Council has no intention of putting forward .
I want to refuse to wait and to further weaken our institutions and the reputation that Europe still enjoys among Europeans .
So yes , we will expect him to keep his promises , such as combating climate change and discrimination , and the urgent concerted action in the face of the economic and social crisis .
To postpone this vote one more time would be to bark up the wrong tree .
To wait for a phantom candidate would be a mistake .
A strong , ambitious Commission Presidency is essential for Europe to regain its position as world leader by seeking a balance between economic and political goals on one hand and social and territorial cohesion on the other .
Priorities must be defined pragmatically but without neglecting the values that lie at the origin of the European project .
We have a number of challenges ahead , such as reforming the Community budget , which Europe must address by showing that it is able to set the world agenda on various topics including the fight against climate change and the regulation of financial markets .
At a time when unemployment is soaring in several Member States , it is vital to seek a sustainable way out of the current economic and social crisis .
This goal should unite the Member States around the principle of solidarity and the strengthening of the European single market .
Since I believe that José Manuel Durão Barroso has the qualities that will allow him to continue to successfully fulfil the expectations that we have placed in him , since I think the fact that he holds the post is an honour for Portugal , and since I see it as an advantage for a small , isolated , distant and outermost region like Madeira to have someone in the Commission who thoroughly understands its reality , I support his new candidacy for the post of President of the European Commission .
I voted against the re-appointment of Mr Barroso as President of the European Commission as , for the past five years , he has been the very symbol of a Commission that chose to disregard the democratic rejection of the Treaty of Lisbon and did so contemptuously and in a particularly arrogant fashion .
Mr Barroso also repeatedly argued for a new wave of mass immigration and constantly played down the problems associated with the possible accession of Turkey to the EU .
It is also telling that Mr Barroso yesterday refused to answer a justified question from a British Member about his intentions with regard to a European Commissioner for Human Rights - an internal one within the EU , that is .
Big Brother Europe marches on , but apparently no one is to know , and that includes MEPs .
in writing . - Although it is not the norm for me to abstain , I felt that , for today 's vote on the election of the President of the Commission , abstention was the right choice .
I accept that Mr Barroso has made some concessions , for example , on the issue of social impact assessments .
However , Mr Barroso has failed to show commitment in putting forward proposals of importance to the S & D Group - for example , a strengthening of the Posted Workers Directive , a directive of vital importance for the protection of Welsh workers .
We also need more commitment about the portfolios given to newly appointed commissioners and a clear explanation from Mr Barroso about the organisation of the next college .
I do not believe that Mr Barroso 's pledge to fight social dumping in Europe is far-reaching enough , and it is for this reason , as well as the abovementioned , that I took the decision to abstain on this vote .
I voted against Mr Barroso 's candidacy , above all , because I believe in a genuinely political Europe , which cannot be satisfied with a Commission bound by the desiderata of big business .
I also believe that one cannot campaign by calling for another form of European leadership only to then give a blank cheque to a champion of liberalism whose programme is sorely lacking in ambition and values .
A man who has taken shelter behind the idea of ' better regulation ' in order to ' deregulate ' everything that I , as a socialist , defend : public services , social protection of workers , respect for health systems , regulation of the financial economy and protection of consumers and of the environment against the power of industrial groups .
Out of respect for my own convictions and those of the electorate , I feel that these values cannot be called into question by ulterior motives and tricks aimed at obtaining derisory concessions from conservatives who control the majority of the Member States , the European Parliament and the Commission , and who will not rest until they have furthered their deregulatory policy .
Although the vote on the President of the European Commission is secret , I would like to express publicly my support for the candidate from our political family , José Manuel Barroso , and sincerely to congratulate him on his re-election .
As the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) won the European elections , it is quite natural that the President of the future Commission should come from our ranks .
Therefore , despite the futile unrest among the divided left and the Greens , who did not , however , have a candidate to put forward , Mr Barroso was comfortably re-elected .
I also welcome his reaffirmed commitment to work in close cooperation with our Assembly , within which he can count on our determination and our support each time the proposals of our European project have to go to the vote .
Parliament and the Commission will now be able to set to work without delay , which was the most important thing at this difficult time , where there are many challenges to take up swiftly for the sake of all Europeans .
Moreover , while Europe is involved in the G20 and climate negotiations , it must be united and in good working order : today 's clear , unambiguous vote also strengthens it in the face of the other world powers .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution of 16 September 2009 on the forest fires of summer 2009 .
This resolution follows numerous others highlighting the frequency , the seriousness , the complexity and the impact of natural and man-made disasters in Europe , the number of which has increased rapidly in the last few years .
The forest fire phenomenon is aggravated by rural depopulation , the progressive abandonment of traditional activities , poor forest management , the existence of vast expanses of forest planted with one single species , the planting of non-adapted tree species , the absence of an effective prevention policy , the levity of penalties imposed in cases of arson , and the flawed implementation of laws forbidding illegal construction and guaranteeing reforestation .
It is regrettable that , despite Parliament 's demands , the Commission has not taken steps to create a European civil protection force , and I welcome the action of my friend Mr Barnier , who has long been proposing this facility .
Finally , at a time when private insurance companies do not offer fire cover for forests , it is becoming imperative , faced with the private sector 's failure to act , to consider a public / private collective instrument to insure forests against storms and fire .
Unfortunately , conditions of extreme drought and forest fires in southern Europe have been growing both more frequent and more intense .
Immense damage has been caused in terms of loss of human life ( 11 people have died just this summer ) , reduced economic activity and environmental degradation , particularly through an increase in the rate of desertification , in that some 400 000 hectares of European forests have disappeared every year over the last decade .
Climate change is contributing to the increase in natural disasters , but many cases are still unforeseeable or are caused by criminal acts .
Scientific research therefore needs to be developed so as to improve risk assessment procedures , fire prevention systems and fire-fighting facilities , and the requisite financial resources must also be released .
We need a European strategy to combat natural disasters , as well as greater interoperability and coordination among the various Community instruments .
The Member States should enhance their cooperation and coordination so as to guarantee solidarity and the availability of additional rapid mobilisation resources to fight these disasters .
I call on the Presidency of the Council to make an urgent decision on the regulation for the new Solidarity Fund , in order to increase transparency and make its mobilisation more flexible in an emergency .
Southern Europe has been the victim of disasters ( drought and fires ) that have threatened human lives , economies and local ecosystems and are contributing to the gradual abandonment of extensive areas that were once populated , worked and cared for .
Rather than being a problem for one country or another , this issue and its serious consequences have now become cross-border in nature and clearly deserve a response at European level .
As I have said previously , the European Union will benefit if it remains united even in adversity and if it is able to mobilise resources such as the Solidarity Fund as well as systems and methods to avert the causes and mitigate the consequences of these scourges and to provide a flexible , prompt and suitable response to them .
In addition to the European Commission , which should adopt a leading role in seeking solutions and implementing best practice , the whole forestry sector should be called on to share knowledge , define solutions and point to ways to help diversify the activities associated with forests .
A Portuguese nursery rhyme says a tree is a friend .
The European Union should repay this friendship and thus support the future of rural areas .
The reason why I voted in favour is linked to the need for effective solidarity and the immediate mobilisation of financial resources , so as to be able , with all due urgency , to tackle the socially and environmentally tragic situation that has befallen the areas and communities affected by this summer 's fires .
I believe , however , that the resolution should place greater emphasis on the effects of certain Community policies , particularly the common agricultural policy , which lead people to abandon the land and productive systems , and on activities which contribute to a preventive approach to the problem of fires .
The consequences of the CAP , particularly in countries like Portugal , are among the underlying causes of the fires which today devastate vast areas of land year after year .
I believe , however , that this possible and desirable cooperation among Member States in fighting forest fires should not be used to pave the way for removing important aspects of Member States ' individual sovereignty , namely in terms of civil protection and measures for controlling and intervening in their own territory .
Once again this summer , forest fires have devastated the south of France .
Like our other European neighbours , our citizens have found themselves battling flames , these disasters resulting in both material damage and human suffering .
This is why I have advocated the setting up of an independent and permanent European reaction force , whose task would be to assist Member States and regions affected by fires and other disasters .
Equally , we need - and this is also the appeal we have made to the Commission - a strategy which allows us to conserve the rich ecosystems in our natural parks , be it the Bauges , Ardèche or Lubéron , with the whole undertaking relying on funding designed for preventive measures and actions to re-establish the damaged ecosystem .
Recourse to the CAP might be justified to prevent the spread of forest fires , which are too often the result of abundant undergrowth in some areas .
Finally , I have also advocated mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund , a fund that today is blocked by the Council even though it is needed desperately .
Mr President , in Monday 's debate on the forest fires during the summer of 2009 , I said that natural conditions will alter with climate change .
That is a fact that cannot be contradicted .
It does not , however , explain environmental disasters , especially if the same phenomena recur every few years .
We can and must be better prepared .
That is why I had to vote against my group 's position today with regard to Amendment 5 and , to be perfectly honest , that position puzzles me greatly .
It really is time the Member States of the Union took a look in the mirror .
One feels fully justified in saying that the destruction caused by forest fires could have been prevented if certain Member States had developed and implemented more effective preventive measures and worked harder to stop criminal activity in the acquisition of more land to build on .
Our political environment cannot be one where people close their eyes to the facts .
This benefits nobody , especially when it concerns the scale of the human tragedy resulting from forest fires .
It has been suggested that climate change is one cause of the increase in the number of forest fires , and it is true that Europe will have to prepare for longer forest fire seasons than just June to September which , until now , has been the norm .
Summers are beginning earlier and they are warmer and drier , especially in the south , and the risk of fires is therefore growing .
The problem of fires itself , however , lies not in any progressive change to natural conditions , but elsewhere .
It is one thing to adapt to the changing environment ; it is quite another to accept rigid bad practices and be unprepared .
In Greece , 130 000 olive trees were destroyed by the fires , as well as many hectares of vines , cattle , beekeeping holdings , storehouses , stables and a large number of greenhouses and houses .
In Spain , 95 769 hectares have been burnt by forest fires , causing 11 deaths and estimated losses of EUR 395 million .
The social , economic and environmental damage caused by the fires to local economies , productive activity and tourism is huge , rendering necessary support for affected citizens and the re-establishment of previous environmental conditions through immediate national and Community intervention .
We urge the Commission to mobilise the current EU Solidarity Fund without delay and make available the resources needed for the purpose of supporting rehabilitation plans for the affected areas , the restoration of their productive potential and the full reforestation of the burnt areas .
The deforestation is partly due to the construction of roads and railway lines .
The Commission must promote measures so that public works financed by EU funds include an amount of public investment for the improvement , maintenance and increase of public forest .
Unfortunately , the summer of 2009 was marked by devastating forest fires in southern Europe , which caused huge material and ecological damage .
It was clear in this context that arsonists , who profit by destroying forests , are encouraged by shortcomings in or the lack of forest registers , or by poorly defined land use .
It was therefore important in this motion for a resolution to call on the Member States to revise or amend these registers .
In addition to reforestation , cooperation between experts , fire brigades and other groups deployed is required both in emergencies and for prevention .
This motion for a resolution contains logical proposals , such as how the Member States can be supported in a disaster in accordance with the principle of solidarity .
That is why I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on the forest fires in the summer of 2009 .
We must say straightaway that preventing natural disasters and adapting to climate change is not an easy task .
Even if the European Union fares somewhat better than other regions of the world with the creation of a strengthened civil protection mechanism and the financial godsend represented by the Solidarity Fund , more than 600 000 hectares are destroyed each year .
I am not just talking about the forest fires in the Mediterranean Basin , the worst of which were those of summer 2009 in the uplands around Athens .
For me , two proposals seem essential to improve the situation .
Firstly , Mr Barnier 's report of 2006 on a European civil protection force must be implemented in full .
We are still waiting for the European green helmets to be set up to give substance to a European policy for civil protection voted for by citizens .
Secondly , it is important for the Commission to have a right to oversee what is happening locally .
It would be surprising to say the least if European grants were paid when some forest fires were probably started by criminals with the sole aim of preparing the land for development .
I voted in favour of the resolution on forest fires .
So far this year , over 200 000 hectares of forest have been destroyed by fire in the European Union .
That is more than in the whole of 2008 !
In Poland , the coefficient of the threat of forest fires is one of the highest in Europe .
In April 2009 , the number of fires was the highest in five years .
We must take urgent and effective measures to counter climate change , which is one of the causes of the fires .
Another important issue in the adopted resolution is that of coordinating EU mechanisms for the prevention of climate change and , in particular , the effective use of the Solidarity Fund to limit the consequences of fires .
We need to set up a European reaction force capable of acting quickly in case of natural disasters .
This would be a financial and organisational completion of the actions undertaken in the Member States .
I hope that the Parliamentary resolution on fighting the effects of fires will be duly considered by the European Commission and mobilised to intensify its own actions in this field .
in writing . - Today 's debate on forest fires in welcomed .
The devastation to many sites of natural beauty is a loss to us all .
We must show solidarity with our colleagues and help the countries affected .
As a result of the reforestation promoted by the regional government , along with initiatives by environmental protection organisations , recent studies show that the forests of Madeira have increased by almost 5 000 hectares in the last 36 years , an achievement that is all the more noteworthy because it goes against the national trend .
This inestimably valuable heritage must be protected and , while we certainly need to be prepared to respond to forest fires , I feel it is essential to balance the allocation of resources across fire prevention , detection and actual fire fighting .
I voted in favour of this resolution since I believe this policy can be promoted at European level through a strategy of solidarity that seeks to coordinate fire response and the effective prevention of hazardous forms of behaviour .
With special emphasis on the outermost regions , this approach should involve both the authorities and the owners of forested land in cleaning up woodlands , planting native species and repopulating rural areas .
Criminal behaviour should also be suitably punished at a national level .
Flexibility in the implementation of procedures associated with the use of existing structural funds or new ones , such as the EU Solidarity Fund , will allow a swifter response to be given to people affected by the loss of farmland , homes and livestock as a result of fires and other disasters .
I abstained from the final vote on the compromise resolution on the aftermath of the forest fires in 2009 .
This was because I note that the majority in this Parliament believes that combating forest fires at the European level should not be restricted to support and coordination but that , in reality , a kind of separate European fire-fighting corps would have to be established , yet another European body that would cost vast sums in order to duplicate work already performed by others .
It is , in any case , an illustration of the fact that the Euro-federalists are less concerned about efficiently and competently managing our continent and more concerned about making a statement , namely that everything must be regulated at the European level - in spite of the principle of subsidiarity that we hear acclaimed so frequently .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Financial services ( signature of the acts )
Under the codecision procedure , legislative acts are signed by the President of the European Parliament and the current Presidency representing the Council .
Before resuming the sitting , a legislative package will be signed to make it effective .
Cecilia Malmström , the Minister for European Affairs , will sign on behalf of the Council .
I am very pleased that Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner is also with us today .
I would like to say a few words on the legislation we are about to sign today .
Today , the eve of the extraordinary summit of the European Union in preparation for the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh is a good occasion to strengthen the role of the European Parliament as co-legislator .
I have been asked to represent the European Parliament at the dinner of Heads of State or Government .
We , the European Union , will be preparing for our participation in the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh .
Today we have an important package of four different legislative acts under the codecision procedure approved by us in response to the financial crisis .
What is in the package ?
A capital requirements directive , a regulation on credit rating agencies , a new regulation on cross-border payments , and a decision establishing a new programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services , financial reporting and audit .
The directive and the regulations are aimed at protecting EU investors and the European Union 's financial system , and at increasing consumer rights guarantees and ensuring better supervision .
These acts are aimed at stabilising the financial markets .
We are thereby fulfilling the predictions , but the legislation we are signing was drawn up by Parliament in the previous term .
Would Minister Malmström like to take the floor before signing the legislative acts ?
Mr President , we are now going to sign a number of legal acts that are absolutely central to the EU 's response to the financial and economic crisis that has hit Europe so hard and that will continue to have an impact .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Czech Presidency , which worked very hard to get these acts in place within a short time .
It was thanks to the Czech Presidency that we managed to bring about quickly such successful cooperation between the Council and Parliament , as well as quick , effective agreements .
As I mentioned previously , we are cautiously optimistic about the economic situation , but we also know that unemployment will hit many countries very hard in the coming period .
There is therefore still reason for Parliament , the Council and the Commission to work closely with each other .
I am looking forward to our cooperation and I am proud to be able to sign these acts along with you , Mr President .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that what we are doing is an expression of the continuity of the functions of the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
There have , in the meantime , been elections to the European Parliament which have in no way impeded our activities or our work .
I would like to now ask Minister Malmström to proceed with the joint signing , which will be done at this table .
I also invite Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , Mrs Berès and Mrs Bowles - the previous and current Commissioners on Economic and Monetary Affairs - I would ask both of you to come here to the middle , and the rapporteurs , who include Mr Karas and Mr Gauzès .
You will all be present at the signing , and the Minister and I will sign .
I would also like to point out that Mrs Starkevičiūtand Mr Hoppenstedt are former rapporteurs , but are no longer in the European Parliament , as they were Members during the previous term of office .
We shall now proceed to the signing .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of interparliamentary delegations : see Minutes
Conclusion of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EC and the Republic of Tajikistan ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the Council and Commission statements on the conclusion of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EC and the Republic of Tajikistan and
the recommendation by Alojz Peterle , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the proposal for a Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Tajikistan , of the other part
( 12475 / 2004 - 11803 / 2004 - C6-0118 / 2005 - .

Madam President , honourable Members , Commissioner , Mr Peterle , I am pleased to have the opportunity this afternoon to discuss the EU 's links with Tajikistan and , in particular , the importance we place on laying a new foundation for our relations with the country by entering into a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
I know that Parliament has a strong interest in this issue .
As far back as February 2008 , in your resolution on an EU strategy for Central Asia , you called on the Member States to ratify the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement quickly - thereby confirming Parliament 's intention to approve the agreement within the near future .
Now the Agreement has been ratified and there is a strong desire to move on with the remaining steps as quickly as possible , so that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement can enter into force as soon as possible , hopefully before the end of the year .
If so , it would send a clear signal that we are opening a new chapter in our relations between the European Union and Tajikistan .
Tajikistan is an important part of our overall strategy for Central Asia .
This hardly accessible country is one of the poorest in the world .
It has a poorly maintained border with Afghanistan , making it a major route for drug smuggling and a way into the region for radical Islamists .
Consequently , we have a great interest in supporting Tajikistan , both for its own sake and in order to solve our common problems .
We are already doing this through a number of contacts .
The Swedish Presidency sent a high level group to the region in July , and a ministerial conference with Central Asia was held in Brussels yesterday .
However , Tajikistan is one of very few countries on the EU 's eastern border with which we have not yet concluded an overall agreement since the Cold War ended .
If we seriously want to get to grips with the issues that I mentioned , we need to create a suitable framework for our future relations .
The arrangements for political dialogue and practical cooperation with Tajikistan must be improved so as to better reflect the shared challenges faced by the region .
A Partnership and Cooperation Agreement would provide us with a more structured way of discussing matters in which we have a shared interest : human rights , the rule of law , the drugs trade and organised crime , as well as terrorism and religious organisation .
At the same time , we need to make progress on issues relating to democracy , good social management and human rights in the region .
We are well aware that this is no easy task .
I therefore very much welcome the structured dialogue with Tajikistan on human rights that is providing an opportunity to conduct a proper discussion .
The second round of this dialogue will take place in Dushanbe on 23 September .
We must continue to encourage Tajikistan to introduce a programme of reforms .
Developments are often very worrying .
We would like to see a more democratic approach within the country as regards freedom of organisation , religious freedom , freedom of the media and the development of civil society .
We must do our utmost to convince Tajikistan that the rule of law must be observed in the fight against illegal activities , the drugs trade and terrorism .
We must emphasise that human rights and basic freedoms must be respected as a way of preventing ethnic or cultural conflicts .
We are also very worried about the extensive corruption that is to be found in the country .
It is hindering not only development in Tajikistan , but also effective contributions from donors .
We should use every channel available to appeal to the Tajik authorities to tackle this problem as quickly as possible .
We cannot ignore the fact that all the transit routes for the drugs trade - or a great many at least - pass through Tajikistan .
The country is vulnerable to radical movements and international organised crime .
We must increase our support for Tajikistan in order to counter this activity while , at the same time , providing alternative sources of income .
This strategy accords well with our commitment in Afghanistan and our work on stabilising that country .
We welcome Tajikistan 's interest in cooperation and support its efforts .
Tajikistan has demonstrated an open , constructive attitude to discussions on our shared challenges .
That is positive .
This dialogue is an important element of our support for Tajikistan in its work on promoting cooperation with its neighbours and finding solutions to urgent , complex regional problems such as climate change , water and border controls .
In view of the fact that we have a strong interest in dealing with many of these problems more effectively and efficiently , I welcome the opportunity to create a new basis for our relations with Tajikistan .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement provides us with a framework within which we can develop our bilateral relations further and thereby contribute to the overall goals of our strategy for the whole of Central Asia .
I therefore call on this Parliament to vote in favour of the Agreement , so that it can enter into force as soon as possible .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Peterle for his excellent report , and also the resolution , which gives a very good analysis of the situation in Tajikistan and makes recommendations which I can support .
Since the EU Strategy for Central Asia was adopted in June 2007 , our relationships with all the countries of Central Asia have been deepening to our mutual benefit .
The rhythm of contacts between us has gathered pace , and there is now a shared understanding of the benefits of greater cooperation on security matters , border management and controls , education , governance and energy diversification .
The strategy is succeeding in forging a new kind of partnership with the five Central Asian republics .
Clearly , though , this overarching strategy is underpinned by individual and differentiated bilateral relations that reflect the varying aspirations and orientations of the countries concerned .
As you all know , our cooperation with Tajikistan is currently still governed by the trade and cooperation agreement concluded with the USSR in 1989 and endorsed by Tajikistan in 1994 .
This agreement does not fully reflect our ambitions under the Central Asia Strategy any more , nor does it serve to support the kind of relationship we now seek with Tajikistan .
Your assent to the new EU-Tajikistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which is before you for debate today , would therefore represent a major step forward , allowing us to widen and deepen our cooperation with this country .
Today 's Tajikistan is confronted , as has been said already , by major economic and social challenges .
It is important - and in Europeans ' own interests - that Tajikistan should succeed in tackling its difficulties .
This is a country which shares a nearly 1 500 km border with Afghanistan , and which lies close to the Swat Valley in Pakistan .
It is a territory vulnerable to spill-over from these conflict areas and to infiltration by Islamic militants .
Tajikistan is also key to efforts to stem the flow of illegal drugs to Europe from Afghanistan .
Greater cooperation with the European Union can therefore play a part in helping to prevent the spread of instability .
A key element in Tajikistan 's vulnerabilities is its weak economy .
The poorest of the Central Asian republics has been badly hit by a substantial decrease in prices for aluminium and cotton due to the global downturn .
This , taken together with a 34 % drop in remittances in the first half of 2009 , gives rise to concern that poverty levels may be rising , and that a precarious socio-economic situation could provoke social unrest .
I believe that we are now on the right track with Tajikistan , supporting and encouraging indispensable reforms .
This has also been the focus of EU Special Representative Morel 's frequent visits and of my own visit in spring 2008 .
There is progress , but clearly more needs to be done .
The Government has made it clear that , in addition to greater trade and cooperation , it is willing to implement measures to improve social welfare , health , education , tackle corruption and improve human rights .
It is to be welcomed that President Rahmon has created the post of an ombudsman .
The ombudsman will be an important interlocutor for us in the next round of the EU-Tajikistan human rights dialogue that you mentioned , on 23 September .
Judiciary reform is still making slow progress , but we hope the recommendations of a recent human rights civil society seminar in Dushanbe will be taken into account by the government , particularly in reform of the legal profession and the new criminal procedure code in Tajikistan .
I am , of course , very well aware of your concerns on democracy and human rights in Tajikistan and I can therefore assure you that the Commission will take these concerns fully into account in our dialogues with this country .
As to the economic reforms , we see progress , for example , on the drafting of a cotton debt resolution mechanism , which hopefully will pave the way for wider agricultural reforms and the implementation of ' Freedom to Farm ' , crucial to tackling poverty in the country .
The European Parliament 's assent to the PCA today will help us to continue to work with Tajikistan on a whole range of political and economic reforms , with a special focus on democracy and human rights , and also to ensure their thorough implementation .
The reform effort is already underpinned by a relatively large amount of bilateral assistance from the Commission .
Indeed , it is EUR 66 million for the period 2007 to 2010 which will even rise to EUR 70 million over the three years 2011 and 2013 .
Our aid will focus on sector support for social protection and health , public finance management reform and technical assistance for private sector development .
This process will be supported by our delegation in Dushanbe .
It is my intention that , before the end of this year , our regionalised office there should become a fully-fledged delegation to encourage the reform process and facilitate full implementation of the PCA .
In particular , I hope it will help us to maintain a thorough assessment of progress in the key areas I have mentioned which we will then measure against clear benchmarks .
The decision to conclude a partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Communities , their Member States and Tajikistan is in line with the European Council Strategy for a New Partnership with Central Asia and Tajikistan 's clear will to develop broad cooperation with the European Union , in trade and many other fields .
I am pleased to see that all the Member States have ratified this agreement and hope that we will be able to give our assent to the agreement with Tajikistan , just as we have previously assented to agreements with Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan .
This will mark the end of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and the former Soviet Union .
Acting on the basis of its fundamental values and principles , the European Union expresses with this agreement its strategic interest in cooperation with Tajikistan , which it regards as a very important partner in this part of the world .
The EU also wishes to deepen its relations with Tajikistan , thereby contributing to the security , stability and economic progress of this country and the development and consolidation of its democratic institutions , as well as to the protection of human rights and the rule of law .
The more specific objectives of European policy on Tajikistan relate primarily to supporting the struggle against poverty , supporting good governance and reform , as well as to effectively tackling drug trafficking and organised crime .
This report takes a critical stance on the state of democracy in this country , expressing concern about corruption and the state of civil society but , at the same time , it calls upon the Tajik Government to tackle the problematic situation in the field of education and training , as soon as possible .
The report also expresses justified concern about violations of human rights , in particular , women 's rights , religious freedoms , judicial independence and the conditions governing the work of civil society organisations .
That being said , the report also welcomes the commencement of dialogue on human rights , the progress of which is essential for the development of bilateral relations .
This agreement reflects our conviction that Tajikistan has the potential to create a modern , functioning state which is capable of successfully carrying out its regional role , in particular , in fighting the extremism spilling over from Afghanistan and elsewhere in the region .
Among other things , the report also reminds us of the importance of energy and water , as these issues concern inter-state relations within Central Asia and require joint tackling .
By way of conclusion , allow me to compliment my colleagues on their constructive collaboration and the Commission on its valuable help .
Above all , I would like to thank the Embassy of the Republic of Tajikistan for their cooperation .
I firmly believe that , with this agreement , the European Union will be able to build on and deepen the cooperation which it has had with Tajikistan to date , and I hope that this will be the spirit in which this agreement is implemented in the near future .
I warmly recommend that you adopt the agreement with Tajikistan .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Alojz Peterle , on his highly factual and - I would like to stress - very balanced report on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and Tajikistan .
Tajikistan has come in for a lot of criticism for its lack of democracy .
What we most often disapprove of is the lack of press freedom , religious freedom and corruption .
I do not wish to dispute those charges here .
However , we do need to take into account the fact that Tajikistan has recently made progress both in combating corruption and improving the human rights situation , as well as various other sensitive areas .
In addition , it is a relatively stable country , which is important , considering its strategic location .
However this has already been covered today .
As a neighbour of Afghanistan , and the associated problems of the large-scale production and sale of drugs , terrorism and growing extremism , and with another increasingly unstable neighbour , Pakistan , Tajikistan could be a natural ally of the European Union .
It is therefore in the EU 's interest to continue to support democratic processes in that country and to strengthen its political , economic and social potential .
Let us remember that Tajikistan is the poorest of the former Soviet republics .
It was one of just 12 countries that was last year on the UN 's list of the countries worst affected by the world food crisis .
I am pleased in this respect that the report also mentions the Millennium Development Goals .
Let us also remind Tajikistan of these .
The European Union is Tajikistan 's primary trading partner .
Both sides should make efforts to implement the agreement as fast as possible , thereby supporting the country 's development and stabilising its economic situation .
Merely criticising what is wrong in Tajikistan will not achieve this .
We also need to send out a positive signal that we care about developing contacts with this country and , in my opinion , Mr Peterle 's report , along with the entire Parliament , has sent just such a signal .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Tajikistan is a word seldom uttered in this House , and so we - I speak on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and also as a member of the Committee on International Trade and of the Delegation for relations with Central Asia - welcome this agreement .
I also welcome this decision to take swift action to promote our representative offices in the region , as the Commissioner mentioned just now .
Moreover , Tajikistan , which is a country that can surprise us but which is often described as an outpost of Europe , is not on the periphery of the world - just as none of the other countries in Central Asia , Afghanistan being the main one , are either .
It is in this country that some very important battles are being fought in relation to drugs trafficking , the fight against authoritarianism and fundamentalism , and the establishment of the rule of law and democracy , which are , unfortunately , still very fragile .
With this legislative instrument we will be able to make progress , not only from a trade perspective but , I hope , from a political and cultural perspective too .
Madam President , conditions are far more favourable for embarking on a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Tajikistan than , for example , Uzbekistan or Turkmenistan , these latter countries being total dictatorships .
Tajikistan , however , is on something of a better path , and this agreement will allow the European Union to have some influence on the situation there .
It was agreeable to hear that , in the name of the Council and the Commission , the cooperation pact would focus on human rights and democracy and try to promote the development of the rule of law .
It was also excellent to hear that an ombudsman 's institution had been established in Tajikistan .
In many countries , this is a very important instrument , and the European Union should lend its full support to this new institution .
I would like to raise another point regarding the question of water resources .
This region is rich in water resources , and the European Union could help Tajikistan to exploit these resources of theirs rationally and democratically , taking account too of the interests of those countries whose territories lie downstream and which might possibly suffer from the effects of large hydroelectric power stations .
Whatever the case , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would like to emphasise the importance of regional cooperation , so that the local economy in Central Asia might recover .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Tajikistan is not blessed with the energy and mineral resources of other countries in Central Asia .
However , that is no excuse for marginalising Tajikistan at the expense of its wealthier and larger neighbours .
Central Asia is a region vital to the EU 's political and energy security .
In terms of strengthening relations with the EU , some countries in the region will progress faster than others .
That is inevitable .
But we must retain a sense of collective engagement as we continue to improve ties with what was , until quite recently , a diplomatically isolated and largely overlooked region , particularly by the European Union .
Favouring some countries in Central Asia over others risks creating a discord and division in the region .
In particular , Islamist terrorists in the region have shown a determination to exploit poverty and inadequate governance to radicalise the people and spread their message of hatred .
The Government of Tajikistan has rejected extremism and , with the help of the international community , is seeking now to consolidate its nation 's democracy .
Tajikistan still bears the scars of a brutal civil war between secular and Jihadi forces that erupted after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s .
People in Tajikistan have no wish to see the return of bloodshed , which is why they have given courageous support to NATO operations against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
The ISAF mission in Afghanistan is vital to Tajikistan 's long-term future and its desire to find a security anchor westwards .
It is fair to say that Tajikistan 's record in democratisation and human rights is imperfect , but I am convinced that dialogue and engagement on the EU 's part will encourage Tajikistan towards positive change .
Certainly , that seems to be the European Union 's view with regard to Belarus and Uzbekistan , so Tajikistan deserves to be treated in the same way .
The ECR Group therefore supports a deeper strategic political and economic partnership with Tajikistan based on a commitment of progress towards openness , democracy and higher standards of human rights .
Madam President , thank you for the report .
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I questioned the competent representative of the Commission in a debate on the role of this agreement within the framework of EU immigration management .
He clearly stated that , when it entered into force , it would pave the way for cooperation with the border security agency ( Frontex ) and for numerous immigration regulations , such as within the framework of readmission agreements and border security with Afghanistan .
The 1 200 km long border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan has already been addressed here .
It will then also become another target of the EU 's repressive policy to keep out refugees .
Thus , the European Union wants to seal itself off from refugees far beyond its external borders .
Yet again , we see that this is a fundamental component of EU foreign policy .
As a result of such partnership agreements , refugees are interned in camps , in which , as we all know , inhumane conditions prevail , as is currently the case in Ukraine .
The problem has already been addressed here in general terms .
This form of so-called international immigration management involves serious infringement of the Geneva Refugee Convention and of international human rights .
I therefore call on the EU to start fighting the cause of flight rather than the refugees .
The European neighbourhood policy is one means of making fortress Europe even more impenetrable , which is why it is looked on very sceptically from our point of view , from the point of view of the GUE / NGL .
Madam President , quite honestly , this debate gives me mixed feelings .
On the one hand , I welcome the fact that Mr Peterle 's resolution clearly points out the many problematic areas in the Tajik economy and society .
On the other hand , I find it incomprehensible that , at crucial points , Tajikistan is described as a relatively stable country .
I have just heard it again in a debate and I absolutely cannot understand where this idea comes from .
Well , the European Union gives the impression that this agreement has to come about come what may .
This will have undeniable consequences for the credibility of the large amounts of criticism that will still have to be made later on .
What I read in paragraph 2 about the disappointment of the Tajik Government I find entirely astonishing .
We must debate the disappointment , ladies and gentlemen , of , for example , the Protestant minority or the Muslims confronted with an Act on Religion that deeply interferes with their religious life .
Instead of this completely misplaced disappointment , the Tajik Government should take care of the large amounts of work it needs to do at home .
I hope , Commissioner , that this is also followed up on conscientiously .
Madam President , I am very much in favour of this agreement .
I believe it is a big step forward in the cooperation between the European Union and Tajikistan , which is a very important country for several reasons .
I just want to quote one contribution to the stability and security of our continent of the EU .
Tajikistan is at the crossroads of drug trafficking from Afghanistan to Europe and Russia .
At least 30 % of the heroin produced in Afghanistan comes to Europe and Russia through Tajikistan .
Ten years ago , the international community started a big operation in Tajikistan , strengthening all the drug control apparatus , and I am very happy to see , ten years later , that it is working and that it is going ahead very well .
This agreement is a direct contribution to the stability and security of Europe .
I see there are still many limitations and colleagues underlined the problems in Tajikistan in terms of human rights , poverty and so on , but I believe this agreement is Europe at its best and I am very much in favour of it .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , believe that this cooperation agreement with Tajikistan really is very positive and can help to achieve what I believe are some important and precise objectives .
The first objective concerns the strategic position of that country , which can genuinely be of use in promoting an area of peace , security and stability .
The second objective , I believe , is and must be to encourage the growth of that country from an economic and social point of view , because we know that it is one of the poorest countries in the region .
Lastly , we must ensure that freedom , democracy and rights are the fundamental elements that govern the application of this agreement .
Leaving aside any limitations that may be found , I believe we should welcome the report on which we are voting in this House .
( SL ) I would like to congratulate Mr Peterle on an excellent report .
The suffix ' -stan ' means ' state ' and Tajikistan is the last of the countries whose names end in ' -stan ' to be recognised as a state by us .
Up until now , we have always overlooked it , which was a great injustice .
However , the stability of Central Asia is in the interests of the region itself , in our interests , and in the strategic interests of the world as a whole .
All the countries in the world are interlinked like a connecting vessel , which is why we also need to demonstrate our maturity by ensuring that all the countries in this region are given equal attention , regardless of their size , stage of development or how much energy wealth they possess .
It seems to me that we have now righted this wrong and made up for lost time .
For this reason , I would like to congratulate both the rapporteur and the Commission , as well as Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and the Swedish Presidency , for finally consigning this delay to the past .
From now on , things will be better .
( PL ) I would like to thank you very much for allowing me to ask a question .
I believe concluding this agreement will be a good idea , as it is a step in the right direction .
However , I do ask myself , and I would also like to ask Minister Malmström the question : among the many activities that the European Union has planned , would it not be desirable to put greater emphasis on helping Tajikistan to train those responsible for securing the border with Afghanistan ?
We are well aware that this is an extremely crucial issue .
The border stretches for 1500 kilometres .
Tajikistan has great problems protecting the border , particularly as there is a large Tajik minority on the Afghan side .
I therefore think that among the various initiatives undertaken by the European Union , we should also consider helping to train the Tajik forces and the people who are responsible for keeping that border secure .
( DE ) Madam President , I would also like to say that Mr Peterle has produced an excellent report .
We should be clear about one thing : the freedom-loving people of central Asia are among our most important partners .
This region has often been dominated by foreign powers .
For the first time in a long time - for centuries - it is again free .
We should exploit this opportunity to establish a real partnership of the free .
I heard talk earlier of crime .
Of course , we must work together to combat crime , but first we should look at the culture in these countries and understand that these are ancient trading nations .
They do not just trade in drugs ; they trade in goods which were always important for Europe and the world .
We should therefore say that this is about partnership , not paternalism .
( EL ) Madam President , I , too , should like to touch on the question of crime , which has already been raised , and the question of illegal immigration .
It is a fact that Tajikistan is at a nerve point , in a geopolitical position , and Europe should examine how we can manage to reduce both crime , in connection with drugs from Afghanistan , and - first and foremost - migratory movements .
It is a fact that Europe can no longer sustain these migratory movements via Tajikistan and from Afghanistan and other countries , a fact which primarily the Mediterranean countries , such as Malta , Cyprus , Greece and Italy , are paying for now , but which it is certain , with mathematical precision , will be paid for at a later date by all the countries of northern Europe .
Of course , we must respect the rights of all the people who come from these countries but , at some point , Europe too will need to protect itself and realise that we cannot sustain these migratory movements from Asia .

Madam President , as Mr Peterle says in his excellent report , the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement is part of a greater strategy for increased regional stability in Central Asia .
It is only right that we make this significant move , because there are so many problems and they are so extensive and affect so many countries , not least Afghanistan and Pakistan , but each country has its own specific problems .
Mr Peterle deals with all this very systematically in his report .
I am pleased that the European Parliament is still holding the banner high as regards human rights .
Human rights are a problem in Tajikistan .
There is still a lot to do in the country as regards respect for democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
That is why it is so useful , as the Commissioner has said , that we have this dialogue on human rights .
I am sure that the Commission will be very clear at next week 's meeting about European values and the expectations that we have of Tajikistan .
This summer , the EU supported a conference that dealt with precisely the matter of strengthening the rule of law in Tajikistan and which was attended by representatives from the research world , civil society , non-governmental organisations and foreign experts , as well as by many representatives of Tajikistan 's own authorities .
It is a matter of improving the independence of the legal authorities and strengthening the rule of law .
Mrs Hautala brought up the matter of water .
This is very important in the region .
The EU is supporting a number of sustainable development projects for hydroelectric power .
These projects must be based on scientific studies , have a regional perspective , and take into account the specific needs that exist .
Mr Zemke mentioned the matter of border management .
This is a very important issue .
The EU is supporting the region to the tune of EUR 66 million up to 2010 and EUR 70 million in the three-year period thereafter .
This must surely provide scope for strengthening not only border management and control , but also training of customs and police officers .
I am sure that the Commission will return to this later .
To sum up , there are many difficult and complex problems in Tajikistan and throughout the region .
There is some light at the end of the tunnel , but we must not underestimate the problems .
I am very pleased that the House is unanimous as regards the importance of taking this step of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
It will provide us with a better tool to use in our work on improving stability and resolving these problems and with which to conduct an active dialogue with the country on human rights and democracy .
It is an important step forward and fills a gap that has existed in our regional strategy up till now .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we have firmly believed for a long time that an EU-Central Asia Strategy is vitally important and will have a positive effect on security , stability and prosperity in the countries of Central Asia .
As Mr Tannock rightly said , we should not marginalise Tajikistan .
On the contrary , I think we should engage with this poorest country of Central Asia .
Having said this , yes of course we are also fully aware that there are huge challenges for this country .
I think it was Mr Arlacchi who mentioned that Afghanistan remains the first opiate- and heroin-producing country in the world and , of course , the whole transit takes place through Tajikistan and through other Central Asian countries .
Afghan opium and heroin are being trafficked out of the country , mainly through Iran and Pakistan on the southern routes and through Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan and Kazakhstan on the northern routes .
So we know that this is an extremely important issue .
But we also see that drug production has decreased in Afghanistan and now it is really a matter of working together in order to make this decrease still further .
For that , we have introduced BOMKA , the border management programme .
That is excellent because it works against smuggling .
It is helping these countries to trade legally but , in particular , it is also working against drug production .
I have visited those institutions myself and I can tell you they are working very well .
We are also organising training .
Training is among the European Union programmes .
Let me say a second word on the human rights question .
The new partnership and cooperation agreement will provide us with an instrument to deepen our dialogue with Tajikistan in this field , and there is the human rights clause .
This will give us the opportunity and the means for discussing with the Tajik authorities all related issues , such as child labour , women 's rights , freedom of assembly and religious freedom - absolutely , Mr Belder , because there are still some problems .
Water has also been mentioned .
I have known about these problems for very many years .
We have tried to help the Tajiks and now we play the role of facilitator among Central Asian countries .
We are convinced that it has to be tackled at regional level , taking countries ' interests and needs into account - both upstream , which means Tajikistan and Kurdistan , and downstream , which means Uzbekistan , Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan .
I think only in this context can a permanent solution be found .
Therefore we are working with all the countries and , in this context , a national policy dialogue on water is scheduled for 2010 - next year - in which all these issues will be addressed , and then , of course , we will try and come to terms .
My final remarks : the time is right to support the final stage of the ratification process for the partnership and cooperation agreement .
More intense cooperation with Tajikistan , supported by you , by Parliament , is in the interests of our citizens .
A positive vote will send a strong signal to Tajikistan that the European Union honours its commitments under our Central Asia Strategy .
It will pave the way for a partnership essential to our own security and help us encourage greater regional cooperation , so vital for the stability of Central Asia .
I would like to thank you all for your attentive words , new insights and new emphases .
I am pleased to see that Parliament stands united , once again , in this debate and that it has the will to forge a stronger and tighter partnership with Tajikistan .
I am also pleased that we are aware of Tajikistan 's identity and its special role in the region .
I , for one , would be delighted if we were to devote an equal amount of attention to the monitoring of the implementation of this agreement , and we will soon have the opportunity to do just that .
However , allow me to recall the importance of Parliament 's role in such cooperation , one vehicle of which will be our delegation to the countries of Central Asia .
I firmly believe that we will be able to finalise this agreement tomorrow with a great majority .
When it does take effect , the European Union and Tajikistan will have the opportunity to cooperate , at regional , bilateral and global levels .
Thank you very much for your help and cooperation .
I have received a motion to wind up the debate from the Committee on Foreign Affairs pursuant to Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 September 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome all agreements between the European communities and the countries of the former Soviet Union , provided that such agreements are based on equal rights and mutual benefits .
If it is established in the report presented to today 's plenary session of the European Parliament that the proposed agreement will help to reinforce and consolidate the Union in Tajikistan and Central Asia from a political , economic and commercial perspective , then I would like urgently to draw your attention to the following considerations which I share with many other people .
The agreement must not in any way be viewed as a possible stepping stone to an EU military presence in the area in question .
It is absolutely essential to develop the European Union as a peace project , free of superpower or military ambitions .
The proclaimed war on terrorism cannot be conducted in the area in question without cooperation from Russia and other neighbouring states .
Last but not least , I would like to point out that we must approach the extraction and use of raw materials in a spirit of complete equality and mutual interest .
New regulations on visas for Western Balkan countries ( Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro , Serbia ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on new regulations on visas for Western Balkan countries ( Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro , Serbia ) .
Mr President , moving quickly on geographically to discuss another area that I am again very pleased to address : the prospects of visa liberalisation for certain countries in the Balkan region .
It is excellent that the European Parliament is addressing this at such an early stage in its period of office .
It shows how important we all believe it to be that the people of the Western Balkans are brought closer to the European Union .
It is undoubtedly the most important issue for the citizens of the Balkan region as far as their present links with the EU are concerned .
Visa liberalisation will firstly make it possible for people to move more freely throughout Europe and will create more open societies .
Many people in the region - particularly young people - have never been to Western Europe , and naturally visa liberalisation would open up a range of opportunities for contacts and exchanges .
That is the real benefit of this initiative .
In 2007 , the EU embarked upon a process intended to result in visa requirements being removed for the countries of the Western Balkans .
There are two aspects to this process : the countries themselves had to make significant progress as regards the reliability of documentation , better legislation on migration , improved rights for minorities and , not least , the fight against corruption and organised crime .
In return , the EU would offer visa-free travel .
Visa facilitation was introduced back in January 2008 , linked to commitments in the areas to be addressed .
However , only genuine visa liberalisation will enable the economic and bureaucratic barriers erected by visa obligations to be removed .
Liberalisation of the visa requirements that apply to citizens of the Western Balkans is an important measure that will strengthen ties between this region and the European Union .
We can expect this to stimulate a pro-European attitude among both the governments and the peoples of the region , because it shows that the European integration process has real advantages .
Continued isolation , on the other hand , would lead to a feeling of exclusion and prevent exchanges of ideas and , in the worst case , could foster narrow-minded nationalism .
Obviously , our aim is the opposite : to open up the EU , to provide the countries with access to Community programmes , to make it easier for people to be in contact and to promote development and exchanges both between the countries of the Western Balkans and between these countries and the EU .
Not least , visa liberalisation will create new opportunities for trade , industry and transfer of know-how .
These are important elements in alleviating the consequences of the economic crisis .
Consequently , the Commission 's proposal that was submitted on 15 July is very much to be welcomed .
It is proposed that in a first step , the visa requirement will be removed for citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia , which have biometric passports .
The aim is that on 1 January 2010 , we will liberalise the visa requirements for these citizens and later extend this to other countries once they also meet the conditions required .
The Commission has assessed that three countries - Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - by and large already meet the conditions for visa liberalisation .
The appraisal of Serbia and Montenegro is continuing and we hope that by this autumn , we will have confirmation from the Commission that all the conditions are met , so that we can take the next step .
I must emphasise that many of the conditions that we have set for liberalisation , such as reform of the police system and combating corruption , will also benefit the countries in their preparations for EU membership and thus create a situation in which everyone wins as far as harmonisation of the rules is concerned .
It also provides a good example of how the principle of conditionality can work in the Western Balkans .
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be included in this first decision on visa exemption , but they are not being left in the lurch .
I know that that is a matter of concern to many in this House .
It is only a matter of time before these countries also meet the necessary conditions in the Commission 's roadmap .
In order that the process can be concluded as soon as possible , we are continuing to emphatically support and encourage Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina to make further progress on the remaining targets , and I hope that they , too , will be able to benefit from visa liberalisation in the near future .
The EU will do all it can to help and support these two countries in their efforts to achieve their objectives , particularly as regards the rule of law .
Where Kosovo is concerned , the Commission 's proposal involves no change .
Here , the visa requirement will remain for the time being .
In the future , we will have to look at how the measures can best be extended in order to give the citizens of Kosovo the same rights as others in the region .
Here we are awaiting a communication from the Commission in October containing ideas for encouraging deeper cooperation and links with Kosovo .
The Council has only just begun its discussions on the Commission 's proposal , but the Presidency will work hard to ensure that we can reach agreement as soon as possible .
We welcome the great interest that the European Parliament has shown in this proposal and the fact that initial discussions are already taking place in your committees .
In view of the incredible significance of this proposal politically , I am sure that we are in agreement on the goal , which is to conclude this process as quickly as possible with satisfactory results , so that visa liberalisation can become a reality as soon as possible .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Minister , Mrs Malmström , for everything she has told us , and which I will try to confirm on behalf of the Commission .
On 15 July , the Commission proposed the abolition of short-term visas for citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
As you have underlined , Minister , this is obviously an historic moment in our relations with the Western Balkans .
This proposal for the abolition of visas is based on the progress made in the last six years in the areas of justice and home affairs , in accordance with the commitments made at Thessaloniki in 2003 .
The Commission proposal has been submitted to the Council .
The Member States support the approach proposed by the Commission and confirm their intention to work in close cooperation with the European Parliament to guarantee the formal adoption of the text during your Presidency , Minister , the Swedish Presidency .
I thank the European Parliament for appointing the rapporteurs within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and for setting an indicative timetable scheduling the submission of the report for the end of September , and the votes within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and then in plenary , for October and November .
The goal is , in fact , to obtain visa exemptions for citizens of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro on 1 January 2010 .
The Commission 's proposal is based on the results of the dialogue launched in the first half of 2008 with the five countries of the Western Balkans .
Road maps have been drawn up stipulating criteria , the realisation of which involves the adoption of structural reforms in the key area of JFS - justice , freedom and security .
This method has proved to be a very important incentive for the countries of the region to progress towards reforms , notably in relation to document security , with the introduction of biometric passports and identity cards for border control and global policies on migration , and also in relation to public order and security policies : the fight against organised crime , corruption , human trafficking , and finally , of course , fundamental rights , including matters of citizenship .
Having studied these reports , we can say that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia meets all of the criteria in its road map .
Montenegro and Serbia have made very considerable progress .
However , for Serbia , there are still some conditions to be met , in particular , with relation to the verification of identity documents submitted by Kosovo residents and people of Kosovan origin living abroad when they request a Serbian biometric passport .
The second condition for Serbia is the control of borders with Kosovo and cooperation with EULEX , and thirdly , the drafting of a national strategy on migration .
As for Montenegro , a lasting solution must be found for displaced persons .
Measures still have to be taken in terms of the effective introduction of the law on foreigners , as well as measures enhancing administrative capacity and which are designed to fight corruption and organised crime more effectively .
That is the situation in these three countries .
Despite the very significant progress accomplished in the course of the last few months , Bosnia and Albania have not yet been able to complete the requisite reforms demanded in the road map , such as the abolition of visas .
On the basis of this analysis , the Commission , in response to the invitation made by the General Affairs Council in June 2009 , has therefore proposed the abolition of the visa for the citizens of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
For Serbia , persons resident in Kosovo , or persons of Kosovan origin who are resident abroad and who hold a Serbian passport issued by a central authority in Belgrade , will be excluded from the liberalisation and will be required to obtain a visa .
Indeed , since 1999 , Serbia has not been able to provide verification for identity documents held by people from Kosovo .
The Commission has considered the security risk that this category of people represents for the Community , as well as the fact that there has , as yet , been no dialogue on the subject of visa liberalisation with Kosovo .
Therefore , the decision to include certain countries in this liberalisation of visa requirements is based on the merits of each individual country .
As far as Serbia and Montenegro are concerned , we will follow closely the measures taken by these two countries to fully implement all of the criteria .
In terms of the progress already made by Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Commission is convinced that these two countries will be in a position to meet all of the criteria in the near future .
In October , their authorities will submit supplementary information to the Commission on the progress made in recent months .
On the basis of this information , evaluation missions will be deployed at the beginning of next year , and then the Commission will draw up new evaluation reports to be discussed with Member States .
Following this , the Commission hopes that it will be in a position to propose the waiver of the visa requirement in 2010 .
In accordance with the procedures in force , the proposal will be discussed at the Council and will be the subject of an opinion at the European Parliament .
The formal adoption of the text by a majority of the Schengen countries should therefore take place during the Swedish Presidency , which will allow the effective introduction of this abolition of visas for citizens of these three countries from January 2010 .
As you have said , Minister , all this means the possibility , particularly for the young generation in these Balkan countries , of participating much more in European life , of integrating into it , and we think that all of this can be extremely beneficial , both for these countries and for our Europe .
There you have it .
Those are the points I wanted to make following the excellent observations made by the Presidency .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Western Balkans need Europe and we Europeans need stability in the Western Balkans .
The Western Balkans are a central part of Europe and we must do our utmost to bring this important part back home to Europe .
For that reason , these are the right proposals .
The reality of life in this area has been described ; the depressingly long queues at visa offices , the young people with no prospect of making an application to leave the country and get a taste of life in Europe .
A lot of people experience this area as a prison , where they have no contact with the outside world .
We all want to put an end to this and , in my group , Mrs Pack , Mrs Bildt and Mr Posselt are working on this with a great deal of dedication .
We all stand for this .
What worries us is that , as a result of the different treatment of the states in this area , there will be separatist movements and different classes of citizens in the area of the Western Balkans will be created , which could certainly lead to problems .
However , the citizens in the European Union equally expect security .
That means that the standards that Commissioner Barrot described here today , namely security standards for police cooperation , in the fight against illegal immigration and economic migration and for biometric data , are the agreed minimum standards which represent the rules of play .
Our citizens expect those rules of play to be adhered to .
That brings me to my second point : there must be no foreign policy concessions on the question of visa waiver .
We should not give these states a free rein .
The rules of play are clear and anyone who abides by them has every chance of having visas waived .
The pressure on the states which have been unable to improve their standards hitherto , despite EU aid , should not let up .
These are the two flanks that we in the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) consider to be right .
We trust in the evaluation that the European Commission has carried out and can therefore approve the present step .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we support , of course , the Commission 's proposals , as they mark a very important step for the three countries in the region just mentioned , which will enjoy a visa-free regime as of 1 January 2010 .
I myself am from a country and of a generation which enthusiastically welcomed the lifting of the visa regime prior to our country becoming a member of the European Union .
I would also say that this is the first and most important sign that things really are moving in the right direction , and that one day , the final destination of these countries will be the European Union .
At the same time , I cannot help but express , to some extent , my astonishment at the Commission 's excessively administrative approach to this matter .
Although , on the one hand , technical matters are important , in the sense that compliance is needed and the countries have to fulfil the necessary conditions to become part of the European Union , and therefore be granted this visa-free travel facility , the Commission 's decision to exclude Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , to some extent , beggars comprehension .
It fails to reflect the delicate nature of this issue in the region .
It underestimates the influence it could have on the future development of relations between the countries of the region , and the attitude of ordinary citizens in the region to this decision made by the European Commission .
For this reason , we believe that the European Commission 's decision should be reviewed to include Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , with a clear timetable setting out when these countries could be included in the visa-free regime , subject to fulfilling specific conditions .
In this respect , this issue is particularly delicate with regard to the population of Kosovo .
Our question is therefore : when does the European Commission intend to initiate a dialogue on visas with Kosovo , and has it considered what the consequences would be , in terms of Kosovo 's stability if this dialogue is not started as soon as possible ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the ALDE Group firmly and consistently supports the goal of EU accession for all the Western Balkan countries .
We are aiming to equip their citizens to join an integrated free movement area with a single market and common values .
Freedom of short-term travel is a vital part of preparation for that .
The Commission and the Council obviously share that goal , so why on earth has the Commission managed to put forward such an ill-judged and divisive proposal ?
The Liberal Group certainly does not want to undermine the pressure for high standards of passport and border security and the rule of law more generally , but this exercise has to be fair , consistent and effective .
It is not as if there are no anomalies at present .
For instance , Serbia and Montenegro have been included in the July proposal : although they did not meet the benchmarks at the date of the proposal , they are expected to do so in the future .
Then there is the requirement for biometric passports , of which Bosnia has now issued 40 000 , by the way ; but Croatians , who have benefited from visa-free travel for some time , do not need one .
We are saying that Serbia 's stabilisation and association agreement cannot be progressed while Mladić stays hidden , since it shows lack of control over the security services .
But for visa waiver , they are deemed to meet the requirements of Block 3 : Public order and security - some contradiction here .
The way to keep Bosnia and Albania up to the mark would be to include them in the legal scope of this proposed regulation , but to make the actual implementation of visa waiver conditional on a Commission declaration of compliance - in fact , similar to that which the Commission needs to make this autumn about Serbia and Montenegro .
The process would be exactly the same , though a bit later .
Any prolonged delay for Bosnia and Albania and the complete exclusion of Kosovo will have very divisive and detrimental consequences , encouraging the search for Croatian , Serbian or , in the case of Kosovars , Macedonian passports , and undermining the integrity and governance of Bosnia and Kosovo in particular .
I cannot believe the Commission and the Council intend to pursue this damaging path .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I am in favour of visa liberalisation and I am also in favour of attaching certain criteria to visa liberalisation , but what I am more in favour of is peace and stability in the Western Balkans .
What do you think it will do , especially to young people , to Bosnian Muslims , to see their Croat- and Serb-Bosnian peers with double passports hopping in and out of the EU for a weekend ?
Do we really want to take the chance of fostering nationalist feelings and deepening the divisions in a country where stability is still so fragile ?
And for what ?
Bosnia and Herzegovina is really not that far behind Serbia in complying with the criteria .
They are already issuing biometric passports and have made about the same amount of progress on the other criteria .
I therefore strongly ask you to include Bosnia and Herzegovina in the present proposal for the sake of those people living there who are working very hard for a better future - with the memories of war still too fresh in their minds .
I am very happy that today our colleague , until recently Minister Cecilia Malmström , has spoken on behalf of the Council .
This House has been poorer for her absence , but the Swedish Presidency has certainly gained from it .
I would like to say in Swedish ' tack ' - or ' thank you ' - for her speech , which in my language , in Polish , means ' yes ' - and it is therefore a fitting word , as I fully agree with what she has told us on behalf of the Council today , even though I have some small but important comments .
In the first place , I really do not want this appropriate initiative of the Council , supported by the Commission , to be - to put it bluntly - some kind of alternative to the rapid accession of Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro to the European Union .
It is what the societies of those countries expect , and it is what they deserve .
I do not believe that we should substitute the perspective of fast-track accession to the European Union by these countries by waiving visa requirements .
Secondly , I believe that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Albania and Kosovo also deserve visa-free travel as soon as possible .
In this regard , we need to consistently hold up definite European prospects before them .
Madam President , on behalf of the Federal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , we believe that the Commission proposal to waive visas for citizens from Serbia , Montenegro and FYROM who have biometric passports is a step in the right direction and implements the European Union 's commitment towards the people in this area , so that they can plan trips and travel to the rest of Europe without the need for a visa .
I must point out that , when it comes to the Western Balkans , we are talking about a traumatised area which recently experienced war and civil conflict for which the European Union and certain of its Member States bear responsibility .
The wounds of this area are healing slowly .
That is why we believe that the visa waiver procedure for the citizens of all these countries is a very important step and will give them the opportunity to communicate with the peoples of the rest of Europe .
However , I cannot not point out the terms and conditions which , if I have understood correctly , bring a degree of uncertainty to whether the Council will approve the visa waiver for Montenegro and Serbia in October .
Firstly , for Kosovo which , unless I have misunderstood , is subject to Security Council resolution 1244 and , especially , for the Serbian minority living in a state of rural prison , guarded within geographical prisons , we are essentially refusing free communication .
A double whammy : we do not allow them to travel within their country , nor do we allow them to travel to the countries of the European Union .
Secondly , I have numerous reservations as to whether certain of these preconditions which we are demanding of Serbia and Montenegro relate to this specific issue and do not serve other political objectives .
That is why I consider that you should endeavour in October to waive visas for the inhabitants of Montenegro and Serbia and for the other countries in the Western Balkans .
Madam President , firstly , peace and stability in the Western Balkans is certainly in the interest of the whole of Europe and , of course , because I am from Greece , it is logical that it should be in our interest even more , because we border some of these states .
As such , we would consider the direction you are taking to be the right direction .
However , I wish to single out FYROM .
The Skopje government is cultivating extreme nationalism towards one Member State of the European Union , namely Greece , circulating maps which show a part of Greece , Macedonia , together with Thessaloniki and numerous other towns , under occupation , thereby basically cultivating the spirit that these lands , which are supposedly occupied by Greece , should be liberated .
I do not wish to focus on the question of the name , to which you may be indifferent , even though the Greeks are very sensitive to a name being hijacked .
However , you must surely understand that we cannot return to nationalism , the fostering of nationalism , in these countries , to the detriment of other Member States of the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , that visa requirements for Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro are to be abolished shows that the reform efforts of these countries are clearly bearing fruit .
However , ten years after the end of the conflict , the graves are still deep and ill-feeling is still simmering beneath the surface .
Clearly this has to do with the fact that Albania , Kosovo and Bosnia , which have not been included this time , are feeling disadvantaged .
Clearly people there prefer to cultivate old antagonisms , rather than ask themselves what their neighbouring states have done better and how progress can be achieved in order to earn visa waiver .
In any event , Serbia should soon acquire the status of candidate country , as it is moving towards accession on several counts .
However , the wounds are far from healed and every measure by the EU is being evaluated accordingly .
That is why we need , on the one hand , to communicate the reasons for our decisions better and , on the other hand , make it clear to Albania , Kosovo and Bosnia that they still need to make an enormous effort to move equally towards accession .
In any event , peace in the Balkans , on the doorstep to the EU , has become far more important than the accession of Turkey , which is being so fiercely advocated on many sides .
Madam President , today we in the EPP say to the people of Bosnia , of Albania and of Serbia : you are not forgotten ; we have not abandoned you .
We understand , especially to the people of Sarajevo , your frustration .
But at the same time , we say to the people of the European Union , we will not bend the benchmarks .
The rules have to be the same for everybody .
Your security is important for us .
Mainly we say to the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina : take your responsibilities ; put your house in order ; do your homework .
We appreciate the progress that has been achieved recently .
We will ask the Commission to continue to support you but if I have learned anything in my six years of the wars and peace in the Balkans , and believe me , this is an issue very close to my heart , victimism , the blame game and scapegoating belong to the past .
This is an issue of European integration .
We have to look at this from a European perspective and , as Mrs Cecilia Malmström said , the best way to start the U-turn that is needed to go from dependence and victimism is for them to take the country into their hands , and to start those visa reforms which are badly needed and necessary anyway .
I hope we can agree on a clear message to the authorities in the region that we will support them but we will not compromise on the security of our citizens - that they have to take their responsibilities .
I think we should support the Commission proposal , and , to those who think that this could be destabilising , I would like to say that stability will come with European integration .
It is very unfortunate that passports are issued in Zagreb and in Belgrade , and we should definitely try to reduce that as much as possible , but we cannot make different rules for the Bosnian people .
It is not in their interests .
What we can do is to do our part in this Parliament to accelerate the process and make a decision , make our policy so that the Council can take a decision within this year .
( SL ) As you probably know , I am rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs regarding visa liberalisation for the Western Balkan countries .
In July , the European Commission sent us a proposal recommending the lifting of visa requirements for citizens of Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro .
Macedonia has already fulfilled all its obligations , whereas Montenegro and Serbia are required to meet the remaining conditions as soon as possible .
Although I very much welcome the Commission 's proposal and appreciate the demanding nature of this work , I am disappointed by the fact that this document has totally omitted the remaining countries , without even giving them a timetable of any kind .
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania are using a clear roadmap for the lifting of visa requirements and are aware of all the conditions that need to be met before that can happen .
Bosnia and Herzegovina , in particular , achieved great progress on this score during the summer , judging by reports from independent organisations .
The decision to omit Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania from the list is primarily a technical one .
We are all well aware that even the best technical decisions can have major political consequences .
The fact is that it is the Bosniaks who have been omitted from the visa liberalisation process .
We must all take on a share of political responsibility for the implementation of this process , which will be a prerequisite for peace and stability in the Western Balkans .
We also urgently need to think about initiating the visa dialogue with Kosovo , as that will help advance structural reforms .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must not put ourselves in the position of putting the brakes on the lifting of visa requirements for all the countries of the Western Balkans which have a clear European perspective .
Visa liberalisation in the Western Balkans is not a jigsaw puzzle with which you might wish to amuse yourselves .
We are dealing with people here , with their quality of life and mobility , and facilitating the closest cooperation possible , not least , economic cooperation .
( SL ) I congratulate Macedonia and hope that Montenegro and Serbia also get to the same stage .
That would be good for all the three countries and for the Western Balkans as a whole .
It is unfortunate , however , that Bosnia has been omitted from this package .
The efforts made as regards Bosnia have been inadequate and insufficiently successful , and by this I mean both our efforts and theirs .
The main obstacle to progress in Bosnia is the state of mind , the feeling of powerlessness , which is paralysing people and institutions there .
The Bosniaks are the only people in Bosnia who have not been allowed to travel freely throughout Europe .
They do not have a second state to resort to and , for that reason , they have been ghettoised .
They are the only ones who cannot harbour dreams of dual citizenship .
That is humiliating .
They feel overlooked , belittled and punished by the European Union .
We must provide political assistance to the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to enable it to help itself and its citizens .
The European Union shares responsibility for the situation in Bosnia and for the stability of the region .
That responsibility lies with the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Bosnia is close to having its visa requirements lifted .
The only problem left is the problem in people 's heads - in their heads and in our heads .
There is a wall rising between us and them , a wall higher than the Berlin Wall .
Let us break down that wall and let us help Bosnia to get its visa requirements lifted , now , as soon as possible , in the same package as the other three countries in this region .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , we Greens obviously welcome visa liberalisation for Montenegro , Macedonia and Serbia .
That is something I campaigned for very strongly in recent years when I was still a member of the Austrian National Assembly .
It is an important step in the direction of fulfilling the dream of a unified and peaceful Europe .
However , the path on which you have embarked has a number of stumbling blocks .
It will result , above all , in the Muslim citizens of Bosnia feeling discriminated against .
This was already the case when you merely announced that there would be liberalisation for the other states .
You argue on the basis of technical conditions that Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet met , but you apparently overlook the fact that there are still problems in other states which are now being liberalised .
Bosnia has already issued 40 000 biometric passports and has already passed a regulation for displaced persons , which other states do not yet have , and it has introduced an anti-corruption agency , which Serbia , for example , does not yet have .
I get the impression that there is also political discrimination here and I consider that very dangerous for peace in the region and for a multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina .
So to name this danger once again : there is a danger that ethnic dividing lines will be formalised here too .
I therefore call on you to conclude a common package with Bosnia and Albania and to start visa talks with Kosovo .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , certain areas of the Balkans are still unstable and are communication routes for illegal traffic controlled by organised crime networks .
Particularly serious is the traffic in human beings , which often involves exploitation in the form of illegal work or prostitution .
The liberalisation of visas must therefore be accompanied by the rigorous application of security rules , one of which is the introduction of biometric passports .
As far as we are aware , Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina have still not implemented these technical measures in full .
It is therefore crucial that we do not liberalise visas for these two countries until their governments cooperate in full and the technical measures guaranteeing the identity of the parties concerned have been implemented .
A failure to meet requirements does not , in my view , represent discrimination .
( RO ) I am pleased that today we are discussing the visa waiver for some Balkan countries and I must tell you why : my grandparents were born in Macedonia , my father in Albania , my grandmother in Greece and my mother in Bulgaria , while I was born in Romania .
I am here today , thank God , so that I can ask Olli Rehn : is it possible to lift visa requirements for Albania by the middle of 2010 , as has been promised ?
This is a question which I would like an answer to because it touches on my emotions , my relations , my family and my roots which lie across almost the entire Balkans .
Please God .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we were all delighted about the proposed liberalisation of visas .
We have already been fighting for this in this Parliament for a long time and now a start has been made .
That is not enough for us .
I think that the wrong wording was chosen in June .
Today - as we have heard - there are still problems in Serbia and in Montenegro .
So why did we not include Albania and Bosnia in this wording and say , here too there are problems that need to be overcome ?
That would not have caused too much damage .
It is , of course , a fact that the politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina have little interest in improving what is , from every point of view , the awkward situation of their fellow countrymen .
Why should they ?
They have a job , they can travel , they waste their time with useless nationalistic conflicts , instead , for example , of working for a good school system , for a good infrastructure , for a good health system , nor have they ensured that the benchmarks for visa liberalisation are in place .
Visa liberalisation would bring a breath of fresh air at long last to this nationalistic fug in Bosnia and Herzegovina and finally give the young generation hope .
However , since the announcement of the Commission 's evaluation , measures have been taken in Bosnia and Herzegovina to combat corruption and a number of important laws have been set in motion , so that the technical preconditions can be met in autumn .
However , it is not just a question of technical preconditions ; it is also a question of the political aspect of things .
There is the question of the biometric passports ; I know that not many have yet been issued and I would sincerely call on the Commission and some of the Member States to help issue these biometric passports .
Technical assistance means a great deal .
The Council , the Commission and local politicians must really make every effort to stop the ethnic divide in this country from widening further still .
A refusal to liberalise visas for Bosnia and Herzegovina would ghettoise the Muslims , as the Croats and Serbs have a way out of this country .
The Bosnian passport - normally a passport is unmistakable proof of a nation - will be worthless in the eyes of its holders if it does not open the door to the EU .
I would ask the Commission and the Council to help these countries .
Albania will manage .
They have a new government ; they will manage , but Kosovo will only manage if you all help .
You have our support .
You do not need to turn a blind eye , but you should set political standards , not just police standards .
( SK ) The liberalisation of visa policies in the Western Balkans is both a politically sensitive issue and a highly sensitive issue in human terms for the inhabitants of these states and this region .
At present , we are talking about Montenegro , Macedonia and Serbia , which is very important in a historical context , but we should not introduce a two-speed system in the Western Balkans on a long-term basis and we must bring Bosnia and Herzegovina , in particular , into this process as quickly as possible and also Albania of course .
The Western Balkans have close geographical , cultural and historical ties to the European Union and to our Member States , and despite the extremely turbulent events that have unfolded there in recent times , it must be said that both the reforms and our expectations are gradually being fulfilled and that political leaders in these states really are making great efforts to meet our expectations .
In my speech , I would therefore possibly like to ask not only the Council and the Commission but also everyone here in the European Parliament to support the leaders of the various states in their efforts and to provide them with assistance in respect of those issues that have yet to be resolved .
We must also not forget that the countries of the Western Balkans are of great geopolitical importance to us for many reasons .
As Serbia and Montenegro now face important domestic challenges which we all hope they will overcome , I would like to stress once more that it would be very appropriate to fix a date as soon as possible for those countries that have been excluded from the process , by which I mean Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
Madam President , these measures allow visa-free access to the EU Schengen group Member States from Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia as from January 2010 .
The Commission envisages giving Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina visa-free access possibly by mid-2010 .
So within 12 months , we could see another 20.7 million people given free access to the EU .
Strictly speaking , this should not affect the UK , which is not a member of the Schengen group , but in reality it will .
Access to the EU for millions more people from some of the poorest and most corrupt countries in Europe will enable them to cross the first barrier in gaining illegal entry to Britain .
These countries will eventually be full members of the EU anyway , with full legal access to the EU .
These measures are yet another undermining of Britain 's ability to control her own borders , and yet another reason why Britain should leave the European Union .
( BG ) Madam President , we are all clearly aware of the advantages and disadvantages of free movement , but let us look at it from another aspect .
Are the three countries in question really fulfilling the fundamental criteria required in order to be granted such privileges as part of the visa waiver ?
The Bulgarian minority in Serbia has been totally neglected and discriminated against for almost a century now , while Macedonia , ever since its foundation , has pursued in practice a constant and consistent anti-Bulgarian policy .
The latest act committed by Macedonia in this regard was to arrest the Bulgarian citizen Spaska Mitrova and give her an exceptionally harsh sentence .
Mitrova is a member of the Bulgarian association ' Ratko ' .
This association was banned in Macedonia , which resulted in Macedonia being ordered to pay a fine for breach of human rights .
The Bulgarian public find it unacceptable that concessions are made to countries that breach the rights of Bulgarian citizens , in other words , citizens of the European Union .
( HU ) I think it is important that the moment has come when we can finally talk properly about the issue of visa-free travel with regard to the Western Balkan countries .
It is gratifying that these countries , which have fulfilled the commitments they have made to date , can also be instrumental in making the process of crossing borders as smooth as possible .
As a Hungarian MEP , I cannot but support these efforts because they will make it possible for Hungarians living in Vojvodina in Serbia , for example , to establish a more direct link with the mother country .
Citizens who live on either side of these borders and who speak the same language and foster close family and cultural ties will not be able to find sufficient words to express the importance of being able to cross borders without any barrier or visa .
On this point , although not closely linked to visa-free travel , certain forward-looking decisions have also been taken , such as the law recently adopted in Serbia governing the operation of the minorities ' national councils .
These mark serious progress in terms of the institutional protection of minorities ' rights .
Facilitating visa-free travel cannot be regarded simply as a technical issue .
It is a very clear political matter .
A vital contribution is made to these countries ' political stability , knowing what entitlements they are granted with a passport from their own states and to what extent it is recognised by the European Union .
It would be unacceptable if the negative differentiation among the states in the region were to continue in the long term .
This is why I appeal to the key responsibility of the Commission and the Council in these matters .
The European Union has the political responsibility to offer the Western Balkan countries the prospect of joining the European Union. it should help these countries catch up and encourage the formation and strengthening of their democratic institutions , which includes minority rights as well .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
I too would like to welcome Mrs Cecilia Malmström and Commissioner Barrot .
I am also delighted with this proposal that has been put forward .
As a former Hungarian Foreign Minister , I have worked very hard together with others to bring the Western Balkan countries closer to the European Union and make them take the next step on the path to accession .
We also know that , from this perspective , visa-free travel is the thing which people perhaps understand and feel the most .
It now paves the way for them to enjoy freedom of movement and to form closer human relationships .
Perhaps it will also help with what I think we all consider important , which is sustaining the motivation of these countries during the very difficult process which accession entails .
We know that some very serious steps must be taken .
Very often , certain traditions need to be transcended which we know it is not easy to transcend .
It is very important that the three countries are now given visa-free travel .
I would also like to draw your attention to a view which has been voiced many times today , namely , that the balance in the Western Balkan countries is very delicate .
There were already ethnic tensions before the war , but they have still remained following the war .
We must therefore assess every kind of measure from the perspective of whether it will decrease or increase these tensions .
In the case of Bosnia , as has been mentioned several times today , this decision is not only beneficial and important because Bosnia has now been left out , but also because a large number of Bosnian citizens who have a Croatian or Serbian passport will enjoy visa-free travel , while the remainder will not .
The same situation applies to Kosovan citizens too , so that anyone who can obtain their passport in Serbia will enjoy visa-free travel .
I believe that it is important for us to emphasise once again that a political decision must be made , not only a technical one .
For this reason , it is our responsibility to help these countries achieve visa-free travel as soon as possible , within a very specific timeframe .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , I too share Mr Weber 's security concerns , having spent ten years in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
This subject has a profoundly foreign policy dimension .
I am from a generation which grew up with hundreds of thousands of so-called Yugoslavian foreign workers .
During the communist dictatorship , the people of southeast Europe living on the borders of Yugoslavia were free to travel , despite the communist dictatorship .
Today we talk of Europeanisation , we send in troops and officials , we spend a great deal of money and , at the same time , we are imprisoning young people in these countries .
That is why the liberalisation of this visa regime is urgently needed .
However , I too have a number of criticisms to make : firstly I am delighted that Macedonia is on board .
Macedonia is exemplary in meeting the criteria , but we should not cite this to Macedonia as compensation for its justified wish to have a date finally set for accession negotiations .
Secondly , Kosovo : it has been said that it must abide by the rules of play , but a player can only abide by the rules of play if they are allowed on to the playing field .
Kosovo has not been allowed on to the playing field .
We intervened militarily , in order to liberate the Kosovars from oppression .
Now the country of the former oppressors are to enjoy visa waiver - and I welcome this , because there is no collective guilt - and Kosovo cannot aspire to it .
Even if there are shortcomings there , it is we who must beat our breasts , because we basically administer this country .
In other words , we must give Kosovo every opportunity , because if Serbia enjoys visa waiver in the long run and Kosovo is absolutely excluded , that will lead to unacceptable distortions .
Thirdly , Bosnia and Herzegovina : I - like several Members - signed the protest against the exclusion of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This land of three nations - badly designed under the Dayton Agreement , which is in dire need of review - with an international administration , which is equally guilty of inefficiency , must ultimately be given an opportunity to take the path to Europe , without being disintegrated .
Disintegration for Kosovo or Bosnia would endanger our security more than any technical details .
( EL ) Madam President , we must acknowledge that the visa waiver for Serbia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro is an important step towards the European integration of the Western Balkans .
However , it should apply to all the nations in the Western Balkans and avoid creating new dividing lines in the area .
Of course , no one can justifiably maintain that the European Commission is biased against the Muslim citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
On the other hand , we should not forget the peculiar status of Kosovo , whose independence is not recognised by all Member States of the European Union .
We want the inhabitants of Kosovo to benefit from the visa waiver ; however , whatever the solution found , it must not prejudice the final arrangements concerning its status .
The Commission has acted correctly in not closing the door to Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania .
However , it must proceed swiftly , so that no new divisions threaten stability in the area .
For their part , of course , the states need to make the necessary reforms which , lest we forget , touch on the question of security and combating organised crime .
This Parliament has stressed for years that easier contact with the outside world and greater facility for travel will reinforce peace , exchanges at all levels and , ultimately , stability .
The issue of visas is not simply a technical issue ; it is a deeply political issue which affects the European future of the area and all the nations in the area have a right to that future .
( SV ) Madam President , I think that at this stage in the debate there is no longer any doubt of the importance of visa liberalisation to the citizens of the Balkans .
The ability to travel freely is , along with education , perhaps the most important tool that we can offer the new generations , of whom we expect so much commitment to the democratisation process throughout the region .
Consequently , I welcome the proposal on visa liberalisation for Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro .
The progress of any individual country on its journey towards the EU represents progress for the whole of the Balkans .
Some of these countries have had to wait a long time ; some perhaps longer than necessary .
We in the European Parliament and the two countries not yet included in visa liberalisation should learn lessons from this .
Although this is a highly sensitive political issue , I would like to point out that the rules on visa liberalisation are clear and universal .
The conditions must be met .
Let us not make this more of a political issue than is necessary , however .
Let us look at what remains to be done and how we can ensure as quickly as possible that Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania are soon also able to join the family of visa-free countries .
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great progress recently and will soon have fulfilled most of the remaining requirements in the roadmap .
I therefore call on the players in Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt the anti-corruption act and lay down rules for the exchange of information between the different parts of the police service as quickly as possible .
I urge them to try to ensure that this work is completed by the end of September , before a report is sent back to the Commission .
In its new analysis , I then expect the Commission in turn to judge what progress has actually been made and , once the EU 's requirements have been met , to propose that the Council approve visa liberalisation for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I hope that this can take effect in July 2010 .
( RO ) Madam President , Commissioner , the visa waiver for some of the countries which belong to the Western Balkans region marks an initial confirmation of the European Union 's commitment to continuing the European process of integration .
However , I believe that unfortunately , the Commission 's proposal is incomplete .
Citizens from Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will not enjoy the same treatment , which is going to create differences between citizens in the Balkans .
I would like to remind you that there is already a division between the previous generation , which benefited from the opening up of the former Republic of Yugoslavia to Europe , and the current generation , which has not enjoyed equal treatment from the European Union .
However , this proposal will result in citizens of countries in the former Republic of Yugoslavia who do not benefit from the visa waiver trying to obtain a second passport in a country belonging to the former Yugoslav federation , which the European Union accepts without a visa .
We have already come across this type of scenario in the case of Moldovan or Georgian passports versus Russian passports .
I believe that the logical solution is to apply the same treatment to all Balkan countries and , at the same time , I call on the Commission to look into including Moldova as well among the group of countries in south-east Europe .
( RO ) As an MEP and socialist , I welcome the communication from the Council and Commission on the visa regime for the three Western Balkan countries .
It is a first definite step towards their integration into the European Union , a first achievement for future EU citizens in the Western Balkans .
However , I also appreciate that the lack of any clear prospect in the form of a roadmap for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Albania and Kosovo must be a matter of utmost concern to us .
I am not only talking about the disappointment among the general public , but particularly about the risk to political stability in the three countries .
Above all , I am expecting the European Parliament and the newly formed European Commission to maintain a predictable schedule for integrating the Western Balkans into the European Union .
It is the only way that we can fulfil the mandate which we were elected for : to unite Europe .
( RO ) Madam President , one minute will be more than enough for me to welcome an historic decision for both the Balkans and Europe .
I believe that freedom of movement is the gateway to democracy and knowledge .
You have given these three countries an opportunity .
However , at the same time , I believe that Europe is also a Europe of regulations which , as European citizens , every one of us must abide by .
You have put forward this proposal because you have assessed that the rules and conditions that we set have been met .
I am of the view that you will submit a proposal to extend this to Albania and Bulgaria when these European regulations have been met .
In your decision , you will certainly draw up a recommendation for speeding up this process .
I am one of those who think that this is not an issue of discrimination .
Quite the opposite , in fact .
I feel that this process will help encourage the other two countries to perform better and meet these conditions because , since the adoption of this decision , the other three countries have proved that when they wanted their peoples to enjoy a different status , they were willing to do what it takes .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I am in favour of liberalisation and of European integration up to and including the completion of this mosaic that is the Western Balkans because , as someone said earlier , we need the Balkans to be stable .
This integration is therefore crucial and must happen as soon as possible .
However , on the subject of immigration - which we spoke about yesterday and which represented security and human rights - we must be very careful , because I believe that the checks must be carried out thoroughly , and not made easier .
The timescales must correspond to these checks , which should be speeded up if possible .
Next , I note that there is a gap in this area , about which very little has been said , and that gap is Kosovo .
You will understand me perfectly well when I say that this gap makes it quite simple for people from the other countries to travel between Kosovo and Macedonia .
I know that a report is being prepared that will tell us something in the next few days , but please give us some more information about Kosovo this evening .

( NL ) Madam President , the Minister said it so well : visa liberalisation is necessary in order to strengthen a bond with the EU , prevent rising nationalism and avoid isolation .
How can it be possible , then , that the proposals threaten to isolate the Bosnian Muslims ?
Great inequality is arising within a single country , as Serbian and Croatian Bosnians do receive a passport .
The Muslims , however , sadly have no neighbouring country that will give them a passport .
Who will stand up for the Bosnian Muslims ?
Will the Commission do it ?
Will the Council ?
Can you tell me for certain whether the Commission or the Council have held talks with Croatia and Serbia about exercising restraint in the issuing of passports as it should be clear that their actions will create a great deal of unrest .

( BG ) I would like to congratulate Mr Barrot for the European Commission 's position on liberalising the visa regime for the Western Balkans .
As Foreign Minister at the time when visa requirements for Bulgaria were lifted , I know the great emotional effect the visa waiver and ending of humiliation had on our citizens .
At the same time , however , as an MEP , I cannot but agree with Mrs Pack and Mrs Bildt that true European solidarity involves the European Union providing logistical help in meeting criteria rather than deviating from them , as this has a demoralising effect on societies and absolves governments of responsibility .
The change must come as a reward for the effort put in , not as a double standard .
The societies of the Western Balkans have to get used to demanding their governments to do their job .
They must know that the visa regime is being delayed not because of European nit-picking , but because they have not done their bit .
Solidarity should be given in return for taking responsibility .
When a position of principle is at stake , a person 's religion and ethnicity do not matter .
( RO ) I support the European Commission 's decision , which embodies the commitment shown for years on end with regard to the visa waiver for citizens of the Western Balkans region .
However , I believe that the citizens of the Republic of Moldova should enjoy the same rights regarding the freedom of movement in the EU as soon as possible .
The European Union must continue to develop its open-door policy to these countries , and the visa waiver is an important step on the path to European integration for these peoples .
To supplement this decision , which will lead to the development of cross-border business opportunities and allow people the freedom of movement , European institutions must consider organising cultural and educational programmes which will publicise European values in these countries .
Against this background , reinforcing border security and combating international crime must continue to be a priority .
Finally , I wish to reconfirm that Romania has not recognised Kosovo 's independence .
( SL ) I would like to express my satisfaction with the progress of the visa liberalisation process over the past 18 months .
This is a major achievement and I would urge you to make rapid steps to continue in the same vein .
In the past few days , we have received reports from Sarajevo that the process of fulfilling the roadmap requirements is gathering pace , despite all the difficulties .
This also holds true of areas as sensitive as police coordination between Banja Luka and Sarajevo .
I call on the Commission and the Council to monitor this progress on a continuing basis and to be responsive to it .
The European Union must be capable of bringing its influence to bear on any political forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina which are seeking to sabotage this process .
The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina must not be allowed to suffer because of the irresponsibility of their politicians and we have an obligation to help them in that regard .
I call on the Commission to include Bosnia and Herzegovina within the visa-free zone as soon as possible .
A selective approach to visa lifting will not strengthen the European prospects of any Western Balkan country whose communities are divided , because selectivity brings with it new divisions .
I welcome every move that combats selectivity and firmly believe that lifting visa requirements for all those countries would certainly help improve the image of the European Union in the eyes of the people in these countries who need an opening on the world after years of conflict .
I would also like to point out that there are thousands of young people living in these countries who have never been able to travel abroad .
Their only source of knowledge about Europe and the world is television .
We have an obligation to strengthen their European prospects as well .
I am aware of the security considerations , but those leaving their countries with ill intentions will find a way to cross into the EU anyway .
However , we are holding back hundreds of thousands of those who have good intentions .
I would , therefore , urge the Council and the Commission to review their positions as soon as possible , to follow up the progress in these countries , and to lift visa requirements for the countries which were not included in the first group . Thank you very much .
Naturally , I call on the governments of these Western Balkan countries to fulfil their obligations as soon as possible , in the interests of their citizens and their EU accession prospects .
Madam President , the liberalisation of the visa regime for the Western Balkan countries is important , as this measure matters most to ordinary citizens in the region and it will clearly show the benefits of the EU rapprochement process .
I am confident that the conditional inclusion on the white list of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will prove to be a strong incentive for meeting the rest of the benchmarks on the road map .
In our case , back in 2001 , such a strong signal was sent , and in a couple of months , we managed to fulfil all pending conditions .
It is essential that Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are included on the Schengen white list as soon as possible , and the Commission should provide all the necessary technical assistance to the authorities of these two countries in order to meet the necessary conditions in a short while .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SV ) Madam President , there is no doubt that visa liberalisation is incredibly important for the people of the Balkans .
Just like you , I have met many frustrated people - particularly young people - who are unable to travel around Europe as they would like , unable to visit their friends , unable to enjoy the freedoms that we all have .
It goes without saying that achieving visa freedom for these people would be good for them , good for their countries , good for the whole region and good for the EU .
That is why I am delighted that the conditions are already in place to give this opportunity to the three countries mentioned - the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia - at the end of the year .
It is regrettable that not all the countries of the Western Balkans can be included in this proposal at present , but let there be no doubt that the Swedish Presidency is extremely keen to strengthen the integration process - and eventually the enlargement process - in the Balkan region .
Those of you who know me will be aware of just how committed I am to this matter .
If this commitment is to be credible and become a reality , however , we must insist on the conditions being met .
It is essential that we do so for the sake of the people of the Western Balkans as well as for the benefit of our own citizens .
We must ensure that the criteria set are met .
As Mr Weber said , we cannot make concessions where foreign policy is concerned just to be nice .
That applies whether we are talking about visas or accession .
I know that the people of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are disappointed .
I can understand that .
They have not been forgotten , however .
We will do everything we can to help them and to make visa liberalisation possible , and that includes in technical terms .
We must give a clear political signal that the opportunity is there for them to be included .
That is what we are doing today .
However , it is up to the authorities and politicians in those countries to finish off the job .
I do not believe that a time lag between the removal of visas for the first three countries and for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will cause instability .
On the contrary , it shows that the EU keeps its word and that if they do what is necessary , then we will keep our promises .
We must support them and we must help them .
I believe they will be able to get a positive report from the Commission in 2010 .
Commissioner Barrot has also said as much .
Where Kosovo is concerned , discussions on the visa regime started back when Kosovo was still part of Serbia , but we are working on finding a solution .
I hope that the Commission will point the way forward in its report so that in the longer term , we can also bring about visa liberalisation for the people of Kosovo .
The proposed visa liberalisation for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia is a very important first step .
I hope you will help us to take it .
I also hope that very soon , we will be able to move on and take the next step for the rest of the region .
Madam President , I would firstly like to mention that this is a groundbreaking step .
It is the first time that we have really had a regional approach .
I would add that this road map method is one based on very objective , very precise criteria , which also help encourage these future Member States to actually realise that we have a Europe of rules , a Europe of values .
I would like to stress that point .
You will not be surprised that the Commission is particularly attentive to everything that contributes to the fight against people trafficking and against corruption .
It is important , this Europe of values .
We must be particularly mindful of this .
I do not know if some of you understood me correctly : I stated clearly that , in the course of 2010 , we hope to make proposals for Bosnia and Herzegovina and for Albania .
There is , therefore , a process in motion which does not aim to discriminate against anyone .
We simply want the road map 's objective criteria to be observed increasingly .
It is true that in the case of Albania , the issuing of biometric passports still has to be improved .
I myself went to Albania to present the first biometric passport in that country and I can tell you that I gave as much encouragement as possible to see that Albania , its political leaders and those of Bosnia and Herzegovina , are fully aware of the efforts required .
We are helping them to establish civil registers , for example , because no matter how hard you try to provide biometric passports , if there is no civil register , it is not possible .
Thus , we are helping them technically .
It is quite clear that in all this , Albania , in particular , must implement the existing framework for combating organised crime and corruption .
In Bosnia and Herzegovina , there also has to be good border control and closer cooperation between police authorities .
That is what we want .
I think that we have good reason to believe that , in 2010 , these two countries will also benefit from the abolition of visas .
I would also like to say to you quite simply that for us there is no question of ethnic or religious discrimination .
Incidentally , in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , there is a significant Muslim minority .
There is no question of discriminating against the 25 or 30 % of Muslim Albanians in Macedonia .
Therefore , I would really like to reassure you and to tell you that this is part of a process that we have planned and that the Council has willingly accepted .
I will also give you an answer on Kosovo .
In March 2009 , an expert mission funded by the Commission resulted in some positive findings .
It is true that the Commission is also encouraging Member States to establish effective consular missions in Pristina .
I can confirm that we will have a report , which will be submitted shortly , on the exact situation in Kosovo .
It is quite clear that in all this we want to open this European perspective to all of the Balkan countries , and we are thinking in particular about the young generation .
Some of you have put particular emphasis on the fact that travel and much easier exchanges with other European Union Member States are , of course , very beneficial .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is why , once more , we will build a Europe of regulations and of values that we hold very dear .
I will tell you quite simply , we are on the right road , but evidently we still need to see a final push by two of the states .
I hope that in 2010 , they will also be able to see the visas waived .
That is what I can tell you , giving you the assurance , in any event , that the Commission 's process is one which is objective , which is really very attentive and not at all conducted in a spirit of any sort of discrimination , but in a spirit of cooperation .
I am personally very committed to this .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Commission and European Council are being called on to make an announcement soon about opening up the EU zone to the citizens of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro .
This is a very important moment for more than 10 million European inhabitants who would like a visa to cross the EU 's border .
Macedonia was on Europe 's side when Europe needed it .
Even Serbia has realised that Europe wants it to come onboard , but it needs to be reconciled with its recent past to do this .
Serbia has worked closely with the international institutions , such as the International Criminal Tribunal , and has acknowledged the mistakes of the past .
The time has come for Europe to reward the efforts of these states for coming into line with the democratic and economic requirements which are typical of the EU-27 .
Their journey has not been easy , but the efforts which have been made must be fully recognised .
Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro have definitely taken the turning for the European Union .
This is why I think that the EU must decide in favour of lifting the visa requirements imposed on citizens from these three countries .
Their governments have demonstrated that they share the same values as we do .
A positive decision would therefore give new impetus to the internal reforms , which are very much needed in Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative to remove the visa system for citizens from the Western Balkans region , more specifically the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro .
Such measures , intended to bring these states and the EU closer together with a view to integration , will reduce the potential for conflict in the region significantly .
As far as Romania is concerned , which shares a border with Serbia , this kind of measure can only serve to provide a further guarantee of amicable cross-border relations .
This measure will contribute to a greater freedom of movement for the Romanian population in Romania and Serbia , as well as support the development of commercial relations between our country and Serbia and Montenegro .
I am confident that removing the visa system for these three countries mentioned above is only the start of the process , with the measure being extended later on to Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Although they have not yet met the Commission 's requirements , I believe that with coordinated efforts , the results will become evident in a short time , Before I end , I would like to emphasise that the visa waiver and the freedom of movement for people in the Western Balkans must not arouse fears , but establish the belief that Europe 's security zone is being extended for the benefit of all of us .
in writing . - ( HU ) The European Union has become stronger after every expansion , not only because it has created a common market for almost 500 million citizens , but also because it has guaranteed stability in Central and Eastern Europe .
The Balkan countries are an integral part of Europe .
The economic crisis or the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty must not delay the process leading to these countries ' accession to the European Union .
I firmly believe that extending the expansion process to the Balkans is a vital process which the European Union must support in order to strengthen its global role .
We must not forget that the Balkan countries ' catch-up process , along with the healing of the wounds from the bloody war at the end of the 20th century , guarantee the European Union 's stability and the region 's well-being .
Waiving the visa requirement for Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is a vitally important event for these countries as part of their process of catching up , while also reflecting the European Union 's responsibility to the region .
This process must be resolutely continued .
It will then enable Bosnia and Herzegovina , Albania and - at the appropriate time - Kosovo to benefit as soon as possible , after meeting the relevant conditions , from the application of visa-free travel .
I support , without reservation , the view of those European politicians who think that suppressing the Balkan countries ' ambitions to join the EU would entail unforeseeable , damaging consequences .
Situation in Lithuania following the adoption of the law on protection of minors ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council by Sophia in ' t Veld , Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert , Leonidas Donskis , Gianni Vattimo , Sarah Ludford , Ulrike Lunacek , Raül Romeva i Rueda , Jean Lambert and Judith Sargentini , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0201 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Sophia in ' t Veld , Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert , Leonidas Donskis , Gianni Vattimo , Sarah Ludford , Ulrike Lunacek , Raül Romeva i Rueda , Jean Lambert and Judith Sargentini , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0202 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Rui Tavares , Cornelia Ernst , Cornelis de Jong , Marie-Christine Vergiat , Willy Meyer and Kyriacos Triantaphyllides , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0204 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Rui Tavares , Cornelia Ernst , Cornelis de Jong , Marie-Christine Vergiat , Willy Meyer and Kyriacos Triantaphyllides , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0205 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Michael Cashman , Claude Moraes and Emine Bozkurt , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0206 / 2009 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Michael Cashman , Claude Moraes and Emine Bozkurt , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , on the Lithuanian Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information - B7-0207 / 2009 ) .
author . - Madam President , I think this is a very important subject that we are discussing here today .
It is about European values .
We put in the oral question and we have also drafted a joint resolution about the Lithuanian law , which is allegedly about the protection of minors .
But it actually does the contrary , because this law may well foster ignorance , taboo and stigma .
It will expose young and vulnerable gay , lesbian and transgender people to bullying and exclusion .
It will therefore lead to immeasurable distress and suffering by young people , the very people that this law is designed to protect .
Instead of protection , it inflicts harm on young people .
Therefore we have addressed this question , and I am very happy that in the summer , we received a letter from Commissioner Barrot expressing the European Commission 's concern about this law , saying that the European Commission will keep a very close eye on it and make sure that any national legislation is in line with European legislation and principles .
I think that is very important , because the European Commission should not only intervene when market rules are being violated but also , and in particular , when European values are being violated .
We cannot tolerate discrimination .
Europe is a community of values - values which I know are shared by the majority of our Lithuanian fellow citizens .
We are all Europeans .
With reference to the resolution , colleagues , I would ask for your explicit support for the resolution and , in particular , for the amendment that seeks to insert a reference to the existing anti-discrimination directives , because I think that is the very minimum .
I also ask for your support for the request in the resolution to ask the Fundamental Rights Agency for a legal opinion on this law .
Finally , I think we can be proud , as a European Parliament - if we adopt the resolution tomorrow - to be the voice of the shared values of Europe .
Madam President , as the previous speaker said , this law passed in Lithuania endangers European values , European law and also the freedom of people , namely the freedom of young people who are lesbian , gay , bisexual or perhaps transgender , to live their life without fear .
According to this law , factual information on this is supposedly damaging to these young people .
I can tell you what that means : it means that these young people must live in fear and possibly suffer depression .
We know that there is an increased rate of attempted suicide among young people who are lesbian or gay or who are confused in their coming-out phase about how they will live their lives .
This law flies in the face of European values , which is why I was delighted that Commissioner Barrot responded on this back in July .
You also told the European region of the International Lesbian and Gay Association ( ILGA ) that the Commission would analyse this text and explain what its next steps would be .
What I am interested in today is what you intend to do .
What have you - and the Council - already promised the Lithuanian Parliament ?
We know that the former Lithuanian President and the new president , who used to be a commissioner , do not approve of this law , but the parliament is insisting on it .
I am delighted that a proposal is on the table today , including a motion for a resolution .
I truly hope that we shall all accept the resolution tomorrow and can petition the European Union Agency on Fundamental Rights to take a position on this law , as that is what it is there for .
In the meantime , it should be quite clear in our common Europe that lesbians and gays will not disappear from families and schools merely because a law prohibits information on them .
Being different is normal , including in this , our common Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , this law begins by claiming to protect children against the promotion of homosexuality in public information .
What does that actually mean ?
Does it mean that if I have a cinema in Vilnius and want to put up a poster for the film Brokeback Mountain , I cannot do so ?
Does it mean that if I give a lecture on homosexuality in a public place , theatre or university in Lithuania , I cannot do so ?
Does it mean - as has already been discussed in the Lithuanian Parliament - that I will have to pay a fine of up to EUR 1 500 or do a month 's community service under the changes to the criminal code that are currently being debated in Lithuania ?
Can a television programme , for example , show a homosexual couple that is happy , or must it only show one that is unhappy ?
Ladies and gentlemen , there was a date that surprised me when these amendments to the law on the protection of minors in Lithuania were passed : it was 14 July 2009 .
14 July is , of course , the day when we gathered here for the first time in this seventh parliamentary term , and also the day marking the 220th anniversary of our European principles , including the right to seek happiness , the principle of freedom of expression and even the principle of freedom of assembly .
Now the freedom of assembly is also at risk , because the Lithuanian Parliament , again , has more recently been discussing the possibility of banning events such as ' gay pride ' marches .
Well , when we gathered here for the first time on 14 July 2009 , it was because we had a duty - I would say a sacred duty - to defend these values , and these are the values that are at stake .
We know how those things begin , and we also know where they always lead .
What are we going to do next ?
Appoint a committee to see what is and what is not promotion of homosexuality ?
Where - in books , theatres , cinemas , advertising ?
Vilnius is one of this year 's European capitals of culture , deservedly so , and certainly much to the delight of all Europeans .
Being a European capital of culture also entails responsibilities , however : the responsibility of promoting European culture for the best reasons and not to put it under the spotlight this year for the wrong reasons .
I therefore appeal for a vote in favour of our resolution and call on the Agency for Fundamental Rights to issue an opinion on this very serious topic .
That is certainly the least that the Members of this House can ask .
author . - Madam President , can I say , as a gay man , I am proud that this House and others are speaking out against this proposed law .
This proposed law will clearly breach EU treaties on human rights , particularly Article 6 , as well as the Employment Framework Directive and general policies on non-discrimination .
It also , interestingly , breaches the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , in that it encourages discrimination against young lesbians and gay people .
So , whom does it protect , and from what ?
The British Conservatives introduced in Great Britain a similar law in 1988 .
It was recognised then , and recognised now , that these laws lead to censorship and the promotion of discrimination and homophobia : discrimination and homophobia which destroys people 's lives and blights the souls of those who practise it .
The proposed law has been condemned by NGOs , including the International Lesbian and Gay Association , the Council of Europe and Amnesty International , as well as others .
It affects young lesbians and gay men - teachers , public officials - and could be used to prevent young people having access to any material - films , books , plays , works of art - created by a gay man or a lesbian .
Are they going to try and stop young people studying the works of Plato , Shakespeare , Oscar Wilde , Walt Whitman , Tennessee Williams , Tchaikovsky and others , the music of Elton John , or idolising tennis greats such as Martina Navratilova ?
It will affect the very way young people and others speak , think and act .
And why ?
Young people need education , not isolation ; they need to understand the world in all its diversity and be taught respect for those who are different .
The love of one human being for another is never lessened by gender or sexuality : it is love .
Lesbians and gay men are ordinary men and women made extraordinary by extremists ' preoccupation with our sex lives and the defamation that lesbians and gay men are a threat to society .
That is a vile misrepresentation .
Any civilised society is judged not by how it treats its majority but how it treats its minorities .
So I say to Lithuanians and people across Europe : reject this dangerous step back to the past .
( Applause )
Madam President , allow me to start by underlining that freedom of expression and non-discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity are cornerstones of our democratic societies .
Our Union is based on various principles and values that all the Member States are expected to support .
We cannot insist on and stand up for respect for human rights in other countries if we cannot uphold these fundamental principles ourselves within the EU .
These fundamental rights and , in particular , freedom of expression and the right not to suffer discrimination , are recognised in Article 6 of the Treaty establishing the European Union and are also contained in Articles 10 and 14 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
These principles are further stated in the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
There is legislation at Community level to safeguard this area .
Directive 2000 / 78 / EC prohibits discrimination in the workplace on the grounds of religion or creed , disability , age or sexual orientation .
Last year , the Commission tabled a proposal to extend this protection to other areas .
This proposal is currently under discussion in the Council and Parliament has submitted a positive opinion .
We welcome this initiative and hope it will be adopted before long .
This is about legislation at European level .
At national level , Member States can adopt national legislation in the area of fundamental freedoms and rights provided - and I repeat : provided - that this legislation fully respects the Union 's and the Community 's primary and secondary legislation , falls within an area in which the Community does not exclusively have competence , and is justified by the fact that there is no legislation at Union or Community level .
The law in question that was adopted by the Lithuanian Parliament in July and the proposed amendment of the Criminal Code and administrative law that is being discussed are a cause of great concern for the Swedish Presidency .
However , we must not forget that the law has not yet entered into force .
From our perspective , a law that aims to ban the promotion of a certain sexual orientation violates fundamental values such as freedom of expression and the fact that all people are equal .
The Presidency has made this position clear in contacts with the Lithuanian Government on repeated occasions .
As regards the more legal issues raised by Members in their speeches , it is important to point out that the Council does not have a formal role here .
Compatibility between national legislation and the treaties is not a matter for the Council , nor is it a matter for the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
It is up to the Commission to judge whether a Member State is meeting its obligations under the treaties .
That involves not only monitoring whether Union and Community legislation is correctly transposed and implemented nationally , but also ensuring that primary law at European level is fully respected .
As I am sure Mr Barrot will say , the Commission can initiate appropriate proceedings if it considers that a Member State is not complying with primary or secondary legislation .
Where Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community is concerned , the Council would be deeply concerned if it were to find cases of discrimination on the grounds of gender , race , ethnic origin , religion , disability , age or sexual orientation .
However , a proposal from the Commission is required if the Council is to initiate a discussion of whether discrimination is taking place and the measures to be taken if so .
In the same way , under Article 7 of the Treaty , the Council can only take action if a third of the Member States or the Commission put forward such a proposal with due justification .
Since the law has not yet entered into force , no such proposal has been tabled .
I can assure Members that the matter of discrimination against LGBT people is on the Swedish Presidency 's agenda .
We will be discussing it at an equality summit in Stockholm on 16-17 November .
Naturally we take the European Parliament 's concern very seriously .
It is about respect for fundamental rights and human rights .
In formal terms , however , this must be dealt with within the legal and institutional frameworks .
As the Council 's representative , I have tried to answer the questions as correctly as possible and explain the limitations .
I look forward to hearing the viewpoints of the representatives of the Commission on this matter .
Madam President , the Minister has explained very well the legal elements of this problem .
I would like to say here that the Commission has repeatedly expressed its firm condemnation of all forms of homophobia .
The phenomenon represents a flagrant violation of human dignity .
The Commission notably repeated this position before the European Parliament on 23 April 2007 , during the plenary session in which the Resolution on homophobia in Europe was adopted .
In areas that fall under the umbrella of Community competences , the European Union , as well as the Member States when they implement Union law , are required to respect fundamental rights .
These are binding principles of Community law .
The Lithuanian law for the protection of minors against the detrimental effects of public information largely falls within the scope of Community competences , as its contents concern implementation of the Directives on audiovisual services and on electronic commerce .
Therefore , the Commission informed the Lithuanian authorities , even before the adoption of the draft law , that some measures of this law would raise serious concerns in relation to their compatibility with fundamental rights and Community law .
In spite of this warning , it would seem that the current version of the law adopted on 14 July last does not dispel the concerns expressed by the Commission beforehand .
In this context , the Commission can only express reservations , and serious reservations , on the compatibility of this law with the principles of freedom of expression , the principle of non-discrimination , and with children 's rights , including their right to access information necessary for their development .
The Commission will not hesitate to take every measure necessary to ensure respect for Community law , including , of course , fundamental rights .
According to information made available to the Commission , a working group has been established in Lithuania on the initiative of the President , Mrs Grybauskaitė , in order to introduce additional amendments to this law .
These amendments should be proposed at the end of October .
The Commission will , of course , await the outcome of the work of this committee and the contents of the amendments before giving a definitive opinion on the law such as it will enter into force .
Indeed , I can only support Mrs Malmström 's very clear point that it is up to the Commission to monitor the situation and ultimately to propose sanctions and to punish breaches of European Union regulations and of fundamental rights , a fortiori .
That is the information that I wanted to give you , showing you that our position on this matter is extremely clear .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , the law that is being criticised and debated , despite the fact that it will not enter into force until March , contains only one single line prohibiting the promotion of homosexuality to minors ; that is the greatly troublesome part .
The President of the Republic of Lithuania took the initiative by tabling clarifying amendments immediately .
Thus , our resolution is practically knocking on an open door .
What we should be doing is concentrating on Parliament 's intention .
The key words in the troublesome line about the promotion of homosexuality to minors are ' promotion ' and ' minors ' - not ' homosexuality ' , as some would have it .
The possibility of direct promotion to minors has been dealt with by the adoption of a law .
' Promotion ' is a deliberate action going beyond the simple and necessary information currently provided by sexual education , which should include a clause of tolerance to homosexual appeal and love .
The promotion of homosexuality to minors , if we open our eyes , may quite often mean significantly more - from encouraging them to try it , to the seduction of minors , even for homosexual prostitution .
The media might benefit from such business , probably by disseminating such promotion to minors .
Dear colleagues , parents and grandparents , please now listen to your hearts .
Would you be in favour of opening up this whole area of challenges to your own offspring ?
( Interjection from the floor )
OK , that is the case for you .
What if they are exposed to such special ' promotion ' regularly and without restriction ?
It seems as though we are stumbling between two trees : the first , if someone likes tricky doctrine , is the right of children to be mentally abused , while the second is the right of children to be protected from abuse .
Let their self-determination come with maturity .
My proposal is to support the positions recalling both the Convention on , and the Declaration of , the Rights of the Child , and to delete paragraph 1 , which is irrelevant at the present time and therefore inappropriate for Europe 's highest House .
Madam President , Mr Landsbergis has given a deeply unconvincing justification of this law .
I was surprised ; I thought he would justify it more .
The Council and the Commission have expressed their deep concern , and that is the correct line .
Anti-discrimination and freedom of expression are absolutely fundamental principles in European law .
In my own Member State , as Mr Cashman said previously , we had such a law in 1988 , but it is now history and this law will become history because , as a Community of values , one of the EU 's greatest strengths lies in our common endeavour to raise the bar on human rights and the protection of our fundamental freedoms .
It is also difficult when one Member State is under the spotlight for a potential breach of this law but it is because of our Community of values that we can analyse those laws and we can say , as the Commission and Council have said , they cause deep concern for us .
The Fundamental Rights Agency should do its job and give its opinion and , as the Commission and Council have said , there are problems within existing law , anti-discrimination laws in this European Union ; let us defend what we have and let us ensure that the Socialist Group , along with our sister party in Lithuania , condemn this law , and let us hope that that is what will happen - that it will be consigned to history .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the Lithuanian Law on the Protection of Minors from the Detrimental Effects of Public Information struck human rights defenders and media people in Lithuania and beyond as overly homophobic and profoundly undemocratic .
Please let me draw your attention to the fact that this law was vetoed by the former President of Lithuania , Valdas Adamkus , but he was overruled by the Lithuanian Parliament .
In addition , this law has been severely criticised by the current President of Lithuania , Dalia Grybauskaitė .
The law was assessed in vigorous terms by the Lithuanian media , commentators , and civil liberties and human rights defenders , who stressed its homophobic substance along with its extremely dangerous political implications , such as censorship and self-censorship .
This law has little , if anything , to do with the protection of children .
Instead , it is against gay and lesbian citizens of the country .
Whatever the case , the equation of homosexuality with physical violence and necrophilia is morally repugnant and deeply disgraceful .
Still , it is difficult to believe that the adoption of such a law is possible in an EU country at the beginning of the 21st century .
Personally I take this law as an unfortunate move and as a profound misunderstanding , to say the very least .
Changes to Article 310 of the penal code and Article 214 of the administrative code are being debated in Lithuania 's Parliament that will criminalise , with the threat of a fine , community work or imprisonment , anyone involved in the promotion of homosexuality in any public space .
If this is not our slide to state-sponsored homophobia and criminalisation of public expression of our gay and lesbian citizens , what is it then ?
Last but not least , this law is a disgrace , but even more so would be an attempt to obfuscate , trivialise and , in effect , justify it .
This is to say that I strongly support the resolution .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a crucial moment in the process of European integration because , until a short while ago , we would surely not have had this type of debate .
This is simply because no parliament would ever have considered adopting a law of this nature .
This means that this is not an internal issue of Lithuanian policy .
Put simply , we must conclude that we are facing an issue that directly affects the survival of European credibility .
No part of the European Union - and here we have the three institutions - can remain silent while a Member State adopts laws which persecute and criminalise something as universal as the right to choose the person with whom you have emotional or sexual relations , regardless of gender or age .
Mr Landsbergis , talking normally about homosexuality , bisexuality and transexuality is the best guarantee of a child being able to live with his or her own sexuality , with respect for himself or herself and for the rest of the community .
This is important because what we are specifically calling for at this time is a guarantee of healthy growth , without coercion or negative stereotypes or criminalisation of childhood .
We can do this precisely by holding a normal debate on this situation , as we are doing , and not by prohibiting or criminalising it .
The law on the protection of minors in Lithuania was drafted out of concern for the emotional and psychological development of the youngest consumers of media which have an increasing presence in children 's lives .
Another concern of the Lithuanian legislators was that children should be brought up according to their parents ' convictions .
I do not believe that there is anyone in this House who would not agree that these are important and burning issues .
These intentions deserve appreciation , and not criticism , although that is not the main point here .
There is no article of this law that infringes European law , and in most cases the law does not even touch upon European law .
The issues raised in the written question are firmly within the remit of the national laws of Member States .
Nobody has given the European Union authority to act in these areas .
That is the fundamental reason why we are opposed to the issue being raised at European level , and why we will never agree to any particular ideology justifying European law in exceeding its authority .
That is also the reason why we cannot support any of the resolutions tabled in this matter .
Madam President , this is not about ideology .
I would say it is about the equal value of all people .
I would also like to thank both the Commission and the Council for their unusually clear position .
I feel convinced that Parliament , the Commission and the Council are now acting in consort where this violation of fundamental values is concerned .
We are talking about the EU and the EU 's respect for fundamental human rights .
That must also apply to all the individual Member States .
In practice , this proposed legislation risks making any information about LGBT issues illegal .
Just imagine if people were suddenly banned from fighting for the equality of all people regardless of sexual orientation .
It is beyond doubt that the proposed legislation is an attack on human rights .
I will not even count how many human rights it violates .
I will simply say in brief : I fully support this resolution .
I hope that Parliament will be as unified as possible in voting in favour of this resolution tomorrow .
( FR ) Madam President , above all , I would like to point out how important the fight against all forms of discrimination , particularly discrimination based on sexual orientation , is to the European Union , to Parliament and to all our colleagues .
What are we talking about today ?
We are talking about a draft law in Lithuania which is causing a problem , which is causing such a problem that Mrs Grybauskaithas become involved .
She has exercised her veto ; she has even set up a working group , which will propose amendments to us .
I therefore have complete confidence in her , and I am sure that this problem will be resolved and that the Member State concerned will find a solution to this serious problem that is discrimination based on sexual orientation .
We have consulted each other , some groups have proposed a resolution and we have fortunately come to a joint resolution .
I am therefore convinced , ladies and gentlemen , that this joint resolution will be adopted tomorrow and that this problem will be resolved .
It is , of course , important that the intellectual and mental health of our children is protected , but I would still like to remind you that the fight against all forms of sexual discrimination is important .
We have worked for this for many years .
We have the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
It does have a purpose .
We have battled for it to be established and there is no question today of it being abandoned or being thrown out .
I would therefore like to thank you for your willingness to adopt this joint resolution .
I thank all of my fellow Members who have put so much into these negotiations .
It is a great pleasure to see that we have succeeded in putting together this joint resolution and I hope that it will be adopted in this House tomorrow .
( LT ) I welcome the European Parliament 's initiative to begin a debate on the question of the Law for the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information , passed due to the efforts of the Lithuanian right wing parties .
It is regrettable that the law was passed without its compliance with international and European Union law being sufficiently debated and assessed .
The voice of non-governmental organisations also fell on deaf ears .
Under the guise of the noble goal to protect children 's rights , in actual fact , a legal basis has been created to divide society , limit information and discriminate against individual groups of society .
The former President of Lithuania vetoed the draft law , while the new President has set up a working group , which will submit a new draft of the law to Parliament in its session this autumn .
I hope that there will be sufficient political will in Lithuania to improve the law , all the more so because we have experience adopting and implementing progressive laws in this area .
Six years ago , the Law on equal opportunities was adopted thanks to the efforts of the Lithuanian social democrats and this prohibited any direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of age , sexual orientation , disability , race or ethnic origin in all areas of life .
At the moment , a similar draft directive is being debated in the Council of Ministers .
This European Parliament resolution should encourage the Lithuanian Parliament to adopt such a law , which respects human rights and freedoms , and in which there is no place for any form of discrimination , including discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , like all of you , I , too , am shocked by the fact that there is a parliament in Europe that is capable not only of proposing regulations of this kind , but also of actually adopting them .
This law is not only an unacceptable violation of the rights of gay men and lesbians in Lithuania , it also does serious harm to the position of homosexuals throughout Europe .
The parliament of Lithuania is telling them that their sexual orientation is something that they should be ashamed of and from which children need to be protected .
I expect the Commission and the Swedish Presidency to make it absolutely clear to the Lithuanian parliament that fundamental values such as equality of treatment and non-discrimination are non-negotiable in Europe - not now , not ever , not by anyone !
For that reason , I would like the Commissioner to pledge specifically , here and now , that the Commission will not hesitate for a moment to take Lithuania to the European Court of Justice if this law enters into force .
( SK ) Lithuania has passed a law which provides important protection for children and young people against the external effects of information which might seriously harm their further development .
It is clear that social and family policy fall under the competence of the individual Member States of the EU and therefore no European initiatives can condemn Lithuania for this .
The law in question does not contravene any international standards in the area of human rights .
I have studied the issue and that is the case .
I firmly believe that , on the contrary , the law strengthens processes for protecting children from exposure to information or images which - and I stress this - their own parents want to protect them from .
I would like to call for a consistent application of the subsidiarity principle which Ireland has secured in the protocol to the Lisbon Treaty .
For all that , such ' warnings to member countries and states ' are setting a serious precedent in clearly sensitive areas such as the family .
( LT ) For the first time in the history of the European Parliament , in this honourable House , the actions of the Lithuanian Parliament are being debated in a negative context .
No matter how innocent or good-willed the authors and supporters of the laws under debate are , they definitely did not lead us into the 21st century Europe .
I think the fact that the Seimas majority 's overconfidence in its sense of justice had a role to play - above us only sky , we do what we want and we do not care about international commitments .
This debate is a very serious reaction by the Council and the Commission ; it is a warning sign to Lithuania 's legislators that we must not step backwards , almost to the Middle Ages , but act by looking forwards , taking advantage of the experience and traditions of the countries of the European Union .
Therefore , these discussions are needed as is the resolution .
( SV ) Madam President , all people are born equal and have the same inviolable value .
Consequently , Parliament must make it very clear today that we are talking about the citizens of Europe , irrespective of the Member State concerned .
Since the EU 's fundamental values are tolerance , openness and freedom , I am pleased that the newly elected President of the Commission has made it clear today that he is going to appoint a commissioner whose portfolio will encompass precisely these issues of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
It is particularly regrettable that a country such as Lithuania - which once experienced repression and dictatorship - has now , as a free and independent state , instigated a law so despicable and which represents censorship , lack of freedom and intolerance .
All of us who support democratic principles and have any common sense must now emphatically denounce this Lithuanian law , and we must vote tomorrow .
Let the Members of this House remind each other that the greatest of all is love .
( SK ) In 2006 , Slovakia was condemned for asking for freedom of conscience .
Today Lithuania finds itself in front of this community because it wants to protect children from the sexualisation of society .
I consider this discussion to be a manipulation of the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights , a document which is legally binding .
This House is ignoring the legitimacy of a national parliament which has twice voted through the law without criticism .
This House is requesting an opinion from the Human Rights Agency .
The Agency , however , does not have the authority to examine the effect of national laws .
I have a question : what must the Irish be thinking ahead of the forthcoming referendum ?
They must be thinking that the time will soon come when they will be criticised here in this House over their laws protecting the family and protecting life .
I am sorry that here in this esteemed Parliament , we fail to respect European values , we fail to respect diversity and national culture and we fail to respect child protection and the right of parents to educate their children .
Madam President , I think the three institutions have made their viewpoint in this debate very clear .
Respect for human rights , tolerance , the inviolability of the individual and the prohibition of discrimination on the grounds of - among other things - sexual orientation are fundamental values of the European project and must remain so .
The Member States have a duty to respect both these values and the actual laws that apply in these areas within the EU .
The Presidency is greatly concerned about the law in question , but we know that it is also subject to debate and criticism in Lithuania .
As has been mentioned , President Grybauskait- who was formerly a Commissioner and is well-informed concerning the values and laws of the EU - has herself initiated a process in which this law will be reviewed and made compatible with EU legislation .
I am extremely pleased that the Commission has been so clear about what will happen if , contrary to expectation , the law enters into force in its original form .
Madam President , I fully agree with the Minister 's conclusions .
I would also just hope that the working group that Mrs Grybauskaithas put in place will be able to prevent the introduction of a law which , in some respects , would be at odds with European law .
I would like to stress one point : we feared that some of the provisions of the law would go against certain directives , on audiovisual services and on electronic commerce .
It is not actually our job to determine family law , which is one of the competences of the Member States .
This being so , everything that has been said previously and in the course of the debate shows that matters need to be assessed better at national level , in this case in Lithuania .
At the conclusion of this debate I have received five motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 17 September 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
My judgment on the motion for a resolution on the protection of minors in Lithuania is intended to demonstrate a very serious institutional concern .
Often , individual MEPs or political groups claim to address issues that relate to the domestic policy of individual States : that does not seem right .
In the case in point , the plan is seemingly to make the European Parliament express an essentially negative opinion on a Lithuanian law - the full content of which is unknown - with the laudable aim of protecting minors , while surreptitiously imposing a position that the individual Member States have been left to establish at their own discretion .
This , I might add , is something which the European Court of Human Rights has stipulated on many occasions .
The principle of equality is beyond doubt , and no one is trying to call into question the dignity of persons with particular sexual orientations .
My reservation is of an institutional nature because it concerns the relations between the European Union and individual Member States .
Discrimination is prohibited under European and international law .
There are provisions to this effect in the treaties , the European Convention on Human Rights and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
No Member State may enact laws that contradict these documents .
The Lithuanian law is inadmissible , as it is absurd and homophobic in nature .
Homophobia is a disease .
People who are afflicted by hatred for homosexuals deserve no sympathy .
They are not so much homophobes , as sexual orientation chauvinists .
And like all other chauvinists , they must be challenged and appropriate laws enacted against them .
In 1990 , the World Health Organisation removed homosexuality from the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Health Problems .
It also confirmed that no type of sexual orientation is a disorder .
In any societies , including Lithuanian society , there are lesbians , gays and bisexual .
They make up about 4 to 7 % of the population .
They are a minority who are entitled to full rights .
The Equality Marches , which cause such concern to some people , are organised , amongst other reasons , to remind people of this basic , fundamental principle of equality .
For this reason , I appeal to the Council and the Presidency to take appropriate steps to prevent Member States from enacting discriminatory legislation .
We must show that the European Union says a firm NO to all discrimination and intolerance .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0203 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Animal welfare
Given that animal welfare is one of the priorities of the Swedish Presidency , and given that countries such as Ireland have already put in place successful animal welfare schemes in relation to the live transportation of animals , including the Suckler Cow Welfare Scheme which helps to ensure that our weanlings for export are stronger and better prepared to cope with the journey , has the Swedish Presidency any plans to take into account schemes such as these for the live export of animals in order to ensure that a balance is reached between the sustainable export of live animals and the safeguarding of animal welfare in any new legislation ?
Furthermore , given that Ireland is an island nation and relies heavily on the export trade of weanlings , has the Swedish Presidency any proposals that would inhibit this vital trade for Ireland ?
Madam President , I have the honour of answering a question from Mrs Harkin .
The Council shares the Member of Parliament 's concern regarding animal welfare .
The Commission 's regular tabling of proposals has resulted in the continual establishment of a fair amount of Community legislation in this area .
The Swedish Presidency aims to maintain the debate on animal welfare and good animal husbandry .
These are priority issues for our Presidency in the area of agriculture and a special conference on animal welfare will be held in the Swedish city of Uppsala on 8-9 October .
The conference will be based on the results of the EU-financed project on Welfare Quality .
Since 2004 , the project has produced a scientifically based system to assess how well livestock is cared for in farming .
The project is also investigating the best ways to provide feedback to farmers , consumers and other stakeholders .
More than 40 institutions and universities from the EU and Latin America took part .
Another topic that will be discussed at the conference is how animal welfare can be improved globally .
There will be speakers from international organisations such as the WTO and FAO , global enterprises and the international meat industry , as well as representatives from the US and Namibia .
The results of the conference may be of relevance for the conclusions planned by the Council in response to the Commission 's expected communication on animal welfare labelling .
As regards taking the initiative for any legislation , I am sure the Member is aware that it is up to the Commission to make proposals .
The Swedish Presidency is currently working on a proposal from the Commission for a new directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes .
At this stage , the Commission has tabled no further proposals for legislation on animal welfare that will be dealt with during the Swedish Presidency .
I am very pleased that you are saying that you want to keep the debate going and that you are having a conference in Uppsala on the matter .
The truth is that the legislation that we have in place is really only in effect for about two years .
I know that we in Ireland have certainly bought into it .
We have ensured training for handlers .
We have upgraded transport systems and , as a result of all of this , our trade is working very well , but , if we stop it , obviously competition will be gone in the market at home , etc .
What I am asking is whether it is important to change legislation that is really only in place and only working effectively for two years .
The other question was about what robust scientific data is in place to show the need for this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Well , as you said , it is important to evaluate this properly and see what is being done ; what the results have been .
We are gathering scientific evidence .
At the conference in Uppsala , we have invited both experts and scientists to be the background for the discussions at that conference .
As I said , we hope that these can be the basis for the Council 's response to the communication that will come from the Commission .
This is what I can say at the moment .
But we also very much welcome the opinions of the European Parliament .
We hope that this could be a very good start for the discussions and gather as much information as possible .

One point : I hope that science is prevailing over emotion in relation to the transportation of animals .
I would ask you to address the issue of the transport of horses which , I think , has not been addressed sufficiently , and I think there is huge concern about that at the moment .
I would suggest that animal welfare concerns on farms may increase because of the disastrous prices that farmers in many of our Member States are being paid for their produce .
They are doing their very best to keep welfare standards up , against the background of very poor commodity prices and , therefore , no income on farms .
So I think we need to be sensitive to this issue .
This is a very controversial topic in Ireland and is grist to the mill of those advocating a ' no ' vote on the Lisbon Treaty .
In view of that and in view of the fact that Ireland is an island , and that without live exports there will be a cosy cartel operating , particularly for beef and sheep prices , can you give us any hope that this will be addressed or compromised prior to the vote on the Lisbon Treaty on 2 October ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I do understand the concerns of Members of this House and of the citizens .
Unfortunately , I cannot promise that this will be solved before the referendum .
We are currently awaiting the Commission proposal .
It has been delayed for reasons I do not know .
As soon as it comes , we will throw ourselves at it and start to discuss it .
I cannot tell you more because we are waiting for the proposal from the Commission .
I hope we can do this without dramatising it , but rather evaluate it and look at it from a scientific and evidential point of view .
Subject : Child trafficking in the EU
A report published in July by the Fundamental Rights Agency ( FRA ) highlighted the severity of the problem of child trafficking in the EU .
Large numbers of children are trafficked within our borders for sexual exploitation , forced labour , adoption and organ extraction .
I welcome the inclusion of human trafficking as a priority issue in the Swedish Presidency 's work programme , but would like to know if any proposals will be considered specifically in relation to the trafficking of children , as the FRA recommends ?
Madam President , the Swedish Presidency shares the Member 's concern regarding child trafficking for sexual exploitation or for other purposes .
This kind of modern slavery is one of the most lucrative kinds of international organised crime .
Of course , it is despicable and it is a serious problem , both within the EU and in the rest of the world .
Human trafficking has long been an important item on the EU agenda and clearly we must continue to implement a combination of measures to combat this appalling violation of the most fundamental rights .
Europe must redouble its efforts in respect of preventive measures and the fight against organised crime , as well as the protection of the victims of crime .
The EU 's commitment to combating human trafficking is clear from the adoption and implementation of both legislation and non-binding instruments on this issue .
To start with , a joint action to combat trafficking in human beings was adopted in 1997 .
The most important piece of legislation is the 2002 Framework Decision on combating trafficking in human beings .
In March 2009 , the Commission tabled a proposal for a new Framework Decision on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings , and protecting victims of such activities .
It was intended that this would supersede the Framework Decision of 2002 .
One of the objectives of the proposal is to provide for the special treatment of vulnerable victims - children - in criminal investigations and proceedings , with a view to preventing what is known as secondary victimisation .
This proposal is linked to another proposal that is oriented even more towards the specific needs of children , i.e. the proposal for a Framework Decision on combating the sexual abuse , sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , and repealing Framework Decision 2004 / 68 , which the Commission tabled at the same time .
The aim is to create a more consistent legal framework , make it more effective and make the penalties for perpetrators more severe .
These two proposals are currently being discussed in the Council .
They are based on a significant international consensus , particularly in the UN Palermo protocol and the measures to combat human trafficking contained in the European Convention on Human Rights as well as the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse .
In conjunction with a ministerial conference that the Presidency is holding in Brussels on 19-20 October , which will focus on overarching EU measures against human trafficking , the report from the Agency for Fundamental Rights will be presented and discussed in detail and the conclusions will be presented to the Council .
The Swedish Presidency also intends to bring up human trafficking and the sexual abuse of children as priority issues in the Stockholm Programme , which we intend to adopt at the summit in December .
Thank you very much , Minister .
I know that this issue is hugely important .
We in Sweden have been pushing this issue in recent years , just as the EU has .
I would simply like to point out that I think it is a great shame that Members of the European Parliament will be unable to attend the conference on 19-20 October because we will be here in Strasbourg , and we cannot be in Brussels at the same time to take part in this important conference .
It is a shame , but that is the situation .
I am also aware that the Swedish Presidency has said that it wants to bring up the issue of the exploitation of children in connection with travel and tourism .
The intention was to do this at a conference on 20 November when the Permanent Intergovernmental Group L 'Europe de l 'Enfance is to meet , but I have now heard that the Presidency will not be raising this issue .
Why is that ?
Are you going to raise it on another occasion ?
Madam President , thank you , Mrs Hedh .
I know that Mrs Hedh is very committed to these issues .
It is very unfortunate that the conference in Brussels clashes with the session .
The reason that it is on these dates is to coincide with the EU Anti-Trafficking Day , which is being held at the same time .
That is why they coincide .
It is indeed unfortunate .
As regards the Member 's second question , concerning why this has been dropped : I was not aware of this .
I will have to check and get back to you on that and perhaps communicate an answer to Mrs Hedh .
Thank you very much for that reply .
I am sad as well that the conference is being held when we are in Strasbourg .
But can you make sure that on the agenda of that conference we do have the Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking highlighted ?
Because there are a number of Member States who still have not signed it , and there are some Member States - including Sweden , of course - that have not ratified it .
So I think it is very important to make sure that it is high on the agenda at that conference , so we can make anti-trafficking a reality .
We have the wherewithal there .
We really must act on it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Yes , Ms Lynne , I will bring this to the attention of the organisers .
Subject : Message for FAO high-level meeting
What message will the Council be delivering on behalf of the EU at the forthcoming session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) ?
Madam President , we are covering many different issues .
The UN FAO conference will start on 18 November .
One of the most important items on its agenda is reform of the FAO .
The reform process is based on the action plan approved by all the members of the FAO in 2008 .
This action plan involves many different types of reforms .
Among other things , the future activities of the FAO will be determined by a results-based management system that will promote greater efficiency as regards the allocation and utilisation of scarce resources .
We also expect the reform process to have long-term effects on the FAO 's work on matters concerning its staffing and local offices .
The conference will also deal with matters relating to changes in the FAO 's charter and the reforms to the Committee on World Food Security .
This reform is important because it is linked to the establishment of a global partnership on agriculture , food security and supply .
In order to discuss these matters at a political level , the FAO is holding a World Summit on Food Security in Rome on 16-18 November .
The Presidency will be represented there and we will present a declaration that is partly based on the Council 's conclusions on food security that will be adopted at the FAO conference .
In its conclusions concerning the FAO on 11 November 2008 , the Council acknowledged that the current food crisis demands a common united and coordinated response from the global community , supported by civil society and the private sector .
To this end the EU should support a global partnership for agriculture and food in accordance with the EU 's action plan for the Millennium Goals .
This was welcomed by the European Council in June 2008 .
Furthermore , in its conclusions , the Council welcomed the ongoing reform of the FAO that is being implemented in a constructive manner by all the member states of the organisation within the framework of the conference 's committee .
In the light of this , the Presidency feels that the summit should have a clear political aim and launch a new management system for world food security , with a rejuvenated and stronger CFS taking a leading role .
The Presidency feels that it is essential that this summit establishes a forward-looking , action-based system capable of getting to grips with the current food crisis and increasing efforts to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal - to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger .
Reform of the CFS and broad commitment to the global partnership will be of the utmost importance in bringing this about .
The Presidency feels that the summit should have this clear political aim , to launch a new system for managing the world 's food supply in which a rejuvenated and stronger CFS plays a leading part .
At an operational level , the Presidency feels that this summit needs to establish a forward-looking , powerful system capable of taking on the challenge of the current food crisis and increasing efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
I do appreciate the detailed response .
Can I just hone in on what the attitude of the Swedish Presidency is in relation to the role of the common agricultural policy in assisting the concept and the desire for global food security .
What role do you think our policy can play in that ?
Do you think it is important that we have a common policy in Europe , given our concerns about global food security ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - We have not discussed that in the Council in the light of this particular conference , but it is clear that the common agricultural policy can play a role and can also , when we discuss it in the future , play an increasing role in facilitating the poorer countries to be part of the common market , as well as in where we can help to mitigate and to eliminate the current acute crisis .
We have done that .
Now the world situation looks a little bit better .
There are positive reports coming from almost all the different markets .
That is excellent , and I would give it a little bit of time to reflect on how we can address those conflicts in the future and how we can use a slightly reformed common agricultural policy to help those poor countries and to avoid a similar situation .
We are talking here about global food security , but I would like to just briefly mention food security in the EU .
In my opinion , food security in the EU depends on food production in the EU .
Just today , the ALDE AGRI group had a meeting with Commissioner Fischer Boel and we were discussing that very issue and the future , as has already been alluded to , of the CAP , particularly post 2013 , and the fact that the budget may be cut , etc .
There are really serious implications for food production in the EU .
I know that is only part of the wider discussion we are having here this evening but , nonetheless , it is hugely important for those who are involved in agriculture .
You have already given an answer but , if you have any further thoughts on that as far as the Swedish Presidency is concerned , I would appreciate them .
President-in-Office of the Council . - This is a complicated and very big discussion .
It touches upon the conference itself but it is , of course , something that goes much further .
We do not have the intention of really starting those discussions ; we have been waiting to receive from the Commission an element , a communication regarding the future budget ; it was promised - as was agreed by the Council in 2004 already - that we would have a thorough revision of the income and the outcome of the expenditure of the budget including , of course , the CAP , which is such a big part of the budget .
This communication has been delayed - there are now rumours that it will come by the end of the year .
If it does , we , the Swedish Presidency , intend to have a first discussion among the Member States on it , but it will be up to the Spanish Presidency to really start working on these issues .
So for the moment , I cannot give you any more details .
Subject : Stability and Development Pact
In June , the European Council affirmed its commitment to healthy public finances and to the Stability and Development Pact .
Nevertheless , as many as 20 Member States are expected to be subject to the excessive deficit procedure by the end of the year . What initiatives will the Presidency take to achieve its objective of correct and responsible implementation of the Stability Pact and where has it identified the difficulties so far in correctly implementing it ?
Does it consider that the crisis necessitates a fresh revision of the Pact or is the reform adopted in 2005 sufficient for the Pact to be respected and effective under present conditions ?
Which exit strategy and strategy for reducing public deficits does it prefer and what is the timetable for implementing such a strategy ?
Does it consider that 2010 should be a year of fiscal consolidation and discipline or that a degree of flexibility should be retained in public finances , particularly in view of the forecasts of dwindling employment ?
This issue was also discussed earlier today .
During the current crisis , public authorities have taken extraordinary measures in terms of both monetary policy and budgetary support .
These efforts were necessary and appropriate , and played an important part in averting an even more serious crisis , in stabilising the economy and in preventing a drastic economic recession .
The stabilisation of the economic and financial situation does not mean that the recession is over , however .
We need to be extremely cautious and ensure that our policy for the future combines the necessary support for the recovery - which we hope will come - with a responsible attitude to sustainable public financing in the medium and long term .
It is precisely the need to balance these two objectives that makes the flexibility adopted in the 2005 review of the pact so sensible .
In difficult economic times , the authorities must take the action required to promote economic activity .
Once the recovery has picked up speed and is driven by its own momentum , however , we must ensure that our public finances are sustainable and we must establish credible plans for budget consolidation .
Since circumstances differ significantly in the various Member States , the schedules - the timetables - for ending financial policy incentives and monetary policy measures will also vary .
This will be reflected in many of the deficit procedures that will be aimed at individual Member States , but it needs to be coordinated , and it must remain in line with the overall framework of the Stability and Development Pact .
Consequently , the Presidency is planning discussions within Ecofin in the autumn concerning appropriate exit strategies and their coordination .
I expect these discussions to result in a clear accord on ambitious consolidation at the right time in each Member State in order to guarantee long-term sustainability .
Thank you Minister for your very clear reply .
I trust that you will focus in particular on whether we should insist on 2010 being a year for improving public finances or whether there should be some way of providing extensions or delays , as this is something from which the Union has not benefited to date in its policies .
That is a very difficult question to answer .
At the G20 Summit next week , we will be starting an initial discussion of exit strategies .
However , it is clear that circumstances vary widely in the different Member States , and therefore the timetables will vary slightly .
I hope we can start this process quite soon , but it also depends on how the economic situation develops .
There is light at the end of the tunnel , we think the worst is over and thus we need to look more into this idea of an exit strategy .
If we do not do it gradually , it is the most vulnerable members of our societies who will be hit by rising unemployment , severe public cuts and the risk of inflation .
However , at present , it is a little early to say exactly when that time will come in the various Member States .
Subject : EU measures to combat unemployment
A recent Eurobarometer poll indicated that whilst 72 % of EU citizens say the European Union is ' playing a positive role in creating new job opportunities and fighting unemployment , ' only a little over a third of respondents had heard of the EU 's tools to combat unemployment , such as the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Is enough being done to promote awareness of these key instruments ?
Madam President , the Council shares the Member 's concern regarding the results of the latest Eurobarometer as regards awareness of important EU instruments to combat unemployment such as the European Social Fund and the EU Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
From the aspects of both democracy and legitimacy , it is important to communicate to our citizens what the EU does .
The Council places great importance on the European Social Fund and the EU Globalisation Adjustment Fund and we want these to be used effectively to combat unemployment .
These two instruments are important financial tools for combating the current recession and increasing employment in that they introduce integrated flexicurity strategies and ensure that skills are improved and better matched to the needs that exist .
The Council expressed this in December 2008 when it backed the rapid introduction by the European Social Fund of supplementary measures to support employment .
The Council also announced improvements to the procedures of the EU Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The original regulation was therefore reviewed to allow the Fund to react more effectively to support workers who had lost their jobs not just as a result of globalisation but also temporarily because of the financial and economic slowdown .
However , it should be pointed out that the implementation of these funds , including appropriate information and publicity , is a matter for the Member States and the Commission .
As regards the European Social Fund , the Member States must provide information on initiatives and cofinanced programmes with a view to highlighting the role of the Community and the aid provided by the funds .
In this context , I would mention the European transparency initiative launched by the Commission in 2005 .
One of the foremost aims of this initiative is to improve information to the general public concerning the EU funds available by publishing the names of recipients of direct subsidies within the framework of the EU 's cohesion policy .
Where the EU Globalisation Fund is concerned , information on the measures financed should be provided by the Member States .
At the same time , I would remind you that the Globalisation Adjustment Fund was established relatively recently .
Lack of knowledge may be due to the fact that this fund has provided assistance in relatively few cases as yet .
Thank you very much for your very concise response .
I have just one other query .
I understand that there is strong opposition within the Council to the proposal to frontload the European Social Fund to 100 % for the upcoming two years .
If that opposition is maintained , can the Council suggest any alternatives that have been put forward to maintain the momentum of the European economic recovery plan ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Yes , we have indeed discussed this in the Council several times .
There is a quite unanimous view that , for the sake of the quality of the project , there should be an element of national financing as well .
Therefore , the proposal to eliminate that has no support from the Council .
However , we are aware of the situation and of the problems .
We have asked the Commission to present an alternative proposal .
I brought that up with Commissioner Samecki , who is responsible for it , just two days ago .
They are working on such a proposal and will present it as soon as possible .
( RO ) I am sorry that the necessary support in the form of 100 % financing is not being provided through the Council at a time when we are talking about the European Social Fund 's role in reducing unemployment , especially during the current crisis .
I would also like to mention that during the current economic crisis , we are seeing increases in unemployment , particularly affecting steelworks and shipyards , or even technical unemployment , in addition to workers actually being made redundant .
I would like to ask you the following question , bearing in mind the need to invest and safeguard the European Union 's economic competitiveness in the future as well : what measures do you envisage taking to facilitate the use of European Social Fund and European Globalisation Adjustment Fund resources to support the industrial sectors experiencing economic hardship ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - As I said , we have asked the Commission to come up with alternative proposals on how this particular Social Fund can be used in this situation where , as you say , lots of people all around Europe are without work , and we hope that the Commission will present such a proposal without undue delay .
However , we do a lot of other things as well to combat unemployment ; this is the responsibility , of course , of the Member States , but there is also a collective responsibility for us to try to coordinate , to facilitate the completion of the internal market , to eliminate obstacles , to get the Services Directive working from 1 January , to get rid of red tape and to stimulate people to be employable , while giving them resources to complete their education or to restart in another direction .
Unemployment will also be discussed at a particular informal Ecofin meeting in October , where unemployment is one of the main issues on the agenda ; and in the light of the discussion that I know is taking place within the European Parliament , but also in almost all Council formations concerning the future of the Lisbon Strategy , there are lots of issues being discussed .
So the Social Fund is only one instrument to combat unemployment .
It can be improved , and it can be more widely used to show the public how it is used in a better way , probably .
But it is just but one element in the whole range of instruments that we have and that we must use in order to combat unemployment .
Subject : Information about Chechnya
What steps is the Council going to take , following the murder of the human-rights and peace activist Natalia Estemirova and the subsequent closure of the Memorial human rights group 's office in Chechnya , to enable the monitoring of human rights observance there to continue ?
What does the Council think of the idea of opening an EU office for that purpose , in Grozny or in close proximity to Chechnya , or at least of sending a temporary mission to Chechnya ?
Madam President , as soon as the Presidency heard of the murder of Natalia Estemirova , we immediately issued a statement condemning the murder and expressed our deepest condolences to her family and colleagues within the Memorial human rights organisation .
We also urged the Russian authorities to investigate the murder quickly and thoroughly and to bring the perpetrators to trial .
I can assure Mr Posselt that the Council will continue to follow developments in Chechnya very closely and we will give particular attention and respect to human rights and to the situation of the defenders of human rights .
The Council has urged the Russian authorities on several occasions to do everything in their power to protect these people in Russia in accordance with the universally acknowledged UN Declaration on human rights defenders .
I would stress that the EU already has a presence in Chechnya as a result of the Commission 's aid project , diplomats from Moscow 's embassies in the EU Member States and in the form of regular visits to Chechnya .
The Council would like to emphasise the importance that it attaches to Mr Posselt 's questions and it is concerned about the human rights situation in Chechnya , but we do not consider there currently to be any particular need for the office or mission that he has proposed .
The European Union is present in the region and we will continue to monitor the issues of respect for human rights , the rule of law and democratic principles in Chechnya and will address these whenever the need arises .
( DE ) Thank you , Mrs Malmström .
That is the first good answer I have received from the Council on this subject .
Thank you .
Nonetheless , I have a brief supplementary question : does the Council intend to address the question of Chechnya again under the Swedish Presidency , because the Russian leadership has issued a series of announcements about changes .
However , action needs to follow and we see none , which is why I would ask that you brief us properly once again on this issue in the run-up to negotiations on the agreement .
We intend to have an urgency debate on this matter tomorrow .
Madam President , yes , we continually raise issues of human rights in our dialogue with Russia and human rights will be on the agenda at the summit that we hope will take place between the EU and Russia during the autumn .
Subject : Authorisation from the Turkish Government for hydrocarbon prospecting within the exclusive economic zones of EU Member States
The Turkish Government has decided to give the go-ahead to the state-owned Turkish petroleum cooperation ( TPAO ) to explore for hydrocarbon deposits within the exclusive economic zones ( EEZ ) of Greece and Cyprus .
This follows on from the threatening stance adopted by Turkey in a bid to deter Cyprus from proceeding with the exploitation of its EEZ , thereby forcing it to veto the unblocking of the energy chapter .
Given the potentially explosive impact of the above decision by the Turkish on its relations with EU Member States , can the Council provide the following information :
What immediate measures will it take to ensure that the Turkish Government reverses its decision to authorise prospecting for hydrocarbon deposits in the EEZ of the EU Member States ?
What measures will it take to ensure that , with respect to Cyprus , also Turkey complies with the Additional Protocol to the Ankara Agreement and recognises its right to an EEZ ?
When is it expected that Turkey will adopt the Convention on the Law of the Sea , which has been incorporated into Community law ?
Madam President , the Council is aware of the events brought up by the Member of Parliament .
As regards Turkey 's relations with the countries in the region concerned , Turkey - just like every other country - has a duty to act to encourage good neighbourly relations and peaceful dispute resolution .
That is the essence of the UN 's Charter .
It is also an important requirement for accession to the EU .
Within the context of Turkey 's negotiations with the EU and the related conclusions drawn by the Council , the EU has called on Turkey to avoid any threat , source of conflict or action that could have a negative effect on good neighbourly relations and the process of peaceful dispute resolution .
Moreover , on a number of occasions , the EU has emphasised the importance of progress in the normalisation of bilateral relations between Turkey and all the EU Member States , including the Republic of Cyprus , and stressed the sovereign rights of all Member States of the EU .
As regards the matter of the Additional Protocol , the Union 's position is extremely clear .
Turkey has a duty to apply it in full and in a non-discriminatory way .
All these matters are systematically raised by the EU , most recently at the meeting between ministers from the EU troika and Turkey that took place in Stockholm in July and in the Association Council in May .
I can assure the Member that the Council attaches great importance to these matters and that we will continue to monitor developments extremely closely .
( EL ) Madam Minister , I appreciate your willingness and determination to give clear replies to our questions .
May I say that we shall be debating the question of the Nabucco pipeline in Parliament tomorrow and remind you that , in January 2009 , the Turkish Prime Minister threatened Brussels that his country would re-examine its support for the construction of the natural gas pipeline if negotiations on the opening of the energy chapter do not continue .
This chapter , as you know , has been blocked by the veto exercised by Cyprus , because it has been threatened by Turkey about the exploitation of its exclusive economic zone .
As , therefore , the question of exclusive economic zones is of crucial importance and may cause a major problem for numerous EU policies , I ask you again what measures the Council will take to ensure that Turkey recognises Cyprus 's right to an exclusive economic zone ?
Madam President , both the Council and the Commission have noted this and we will monitor the matter closely .
In all our dealings with Turkey , we will continue to raise the matter and the importance of good neighbourly relations .
The next opportunity will be at the foreign ministers ' troika in November .
I hope that incidents of the kind mentioned by the Member can be avoided .
Where the energy chapter is concerned , this is currently being screened in the various Council formations and discussions are ongoing .
It is a little too early to announce the results of this analysis and , as the Member will be aware , each step in this process requires unanimity in the Council .
Subject : EU policy in Burma
Can the European Council make a statement concerning the policy of the European Union towards Burma and outline what measures the European Union is pursuing so as to help release Aung San Sui Kyi , who has been imprisoned there since 1990 ?
Madam President , the EU has followed the situation of Aung San Suu Kyi closely ever since she was imprisoned twenty years ago .
The Council has worked continually and very actively on her behalf .
On many occasions , we have called on the authorities in Burma to release her .
Furthermore , during this time , the Council has taken specific action a number of times .
To mention some of these actions :
In August , the EU immediately condemned the judgment against Aung San Suu Kyi and the proceedings against her , which had no legal basis .
We called on the authorities in Burma to release her immediately and unconditionally .
The Council stated that the legal proceedings against Aung San Suu Kyi represented a crime against national and international law .
Moreover , the EU 's high representative , Javier Solana , spoke out on behalf of Aung San Suu Kyi at the ASEAN ministerial meeting and the subsequent ASEAN-EU ministerial conference in July , at which a representative of Burma was also present .
Strong demands were also made by many others present at this meeting , including representatives of the USA , China , Russia and others , for the immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners .
Through its Special Envoy for Burma , Piero Fassino , the EU has also been very active in supporting the measures taken by the UN and the UN 's Special Adviser Ibrahim Gambari , and has also consulted important EU partners in Asia .
The authorities in Burma have chosen to ignore the protests against the imprisonment of Aung San Suu Kyi and the calls to release her that have been made by a large number of countries and organisations , including the Secretary-General of the UN , the Secretary-General of ASEAN and a number of ASEAN Member States , of which Burma is , after all , one .
As there has been no response from Burma , the EU has taken further action directed against those responsible for the judgment .
We have placed members of the judiciary and others involved in the action against Aung San Suu Kyi on the list of persons who are to be denied visas and whose assets are to be frozen .
We have expanded the list of persons and units that are to be covered by restrictive measures so as to also include the freezing of assets held by companies owned and controlled by members of the regime in Burma or by persons associated with them .
The response agreed on by the Council on 13 August is entirely in line with the resolution passed by the European Parliament in October 2008 .
I can assure the Member that in addition to these specific measures , the EU will intensify its work within the international community and , in particular , with like-minded partners in Asia in order to bring about the immediate and unconditional release of Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners .
This is a fundamental first step in the process of national reconciliation that is required if the 2010 elections are to be able to be regarded as free , fair and credible .
I would like to thank you , Madam President-in-Office , for your comprehensive reply .
Can I ask you what action the European Union has taken , or is in the process of taking , to assist the thousands of refugees that have fled Burma 's northern Shan State into China as a result of August 's violent clashes between the junta and ethnic minorities ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am very sorry .
I do not think I can answer that question .
I will have to come back to you on that .
I am sorry .
Subject : Closer EU-US relations
Can the European Council outline the initiatives that it is pursuing so that closer political and economic relations can be built up between the European Union and the United States of America ?
Madam President , the Council attaches the greatest importance to relations between the EU and the US .
Transatlantic relations represent a cornerstone of the EU 's foreign policy and are based on our shared values of democracy , human rights and our commitment to open , integrated economies .
The new administration in the US has given a new stimulus to these relations .
We are firmly resolved to continue this cooperation .
This is a time when definite results are expected in our transatlantic relations , on both sides of the Atlantic .
I am pleased to be able to state that there are many areas in which the EU cooperates closely with the United States in order to expand our strategic partnership and achieve results .
Naturally we will continue to cooperate very closely on a number of regional issues such as Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iran , the peace process in the Middle East , Russia and the Western Balkans .
We cooperate regularly on crisis management and I am delighted that the United States is now taking part in a civil ESDP mission , namely EULEX in Kosovo .
We will be cooperating closely on climate issues ahead of the Copenhagen Summit at the end of the year .
The new administration has raised the ambitions of the United States substantially in this area .
We welcome this and hope that they will be able to present comparable objectives as regards reducing emissions in the medium term as part of the agreement .
We have also long cooperated on energy matters .
We feel that this must now be taken to a higher level and we hope to establish a special energy council for the EU and the United States .
This could become a good forum for increased cooperation between us in the areas of energy security , markets , sustainability policy and research into new energy technologies .
Another issue of high priority is , of course , the financial and economic crisis .
Very close cooperation is needed here if we are to restore confidence in the financial markets and get them to work properly .
In the area of trade , the Doha Round must be concluded ambitiously in 2010 .
This is essential if we are to foster economic recovery and fight protectionism .
The US has a key role to play here .
Naturally , we will be discussing these issues at the G20 Summit next week .
Both sides have shown interest in deepening our cooperation on justice and home affairs and in increasing understanding of each other 's regulatory and political frameworks .
The statement on the closure of Guantánamo Bay , which mentioned deepening transatlantic cooperation on justice and home affairs , is an important step in this direction .
As regards non-proliferation and disarmament , the cooperation between the EU and the United States has been reenergised and the Obama administration has been very keen on this .
Washington and Brussels are working together to ensure that significant progress is made on issues such as the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty of Non-Proliferation , the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and implementation of a solution to the deadlock at the Conference on Disarmament so that we can achieve a treaty banning the production of weapons-grade fissile material .
There is strong interest on both sides in strengthening transatlantic political dialogue and cooperation on development work .
The EU and the US are the world 's largest donors and we therefore have a common interest in improving efforts in the area of development .
We are conducting discussions concerning how this can be done .
The forthcoming summit between the EU and the United States is an excellent opportunity to discuss these and other relevant issues at the highest level .
I am extremely proud that the Swedish Presidency has been given the opportunity to lead the EU at the summit .
We are firmly convinced that the summit will promote transatlantic relations in a positive and constructive manner .
Thank you very much Minister .
It is great to have you back here , albeit in a different guise .
Specifically on the two issues where I think we can most cooperate : on proliferation , number one ; and secondly with regard to the financial crisis .
Does the Swedish Presidency - representing the Council , of course - have specific ideas that they want to bring to the US-EU Summit that will take place very shortly , in particular , about the differences there appear to be between France and Britain on one side and the rest of the European Union with regard to the financial regulations that would apply ?
The US appears to be closer to the others within the EU , maybe , than they are to the French and British ideas that were announced yesterday by Gordon Brown .
President-in-Office of the Council . - This morning we had a debate on the preparations for G20 .
I know that there are different proposals discussed in the media but I must say that the EU is extremely well coordinated .
We have had discussions with the finance ministers and tomorrow night there will be a dinner with Heads of State and Prime Ministers to finalise the coordination in the light of the Pittsburgh meeting .
The EU stands united .
We know what we want .
We have a concrete proposal , and the fine tuning will be done tomorrow .
So I am not really worried about that , and I am also very happy that , with the help of the Commission and Commissioner Almunia , we have reached this very rare stage of strong unity within the European Union .
These are our priorities and our solutions that are being discussed and we will , of course , try to find cohesion on as many points as possible with the American Administration and the other partners at the G20 meeting .
On non-proliferation , we are very happy that this is again on the agenda .
It has been difficult for some time to raise it and we are very happy with President Obama 's commitment to that .
But it will take time .
There are complicated technical issues and it will take time to pursue them .
We are very process-oriented .
We will try to move them forward but I cannot tell you how long this will take and what deadlines we have .
But it is on the agenda .
We are very committed to moving forward and I think this is also a wish that our American counterparts share .
Madam President-in-Office , I would like to ask you about the EU-USA-Russia triangle .
As we know , on the initiative of President Obama , the USA and Russia started very important negotiations on nuclear disarmament .
How , in your opinion , can the Council and the European Union facilitate , and have its input in , these negotiations which are so important for the future of mankind ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am very happy at this news .
I think it is an important step that those two countries sit down and discuss , as you say , important issues for mankind , and we can but hope that they move forward in a concrete way .
There is a global nuclear summit in March 2010 where the EU will be present , of course , as well .
This is also a good opportunity , in the light of that , to coordinate our views and to see how we can contribute to make these discussions as successful and fruitful as possible .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.00 )
Crisis in the dairy farming sector ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission ( B7-0208 / 2009 ) by Mr De Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the crisis in the dairy farming sector .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the dairy farming sector is going through one of the deepest and most serious crises of the last few decades : the fall in the price of milk and the more general crisis in the dairy farming market have now become a source of concern throughout Europe .
This is a cyclical crisis , caused by the difficult economic situation , which has led to a decline in milk consumption and created stagnant markets , with the prices paid to producers in free fall .
The prices paid to milk producers have plummeted everywhere , averaging 24 cents per litre within the European Union .
Many economic operators are in an even more serious situation , as they get prices of less than 20-21 cents , when their production costs come to at least 40 cents per litre .
Other markets , such as the cereal , olive oil and fruit and vegetable markets , are showing some alarming signs too .
On this front , first of all , we should continue to make use of all the measures at our disposal so as to stabilise the market and to stimulate an upturn in consumption , but at the same time we need to be able to look to the future with medium- and long-term policies and to do everything possible to identify acceptable and lasting solutions aimed at minimising the risk of price fluctuations .
In this context the Commission proposals extending the intervention period for butter and skimmed milk powder have been welcomed and accepted within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as the unanimous vote of 2 September demonstrates .
We believe , however , that these proposals are not enough to mitigate the serious consequences of the crisis in the sector .
That is why , still in relation to the adoption of the European Commission 's proposal , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has adopted an amendment to my proposal that also reintroduces aid for private storage of cheese , which was abolished under the health check on the common agricultural policy in November 2008 .
This was a unanimous decision , Madam President , Commissioner , representing what are , in essence , identical views shared by the members of the Committee on Agriculture , which I have the honour of chairing , and expressing our desire to send out a strong signal to the Council and the Commission at a sensitive time for an extremely important sector for European agriculture .
As well as being a first important demonstration of the positive leadership that we as the European Parliament want to provide when looking ahead to codecision in agricultural matters too , this is a measure that can also offer immediate help to dairy farmers , who are grappling with an increasingly difficult market and with an obvious and dramatic fall in sales .
However , these initial measures , on which we will vote today , are not enough to support the producers in crisis , and that is why the Committee on Agriculture , through an oral question and a resolution on which we are preparing to vote , is calling on the European Commission to introduce new and effective measures to combat the crisis and to support the sector .
We want to encourage and at the same time support the European Commission in the process of deciding what must be done to end the crisis in the European dairy farming sector once and for all .
In this sense we hope that the Commission will provide an exhaustive answer to our questions and will take our proposals seriously , so that interinstitutional cooperation produces the results that European agriculture deserves and shows its solidarity by offering practical support to European farmers in crisis , who need our help today .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , would you allow me to use a bit more than the three minutes ' speaking time allocated to me , because on this important and serious issue I think three minutes would not actually be sufficient .
First of all , I would like to say that I am very happy with the questions put by the Committee on Agriculture , because this gives me an excellent opportunity to clarify the actions that have already been taken .
Let me also thank Parliament for its ongoing work in this area .
We are all committed to finding solutions .
You are , and so am I.
Not everyone agrees with my preferred solutions , but I strongly believe that these solutions are working , that they will work , and they are also solutions that we can defend politically .
Mr Paolo De Castro asked on behalf of the Committee that we say what we are actually doing .
The top line is good news : prices are improving .
For example , in the course of one month butter prices went up by 4 % in France , 8 % in Germany and even more in the UK .
Skimmed milk powder also went up by 4 % in France and Germany , and 2-3 % if we look at the average all over Europe .
Average milk prices have been going up , and Albert Deß just told me this morning that the spot market prices are now at 30 cents in certain areas .
We can see that intervention buying on cheese has almost stopped because the market price is higher than the intervention price , which is another positive signal .
We are not yet where we want to be , but we are heading in the right direction .
This makes me more confident than ever before that the policy approach that we have been taking from the very beginning is the right one .
You know the key elements of what we have been doing .
We have been using all the market measures available and here we expect to spend approximately EUR 600 million over a 12-month period .

We have indicated the possibility for Member States to start the direct payment of the single farm payment to farmers from 16 October instead of 1 December , and we decided under the 2003 reform to decouple the dairy premium - EUR 5 billion every year - and transport it directly into the single payment scheme .
We have the recovery package and the decisions taken in the health check that provide another EUR 4.2 billion to face the new challenges , including restructuring in the dairy sector .
All this of course is on top of what we can do under the rural development policy .
Just for clarification to Paolo De Castro , intervention for cheese was actually abolished in 1994 .
I think there must be some confusion between intervention and private storage because private storage was abolished by the decisions in the health check .
As I said , our current approach seems to be working .
I am therefore more determined than ever before not to go back to the future in ways which would hurt our dairy sector in the long term and leave our farmers without any kind of predictability .
In other words , making a U-turn on the health check decision is not an option and something that the European Council , the heads of state , explicitly asked me not to do .
So , the idea of keeping the quota system after 2013 is not on the table .
Freezing quotas is not on the table , and neither is any return to the use of certain expensive but inefficient market instruments of the past .
They are not on the table .
This certainly does not mean that we have now done the job in terms of policy .
I think it is time for further action .
We need to follow up on the dairy report from this July , use the measures in there and then decide on other actions for the longer term .
If I could start with the report , I will look first at state aid .
The report floated the idea that Member States could temporarily offer aid of up to EUR 15 000 for farmers under this temporary crisis framework .
The Commission has actually already launched the boat and expects to change the rules in the coming weeks .
The second point is streamlining the procedures for responding to prices in the dairy sector .
At this moment , milk is not actually included in Article 186 of the single Common Market Organisation which allows the Commission to take temporary actions quickly under its own power during times of market disturbances .
I am therefore proposing that we include the dairy sector in Article 186 , and this will enable us to spring into action in the future if we hit serious problems in the dairy sector .
For example , our recent extension of intervention had to be approved by the Council , and Parliament voted on this as well , but , if the dairy sector had been included in this Article 186 , we could have acted immediately .
More generally speaking , we could with almost immediate effect mobilise measures stimulating demand and / or we could limit the marketing of milk , and all this would only be put in place on a temporary basis and under the condition that we had the necessary financing available .
The third follow-up point from the report concerns the buying-up schemes by Member States .
One way to restructure is that Member States can actually buy quotas from farmers and put these quotas into the national reserve .
As you know , the national reserve counts in a sense as part of the Member States ' total quota , so if individual producers go over their quota , but Member States as a whole do not exceed their quota , with the national reserve included , then no super levy is actually paid .
What I intend to propose is that bought-up quota kept within the national reserve will not count as part of the national quota when it comes to deciding whether we have to add or to ask the farmers to pay the super levy or not .
If the super levy should then be collected anyway , then the part corresponding to the bought-up quota could then be used for restructuring .
It might sound a bit complicated , but it is actually a very efficient tool .
All of these steps are actions that we are taking now with an almost immediate impact on the markets , but we also need to do something about steps for the medium and longer term .
I would like to thank France and Germany here for their ideas and their input on these different possibilities .
The first longer-term issue is about using contractual relations between milk farmers and the dairy industry to better balance supply and demand in the dairy market .
I believe that this is a much , much better approach than the quota system , and it already works in parts of the European Union .
Milk producers and dairies have clear agreements which remove a lot of the uncertainty .
On the other hand , some Member States simply do not use this possibility , but this can be changed by looking for a legal framework for these contractual relations , whilst clearly safeguarding fair competition .
The second long-term issue is about the balance of power , and you know that we have had this discussion a lot of times .
We need to be able to see within the whole chain from primary producer to supermarket chains where the added value is disappearing .
We will look into future markets as well and , finally , I think a lot can be done on production costs and innovation .
In order to deal properly with all these ideas for the medium and long term , I want to establish a working group with experts from the Member States and the Commission so they can go to the heart of these issues .
For me , the problem in the dairy market is not only an issue between the Commission and Member States .
Parliament actually plays an important role as well , and I am looking forward to the discussion here today on this important issue .
Thank you for being so patient .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is , of course , extremely difficult to summarise this problem in two minutes , but I will try to do it in the style of bullet points .
The dairy sector is in trouble .
Many dairy farmers are seeing their very existence under threat .
The main reason for this is a huge drop in milk product sales .
The Commission really should have acted more swiftly in this regard .
I would also have preferred to see stronger sales promotion measures instead of a greater amount of intervention , such as butter fat being used once again in the ice cream industry .
Last year , when the price of butter reached more than EUR 4 for a short time , a large proportion of the ice cream industry stopped processing butter fat .
I know the figures for Germany , which show that around 100 000 tonnes is no longer being processed by the food industry , which corresponds to a million tonnes of milk .
We must try to stimulate sales once again , in order to clear these quantities from the market .
I would like to thank the groups that have helped in drawing up our joint motion for a resolution .
Unfortunately , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance did not participate in this discussion .
Commissioner , as a short-term measure we are calling for an increase in the de minimis subsidies in an additional motion which is being tabled with 40 signatures , because this would be an opportunity to help the smaller dairy farmers in particular .
It would also make sense to introduce an early retirement regulation .
I know a lot of farmers who are 58 years old and who would like to stop working soon .
An appropriate regulation would be needed for this .
Commissioner , I would like to thank you sincerely for your work .
I would ask you to put in place appropriate regulations to improve the situation of our dairy farmers .
Perhaps you will still have the chance to remedy this situation in the near future .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Commissioner , the Commission and the Council have taken a long time to react to the serious crisis affecting the sector .
We are all agreed on that .
The terrible situation the sector is facing requires swift , decisive action , or we risk seeing the ruin of many thousands of farmers throughout Europe .
My political group has made a great effort to enable us to reach the compromise contained in the resolution we are discussing here today .
I hope the proposals merit your attention , Commissioner , because only by acting to reduce supply and simultaneously stimulate demand will it be possible to restore market equilibrium and bring prices up to profitable levels for producers .
I regret that the compromise did not include the temporary suspension of increased quotas or the introduction of a likewise temporary premium to reduce production .
The measures we propose are , however , a useful contribution for overcoming the crisis more quickly .
It remains for you , Commissioner , to duly follow them up .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , as we have heard from other speakers , there is a crisis in the milk sector .
There is no doubt that we must take action to alleviate their pain , but let me make it very clear that this is a short-term crisis which requires short-term market measures by the Commission , as outlined in the resolution .
Let us also be clear that , for too long , European consumers have paid for a dysfunctional agricultural policy which has failed both farmers and consumers .
This crisis should not therefore be used as an excuse to turn our backs on the road to further reform and liberalisation of the CAP .
That is why we have tabled amendments to this effect and why I welcome your reassurance on this matter .
We also want to see the Commission focused on sorting out the market , which is clearly failing .
Consumers are losing out as they fail to get the benefits from the fall in milk prices .
Farmers are losing out because they do not receive a fair share of the retail milk price .
We welcome the Commission 's investigations into the food chain but , Commissioner , we want you to go further .
Will you commit to action that will root out supermarket abuse of their monopoly positions ?
Will you commit to a competitive market that allows producers a fair share of the cake , and will you commit to a functional milk market that gives a fair deal to farmers and a fair price to consumers ?
I look forward to your response , Commissioner .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for months now livestock farmers have been warning the Commission and the Council of the gravity of the crisis .
Tens of thousands of jobs have been destroyed in rural areas .
The European Union had counted on growth in world demand .
Its experts got it very wrong .
The financial and economic crisis that we are experiencing has direct effects on agriculture and consumption .
The decision by Mrs Boel , Commissioner for Agriculture , to maintain the increase in quotas and the Council 's wish to dismantle them by 2015 are a provocation to milk producers .
Times have changed .
European policy must be adjusted to suit a new global environment .
The milk prices imposed on producers do not cover production costs .
On each litre of milk , some small farmers are losing up to 30 cents .
At the end of the year , many of them will not have made a single euro , or will even have lost money .
Some of them , too , as we are told by regional officials , are today going so far as to take their own lives .
In the face of this unprecedented crisis , the European Union must take significant steps , quickly .
We call upon the Heads of State or Government who are meeting this evening to prepare for the G20 to place the issue of the dairy crisis on the agenda for their meeting , so that appropriate steps can be taken to respond to livestock farmers .
The European Union must boost the negotiation capacities of dairy farms , so that they are no longer subject to the dictates of the agri-food industry .
It should also put in place a safety net to guarantee a remunerative price so that the price never falls below the production costs .
The European Union must put a stop to its export refunds programme .
It has just committed the enormous sum of EUR 480 million , adopted with the backing of various parliamentary groups from both the right and the left , in order to sell its surpluses cheaply on the world markets .
It is destroying hundreds of thousands of farming jobs in the south and is cynically pushing farmers to move off the land or to immigrate .
Above all , the European Union must immediately make drastic reductions , of 5 % , in European milk quotas , in a way that is inversely proportional to the volume delivered by small producers , in order to swiftly re-establish a balance between supply and demand .
A laisser-faire policy is unacceptable .
It has terrible consequences in terms of employment and land use patterns .
Without the small farmers , there will be no Europe .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I feel very strongly that the Commission was very late in acting on this particular problem .
They sat on their hands for too long , and many farmers have suffered grievously for that .
We can either decide to help the industry , or we can decide that we will ultimately let our farmers go out of business : then we can import from abroad with all the problems that brings us .
I welcome your remarks for the future , Commissioner , but I am not happy about your remarks for the short term .
I think we need to do more in the short term to help the industry through this present crisis .
Those short-term measures require immediate action .
Of course I remember the time of the milk lakes and the butter mountains , and I do not want to go back to that .
I do not think anybody in the industry wants to go back to that situation : neither the farmer , nor the processors , nor the Commission nor we in this Parliament .
We do not want to return to that , but one of the main problems I see at this moment in time is that , while the farmers have taken a drastic reduction in what they are receiving for their milk , consumers are paying almost the same as they paid before .
Until we tackle the power of the supermarkets in this area we will not have the answer .
They have to be controlled .
We need an ombudsman , someone who can tell the supermarkets that they are acting beyond their remit , that they are ripping the people off , ripping the farmers off and putting them out of business in the process .
Madam President , once again I can only regret the positions adopted by the Council and what has just been said here by the Commissioner , who persists in not getting to the bottom of the issue and not recognising the need to review the decisions reached on the dismantling of milk quotas .
Instead , she wants to continue deregulating the sector against the farmers ' best interests .
We therefore insist on supporting the need to maintain the quota system , albeit with readjustments to adapt them to the needs of each individual country , including the scrapping of the annual 1 % increase until 2015 .
Does she not believe that , at a time of such serious crisis in the dairy sector , what is more important than deregulation of the sector and liberalisation of international trade is support for agriculture and the dairy sector in the Member States , so as to promote rural areas and employment with rights ?
Does she not consider it essential to create an extraordinary support fund for the dairy sector at Community level , benefiting the most affected producers and countries , and to define new forms of aid for milk and meat production ?
I consider it necessary .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to stress my doubts about the proposal to extend the 2009-2010 intervention period for butter and skimmed milk powder , since this proposal is in danger of turning short-term measures designed for the current crisis in the market into structural measures that would actually restore the dairy farming sector to the position it was in before quotas were introduced .
In an effort to make the market measures more balanced , where benefits are not given solely to those Member States involved in butter and skimmed milk powder production , I call for the reintroduction of Community aid for private storage of cheese with a long maturation period .
Lastly , I would like to draw your attention to the matter of the origin marking and labelling of dairy products and to the traceability of products : this is a request that comes directly from European consumers - in ever greater numbers - and one that might help us to tackle the crisis in the dairy farming sector .
I hope that my fellow Members from the other groups , too , can endorse this proposal .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her words to us today .
In my country , in Northern Ireland , the dairy sector is of vital importance .
When the dairy sector struggles , the rest of the rural economy struggles .
Currently dairy farmers receive just over 20 cents per litre for milk amid escalating costs .
In Northern Ireland not only have they had to contend with poor milk prices and high costs , but we have suffered a third consecutive wet summer and this has had a devastating effect on the dairy industry in Northern Ireland .
It was distressing last night to see farmers in Belgium so angry and feeling so helpless that they are spraying milk onto their fields in protest at the poor price of milk and the difficulties that they too are encountering .
The Commission has taken welcome steps to put a base on the market but we cannot sustain prices at an uneconomically low level .
I call on the Commission to take short-term measures to help : measures that will increase demand for milk ; measures that will cut the cost of production ; measures that will address the supply chain with its decreasing farm-gate prices and high supermarket prices ; and measures that in the long term will create a sustainable industry and a future for young farmers who are experiencing severe difficulties with low prices and high bank charges .
Madam President , when farm women start protesting you know there is a serious difficulty .
At the weekend I met a group of Irishwomen called ' Farm Women for a Fair Price ' and I think we should note the words ' fair price ' because producers are not getting a decent or fair price - and that is what this debate is about .
It would be churlish not to welcome the comments from the Commissioner about a stability coming into the market place , although at a very low level , and I acknowledge that the Commission has taken steps and spent money to bring stability to the market place .
It is just that it is not enough and it did not happen quickly enough and we have a severe crisis .
I want to say that , in relation to the future , your comments are particularly welcome .
I am worried that this House is divided on the issue of milk quotas because when we have codecision , if the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , we are going to have to think more coherently as a group and give clear signals to farmers rather than divided messages , so let me repeat that your comments about making links between producers and processors , about production levels , are something we need to explore , something we have to have a further debate on .
But we need to ask you , Commissioner , what type of market support measures do you think will exist in the absence of quotas that can ensure a fair and decent price to our producers ?
And , also , please tackle the marketplace : it is not working .
Everybody says they are making no money from milk , including the supermarkets -which I doubt profusely - but we need more clarity , and we need fairness for farmers .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I will be brief .
I think that there are two parts to this debate .
There is the immediate question of how we can extricate ourselves from this crisis .
All measures , ranging from assistance for farmers to intervention measures , are necessary - in fact , absolutely necessary .
We must endorse them and even call for them to be enlarged in scope .
That is what we , together with several fellow Members , are proposing here in Parliament .
Secondly , there is the structural question regarding the management of the dairy market , and this is where our views diverge from yours , Commissioner .
You propose that we move in the direction of using contractual relations .
I can tell you in advance that introducing contractual relations between industrial firms and farmers will , in the long term , result in those industries competing with each other , on a Europe-wide scale .
In order to regulate a market , we need public regulation .
There is no other solution .
After this crisis , that is what the debate must be about .
I think that , in this debate , we must respect all opinions and all options ; I fear that we acted too quickly at the time of the health check to settle an issue such as quotas , which up until now , as I would like to point out to all those who have spoken , have made it possible to maintain dairy production in Europe , to ensure that the dairy industry is highly developed and , at the same time , to keep prices at a level that was easily affordable for customers .
Madam President , in the last 12 months the majority of dairy farmers in Ireland and across the European Union have been selling their milk for less than the cost of production .
The livelihoods of dairy farmers are under serious threat .
While the Commission 's decision to extend the intervention period for butter and skimmed-milk powder until 2010 is very much welcome , short-term measures would not alleviate the pressure on dairy farmers in the long term .
Actions must be taken now that will manage , not just the current difficulties , but are long-term and will ensure a sustainable and successful industry into the future .
Financial assistance is required by dairy farmers immediately .
The creation of an EU dairy fund of EUR 600 million , as called for by Parliament in the 2009 budget procedure , is urgently needed .
Dairy farmers are entitled to fair prices , and an appropriate system of price supports is required to guarantee milk producers a reasonable minimum price per litre and a reasonable income for them to survive .
Irish and European dairy farmers must not be forced out of business and I urge the Commission and the Council to take immediate and effective action .
Commissioner , may I say to you that you have been a very successful Commissioner , and I pay tribute to the immense work you have done .
You have recently announced that you are stepping down , and I would urge you to solve , or to make as much of a contribution to solving this problem as possible , before your departure .
( ES ) ¡ Bon dia !
I am addressing this Parliament without being able to do so in my own language , Catalan , which is spoken by over 10 million European citizens .
Today , on behalf of my Group , I want to express our solidarity with the whole of the agricultural sector , and in particular with the strike by milk producers and their actions across Europe .
The current situation is unsustainable and requires a political solution .
Clearly , the measures adopted to date by the Commission have been unable to alleviate the crisis or provide a viable alternative to the quota replacement scheme planned for 2015 .
As a result , in Spain for example - Galicia to be precise - 14 000 milk producers have had to cope with root-and-branch restructuring in order to continue living and working on the land , but today they are still on the verge of imminent disappearance .
For all these reasons , in the same way that the Commission has intervened in other sectors , it must also intervene in the milk sector , by regulating production , redistributing quotas , offering temporary compensation , encouraging product traceability and helping to bring producers and consumers closer together by correcting the dysfunctions caused by the distribution oligopoly .
Why has the Commission not positively intervened to prevent the negative consequences of this oligopoly established by the major distributors ?
Why are we not guaranteeing the rural survival of our milk producers - and farmers in general - who provide extremely positive economic , social and environmental knock-on effects ?
- ( CS ) - Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis in the dairy produce sector shows that the entire European system of quota-based regulation is faulty and ineffective .
What we need is not more regulation and manipulation of the quotas but the complete elimination of milk quotas .
The opportunity to produce milk should go mainly to producers who have low costs and who achieve a profit .
The way to overcome the dairy crisis is to eliminate milk quotas as quickly as possible .
I support the Commissioner 's attempt to eliminate quotas by 2015 , but I would not be sorry to see them go even sooner .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , listening to your statement has increased my concerns even more .
The statement is not a sufficient response to the scale of the suffering being experienced by milk producers and farmers in general .
The crisis is a structural one , and has not been caused merely by current circumstances , as you have said , but by the successive deregulations .
That is why we are calling for an exceptional meeting of the European Council , in order to save small-scale agriculture .

The Council ought , firstly , to decide to set up an exceptional fund to provide assistance to non-industrial dairy production ; secondly , to immediately set a minimum intra-European price that the central buying offices would be obliged to adhere to without any increase in prices for consumers ; and , thirdly , to block national production quotas and put a stop to improper imports from outside the Community .
Madam President , I have major concerns for the dairy industry in the UK .
I feel that the biggest problem lies with the retail industry , which is making huge profits off the backs of our dairy farmers .
When we see what the supermarkets are charging consumers for milk , and then look at what the dairy farmer actually receives , the difference is just incredible .
The work and the major cost in producing milk are borne by the farmer , but at the same time the supermarkets are reaping huge profits .
The margin that the farmer receives is so unfair .
We need to put pressure on the supermarkets to pay a fair price to the industry , and it is my view that the price of milk in the supermarkets will not have to change .
The consumer will not have to pay any more for their milk .
The supermarkets need to reduce their profit margins .
It is quite scandalous when we see the massive profits that these supermarkets are enjoying every year and at the same time our dairy industry is struggling .
If action is not taken on the issue in the very near future then I really do believe that many of our dairy farmers in Wales , and the rest of the UK , will go out of business .
I have one quick point on what the Commissioner said this morning about the super levy .
I am concerned by those comments .
I think it will hit our most efficient producers - those who have risen to the challenge , responded to the market and invested heavily in their farms , following a lead from the Commission that quotas will be abolished .
Imposing a super levy goes against the structural changes which both the EU and the UK Government claim to support .
( BG ) Madam President , the Commission is in an extremely upbeat mood again , bearing good news , but I fail to understand and cannot see anything good in thousands of tonnes of milk being thrown away in protest at the policy currently being pursued .
The truth is that Mr De Castro and the other previous speakers are quite right in saying that the Commission and the Council did not do enough during the health check to prevent this crisis .
Incidentally , where are the representatives of the Council who should be taking a stand on this issue , seeing as the Council holds the deciding vote in any reforms ?
My Eastern European colleagues and I on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development warned on several occasions that we needed a much greater increase in quotas , or their total removal , because our countries , being new to the European Union 's systems , were the first to feel the impact of the crisis .
Unfortunately , we have remained a lone voice in the desert , and the fault for this lies with Parliament .
I deeply regret that we pro-reformists , who really wanted the agricultural policy to be reformed , have turned out to be prophets of doom .
I hope you learn the lessons for the future .
( RO ) Many people have asked during this period , right from the start of the crisis , to freeze the increase in milk quotas .
This type of measure would not only not provide a solution , but would be a mistake , at least from the following points of view .
First of all , there is no basic economic link between the increase in milk quotas and the fall in market prices .
Quotas have increased , while production has fallen .
I cannot see where the link is .
The market itself offers the explanation for falling prices .
I believe that setting fixed quotas would lead to a rise in prices over time .
However , the beneficiaries will be , once again , not the producers , but the processors and retailers .
If we want to limit production we should perhaps encourage producers to stop livestock rearing voluntarily , by providing incentives rather than measures which could distort the market .
Assuming quotas are frozen , what is going to happen when , for instance , demand on the global market picks up again ?
What could European producers do ?
Because dairy production does not have a tap that we can just turn off and on ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
As I was saying , what could European producers do , assuming demand on the global market picks up again ?
Because dairy production does not have a tap that we can just turn off and on willy-nilly .
If we were to cut production now , farmers would obviously give up cow rearing , but it would be very difficult to replenish the livestock when we realise that what some people now imagine would be a good measure is , in reality , a big mistake .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Council , I would like to begin by thanking my fellow Member Mr Capoulas Santos , who has made this resolution possible .
Today we are talking about our dairy farmers and whether we are going to leave them in the lurch or deal with them in an honest manner .
I do not believe that we should leave them in the lurch , but should be honest in our dealings with them .
Yes , short-term measures to overcome the crisis are urgently needed .
Yes , intervention is perfectly acceptable for a short period if the price of milk has reached rock bottom , and additional subsidies , loans and funds to combat the crisis are justified .
However , what is totally unacceptable is , firstly , to start up discussions about milk quotas again and , secondly , to reintroduce tax-funded export refunds for products supplied to developing countries .
We abandoned this one way street in 2003 and I appeal to you to keep it that way for the sake of our dairy farmers .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the world economic crisis has thrown the global market off balance .
As milk producers we are suffering the effects of prices having hit an all-time low .
We are hearing over and over again that the adopted milk quota regulations should be amended .
As a dairy farmer myself , I can only warn you against doing this .
The Commission 's intervention measures have also succeeded in preventing milk prices from falling even further and the market seems to be relaxing .
However , I do not think that this intervention is really a good means of achieving this , because it will result in stocks piling up which could burden a recovering market later on .
I therefore call on the Commission to explain how it is going to deal with this problem .
Madam President , can I compliment the Commissioner on her vision for the future of the industry , and may I say that I strongly support her intention to abolish milk quotas .
I think this is the right decision to make .
I also welcome her proposals to meet this current crisis as a sensible and appropriate way to support producers through a difficult time .
There are , however , two points that I want to make .
Firstly , in my view , the implementation of the super levy at this time would be inappropriate .
It is a short-term , knee-jerk reaction .
It will send all the wrong messages and it will only effectively penalise efficient producers who are making plans to stay in the industry for the long term .
Secondly , we need to recognise that there is little or no direct relationship between the price in the retail sector and the raw material price received at the farm gate .
That is what I term a dysfunctional price-chain mechanism .
The major influence will always be the global marketplace , and we have to recognise that the global marketplace will always be volatile .
I therefore urge the Commission in the long term to come forward with plans to ensure that there will be some sort of stability mechanism for the benefit not only of producers but also , of course , of consumers in the long term .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , you ended your speech by saying that there is a crisis in the milk sector , and yet you started by saying that all possible measures have already been taken and that the situation is being sorted out .
You should know that it takes a wise woman to recognise that she was wrong .
That is a saying in Spain , which could very well be applied to this situation .
For months the milk sector has been suffering one of the worst crises in its history .
Despite that , because the European Commission and certain governments - seemingly including my own , the Spanish Government - do not want to allow their arms to be twisted , they are refusing to go back on the decisions relating to the health check of the common agricultural policy .
Those decisions were taken without any thought for the fragility of this sector , and in a market context very different from the one that has developed since that compromise was agreed .
It makes you think that the Member States did not want to see , or could not see , at that time , the storm that was approaching .
The reform has very quickly become irrelevant , due to the major turnaround in the market , which demonstrates that the sector is totally at the mercy of price volatility .
The fact that major producers such as France and Germany - countries which , in absolute terms , obtained the biggest increase in their national production quotas in this agreement - are now the ones asking for a review of the health check decisions raises a lot of issues .
As I see it , the Member States were wrong and should have listened more carefully to the voices , including mine , which were calling for any final decision on the future of the sector to be postponed until 2011 .
It is a shame that no one listened to us .
Perhaps you should do so now .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , today 's debate is vital so that we can express our concern about the crisis in the milk sector .
We must sort out this situation , which is threatening the future of a large number of milk producers in the European Union .
This is a European crisis that must be tackled from a European perspective , with ambition and by using all available Community tools , something which the Commission at the moment seems incapable of doing .
Commissioner , you should not pass the buck to Member States so that they help whoever they can .
We must find common solutions .
As a result , this Parliament has an important responsibility in demanding measures aimed at reinvigorating demand , and not only those measures indicated in the motion for a resolution , but also those available through the common organisation of the market .
Another important issue is the huge difference between the prices paid to the producer and the final price paid by consumers , something which affects not only the milk sector , but all agricultural and livestock products .
There are many men and women who , faced with the current uncertainty , need a clear and firm signal from us that the continuation of this activity will be guaranteed .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , yesterday in Wallonia over three million litres of milk were poured away by farmers disillusioned by the most serious crisis ever seen in the sector .
They receive only 19 cents per litre .
The crisis is caused by an over-abundant supply of milk , which is making prices drop sharply .
Deregulation is encouraging volatility , and market conditions now are totally the opposite of what they were a short time ago .
Commissioner , please stop stubbornly hiding behind choices made last year and take into account what is really happening on the ground now !
The Council is also to blame , firstly for not being here to listen to the debate , but also for not taking decisions , because it is swayed more by purely national interests than by a European vision of agriculture .
The market is not working .
There is over-production .
It would be very simple to freeze the 1 % increase in quotas , or to reduce the quotas immediately by 3 to 5 % , because we urgently need to come up with some short-term solutions .
Adopting this measure would kill two birds with one stone : we would give the producers a decent price once again and , by reducing production , we would reduce the European bill of hundreds of millions of euros spent on various interventions , including export refunds .

( PL ) The action that has been taken - I have spoken today to Polish farmers and Polish product manufacturers - indicates that there has been an improvement , albeit not a significant one as yet , in the situation facing the dairy sector , but that there has been no change at all in the very difficult situation facing Polish and European farmers .
They still receive very little money for their products , below the viability threshold .
This also applies to those farmers who have invested a great deal of money , including EU funding and loans .
This situation is plunging them into further difficulties , and they are unable to meet their obligations .
In view of these problems , I would like to talk about the future .
Today , we have to react to what is happening right now , but we also have to think about what lies ahead and plan our common policy to take farmers into account as well .
At this juncture , I would like to repeat the following : the common policy in respect of dairy farmers needs to involve plans for sensible investments in this sector , so that we can avoid spending money which , as a result of increased production , will land us in the kind of trouble we find ourselves facing today .
I also trust that all the political powers will reach an agreement regarding future quotas .
( HU ) Those who have spoken before me quite rightly refer to the fact that we should not return to the quota system and export subsidies , but the policy which the Commission has pursued has completely failed .
The crisis has not eased .
This is why Mr Le Foll and I are proposing that we temporarily freeze the quotas , but only temporarily .
The new Member States are still at a particular disadvantage because of phasing-in , as we are receiving just 60 % of the subsidies from the envelope in Brussels this year .
As a counterbalance to this , the Hungarian government proposed increasing the quota-based subsidies , but the Commission did not respond positively to this suggestion or to the one from France , specifically from the French ministry , either .
I finally call on my fellow Members to support the amendments from Mr Le Foll and his colleagues .
We also support the proposal from Elisabeth Jeggle in favour of creating a EUR 600 million dairy fund and the extension of the school milk programme .
( DA ) Madam President , thank you Commissioner for a good start - and a good introduction to the debate !
I recognise that Europe 's dairy farmers are facing a crisis on a major scale , but I simply do not understand how my fellow Members can think that you , in the Commission , have not done enough .
I would definitely like to call on you , Mrs Fischer Boel , to reiterate what you have done .
It seems to me that the list of initiatives coming from the Commission is a long one , in fact it is almost too long .
It is almost as if we are destroying the progress that we made in connection with the health check .
I would also like to point out that the efforts that have been made thus far on behalf of the dairy farmers have clearly not been mirrored in relation to those workers in the car industry who have lost their jobs or those workers in the shipbuilding industry who have lost their jobs as a result of the current economic crisis .
So I can only ask that we take a little care about how we handle this crisis and that we also make sure that we do not destroy the sound progress that was made , despite everything , as a result of the health check .
The idea of freezing the milk quotas is , I think , completely hopeless !
Nor can we go back to the old models by granting export refunds - that simply ruins the market for someone elsewhere in the world .
We have to be careful .
Commissioner , I would nonetheless like to ask you to reiterate the long list of activities that you have already undertaken so that my fellow Members can see that there is certainly no need for us to go crazy and start enacting numerous additional measures with the result that we destroy the sound progress that has been made .

( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the measures are without doubt inadequate .
We propose other , more targeted interventions , especially for the mountainous and disadvantaged areas of the European Union , so that all the Member States benefit equally ; interventions such as reinforced protection for designations of origin , not just inside the European Union , but on the international markets , clear labelling and mandatory indication of the origin of dairy products , the reactivation - and why not - of private storage of dairy products and provision for satisfactory aid , an increase in eligible destinations for export refunds , full transparency in the supply chain and a reduction in the gap between producer and consumer prices .
We are not the mouthpieces for the farmers ' interests .
We are here to convey the anxiety , the cry for survival of the creative forces of the European countryside , and that cry for survival from the people in the European countryside is for us a standing instruction to act .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner - I would have liked to have been able to address the Presidency of the Council too - ladies and gentlemen , as you yourself acknowledged the other day , Commissioner , to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the price paid to dairy producers no longer covers the current costs of production .
What that means is that our producers are in the process of decapitalising .
Just now , you listed the measures you have taken in the past nine months .
Those measures do exist , we will grant you that .
They have not , however , produced the anticipated effects because , in our view , they are not extensive enough , and there is definitely too much uncertainty about how effective their target is .
This morning you mentioned a recovery in the market , but the producers will certainly only see the effects of this in the payments made at the beginning of next year .
The agricultural products market is not the same as the market in metals or the energy market .
It calls for regulatory tools , because the cycles of the seasons and nature also have an effect on market conditions .
Your interpretation of the health check , carried out under the French Presidency , surprises us , since the interim assessments that it produced in relation to the dairy sector leave all avenues open , including the possibility of new decisions on tools for regulating the markets .
The French delegation , to which I belong , is convinced that a renewed quotas system will be necessary after 2013 .
The tension that existed on the food products market prior to the current economic crisis has demonstrated the fragility of the balance across the world between production and consumption .
After having partially dismantled the intervention tools , we have neither the right nor the legitimacy to dismantle today the production tools that we will need in the short term .

Commissioner , we must give farmers back their dignity : these are men and women who are not afraid of hard work .
( ES ) We cannot allow the milk sector to collapse .
It is vital for our rural world , and for food security and quality .
Futures markets and the medium- to long-term prospects of the milk and dairy products market in the European Union are showing positive signs .
We must prevent these falling into a negative situation .
We need anti-cyclical actions and joint initiatives .
The collapse in prices clearly shows the inadequacy of support measures .
The distortions in the dairy farming market mean that each supply chain cannot function effectively or fairly .
Producers are suffering price drops which are unbalancing the market , not being passed on to consumers and delaying the sector 's recovery .
This must be corrected .
We must ensure fair competition and also reinforce traceability during marketing .
( FI ) Commissioner , you mentioned that there is no longer any question of a return to the quota system .
Have we not seen what happened in the dairy industry after the Commission decided in the spring gradually to withdraw these quotas ?
That was a very poor and short-sighted decision .
The complete withdrawal of quotas will deal the deathblow to many small farms .
Is this the sort of policy that the Commission wants to implement ?
The fact is we need a restrictive system for the dairy industry .
If quotas are out of the question , I would appeal to you , Commissioner , to ensure that the Commission proposes other solutions to resolve the crisis .
This is a European crisis and we have to implement an agricultural policy that guarantees at least a reasonable standard of living for farmers , regardless of country and region .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am an elected representative from a region in the west of France , where there is a very high concentration of dairy farmers , and I do not believe that you have acknowledged the tragic social situation they are experiencing today .
Commissioner , when you speak of ' producers ' , what I hear is ' manufacturers ' and ' distributors ' .
Dairy producers do not need your compassion , Commissioner .
They do not need the outmoded liberal theories that have drawn us into an unprecedented world crisis .
Dairy producers need a genuine agricultural policy .
They need strict quotas .
That is why we are calling on the Council to overturn your policy and instead to create a genuine policy to support dairy producers and to put an end to this policy of destroying them en masse .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , our debate really has taken place in the shadow of dramatic events related to farmers spilling milk in protest .
We are all deeply shaken by what has happened .
I wanted to refer to a problem that was mentioned by my colleague , Mr Nicholson , namely the way in which large commercial chains and hypermarkets have abused both their consumers and , in particular , their suppliers .
I would like to remind you that the European Parliament , during the 2008 parliamentary term , adopted a written resolution - I was one of the co-authors - on the need to put an end to these abuses , and for the Commission to conduct a thorough investigation into the matter .
According to my information , action has been taken , but the process seems to be too slow .
I would like to ask whether the Commissioner is interested in this matter and , generally , what the future prospects are in relation to these kinds of activities .
There is something really wrong with the economic policy of the European Union , as farmers receive less than 10 % of the value of their products .
This has to change .
I would like to ask the Commissioner to take action on this issue .
( CS ) Commissioner , you see as progress a 3 % - 8 % increase in the price of finished products such as skimmed milk and butter .
In my view , this is an insult to our farmers .
The main problem is the price at which milk is purchased from farmers .
In the Czech Republic , for example , the purchase price is up to 25 % lower than the production cost , but the price of the finished product which is then sold in the shops would easily cover all the farmers ' costs .
The main problem , therefore , is that there is a large hole somewhere .
This problem has to be resolved .
In the Czech Republic we now have fewer cattle than we had after the Napoleonic wars .
This is now even putting at risk the upkeep of rural areas .
Mr Bové is quite right and Mr Fajmon profoundly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Mr President , emergency measures are obviously needed , as the situation is disastrous .
But is it not possible that the problem lies somehow with the basics ?
Surely there is a problem with a model or system where a huge quantity of soya is imported from Latin America , for instance , thereby increasing the oversupply in Europe while destroying the environment in Latin America .
In the ensuing crisis , we then rack our brains about whether we should export agricultural produce to the developing world at dumped prices , therefore ruining the market over there , along with the situation of smallholders and producers .
Do we not need a new model , such as food sovereignty , instead of imposing on agriculture the free-trade logic dictated by the WTO ?
My second question is the following .
We are asking for specific advice or a proposal on how ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , we saved the banks , because we had to .
Now we are faced with a situation where we need to prevent thousands of farmers from going bankrupt in the short term because prices no longer cover production costs .
However , we must ensure that we maintain our production potential in order to supply the population with high quality foodstuffs .
I belong to a generation which experienced food rationing .
I remember having to cycle eight kilometres in the winter of 1944 just to get two eggs .
It will hopefully not come to that , but security of supply - not only in the energy sector - is also important .
If we are not prepared to take the measures that have been called for in our resolution , the cost in terms of the social , economic and environmental policy consequences in the EU will be many times what ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the European Commission stated in its communication of 22 July , the situation in the dairy farming sector has deteriorated dramatically during the last 12 months .
However , taking into account the huge impact of the crisis on dairy product prices , and in particular on the income earned by producers , the measures proposed to date by the European Commission and debated by the Council of Ministers have been inadequate to counteract the fall in demand and its consequences .
The current crisis is not only giving us the challenge of reversing the fall in demand , but also an opportunity to encourage the consumption and promotion of dairy products .
We must also ensure that the indisputable quality of the initial product is maintained intact until it reaches the end consumer .
In this respect , actions such as improving labelling , increasing milk consumption among certain groups of the population or using milk to feed calves may help not only to improve the current situation , but also the whole structural situation in the sector .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Members of Parliament for this very dedicated debate .
I have actually listened very carefully .
But of course I have also noted the different views that I have heard among the different Members of this Parliament .
As regards the quota system ; it seems to be the scapegoat of this whole situation in which we find ourselves .
I do not underestimate - and I have been very precise on this since the very beginning of the discussion - that the dairy sector , not only in Europe but globally , finds itself in an unprecedented crisis .
That must be very clear .
So I certainly do understand the frustration that I see among farmers in different parts of Europe , not all over , but in different parts of Europe .
The abolition of the quota system was decided back in 2003 so it is not a decision that was taken overnight while nobody knew what was happening .
Then , in the health check , we had the discussion on increasing the quotas to try to find a soft landing for the dairy farmers .
But I think that those who want to point their finger at the quota system for being the reason for all the problems in which dairy farmers find themselves are wrong .
Because we see that even with a quota system in place , we have not been able to maintain high prices and the structural changes in the dairy sector have taken place anyway .
If you look at 1984 , when the quota system was introduced , we had 1.6 million dairy farmers in the old EU-10 .
Today in EU-10 we have 300 000 dairy farmers : less than one fifth of the number of dairy farmers today compared to 1984 with a quota system in place .
So these structural changes are taking place anyway .
I do not think that going back or rolling back the decision in the health check is the right policy , and here I am supported by all heads of state saying clearly in their decisions from the meeting in June that I have to stick to the decisions from the health check .
I have never , ever , during the health check discussions , signalled any openness to roll back these decisions because that would certainly jeopardise predictability for farmers within the European Union .
But , José Bové , I think you said I had not been acting with preciseness ; that is , the laissez-faire attitude .
I do not think it is fair to say that we have been doing nothing .
I am not going to repeat all the different measures that we have been taking .
I think that , if Member States want to pay specific attention to the dairy sector , they now have the possibility with the health check to reallocate the direct payments so they give a special preference to the grassland areas .
That is a possibility and I know that at least one big Member State has taken the opportunity to use this possibility , and for the mountainous areas there are lots of different possibilities .
We have production in Europe today that is 45 % below quota , so what would happen if we actually wanted to cut quota by 5 % ?
We would actually damage the situation for the young farmers that have invested in the future .
Therefore , I would recommend to those countries , those Member States , who really want to help their dairy sector that they use this buy-up of quotas from those who want to leave the dairy sector .
That is a much better way of securing the maintenance of those who have invested while giving a helping hand to those that want to leave the sector .
That is I think the right policy .
Could I then just correct the misunderstanding on the super levy ?
We are not introducing a new super levy system .
We are just giving the possibility that , if Member States are buying up quotas from farmers , they can reduce the number of kilos or tonnes from their ceiling , but it is not a new super levy that will punish any of the farmers .
Just on some of the promotion .
We have already reserved EUR 14 million for promotion for the rest of this year .
We have agreed on extending the school milk scheme ; yogurt that is low in sugar - that is , containing no more than 7 % sugar - will now be introduced into the school milk scheme .
Labelling - I hear from different Members of Parliament that there is interest in a labelling system .
Let us discuss that in the context of the quality paper that is actually on the table at the moment .
So I think there are lots of possibilities .
Then , finally , on the food chain , I completely agree with you that that there is no transparency in this chain and we cannot see where the added value is disappearing .
Therefore , I am looking forward to the presenting of this report before the end of the year so we can see what the situation actually looks like .
I must say that , if you look at the supermarket situation all over Europe , there are huge differences .
Germany has a tradition or number of discount supermarkets .
These supermarkets are using dairy or milk products , drinking milk as a produit d 'appel to get the consumers in , and they are offering a very low price but they are just handing over the bill to the farmers , paying them the low price .
So , I think it would be very interesting and necessary to see what is actually happening in this chain , so let us get this transparency on the table and let us , internally in the Commission , but also in Member States ' competition authorities , look into the market .
It has been a very interesting discussion here today .
I hope that you have noticed the short-term measures and the long-term measures that have been worked out together with France and Germany .
I am sure that we will have some very interesting discussions on the future of the dairy sector in Europe because we all want our dairy sector to have a future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank the Commission for deciding to come here to Parliament today to present new proposals on the crisis in the dairy farming sector .
It is important for the parliamentary term that has just begun to be characterised by an interinstitutional dialogue between the Commission and Parliament , a positive dialogue , which has in fact already launched the codecision process .
We will assess your new proposals very carefully , Commissioner , and it will be my job to ask the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to issue an opinion on the new ideas immediately , without delay .
May I conclude , however , by pointing out that , if the amendment adopted unanimously within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also adopted by this House in plenary , it will become a political problem if the Council , after the ratification of Lisbon , should then vote it down .
I therefore invite you , and the Council , to give it serious consideration .
To conclude the debate , I have received seven motions for resolutionspursuant to Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I come from an outermost region , the Azores , where milk production is the pillar of the economy , society and the environment .
In recent weeks we met with the producers , their organisations and the processing industries .
They all agree .
It is crucial that the Commission should give a more effective and urgent global response in order to tackle the current situation .
Cash flow in the sector is drying up .
It is vital that the outermost regions be looked at particularly carefully by the EU and be included in its responses to mitigate the effects of the current crisis .
They are all of the opinion that we need to stop the increase in quotas .
In a market thrown off balance by surpluses , any country that increases its production harms all the others .
They also believe that we should continue to maintain quotas as a supply regulation mechanism that stabilises their activity .
In the current scenario of total liberalisation , its social , environmental and economic effects on these regions need to be urgently studied .
Specific measures must be designed to prevent the collapse of this activity , which is responsible for our beautiful countryside , the quality of our environment and rural areas , and the economic progress and convergence that we have been achieving .
in writing . - ( HU ) The current dairy market crisis has been caused mainly by raising milk quotas .
The European Commission and Member States ' governments are also responsible for the current grave situation affecting the dairy sector , as in 2008 they supported raising the quotas , resulting in the creation of milk surpluses and the collapse of prices .
This decision was based on the European Commission 's erroneous market forecasts .
However , the European Commission did not abandon its intention even when it became obvious that the production increase was contrary to market trends .
This is why the European Union must immediately drop its measures leading to an increase in dairy production .
Furthermore , we also oppose the permanent removal of quotas after 2015 .
The important lesson to be learned from the current crisis is that the dairy market needs to be regulated .
Without this , prices will become unpredictable .
European dairy producers cannot endure the losses caused by large-scale price volatility .
I am pleased that , with a view to easing the crisis , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted in favour of my initiative , which would raise the export subsidies amount from EUR 450 million to EUR 600 million .
Without the export subsidies some of the surpluses would remain on the EU internal market , which would lead to a further price decrease .
in writing . - Milk quotas need to be cut by between 5 to 10 per cent in order to push prices back up to a sustainable level .
But quotas alone will not save the dairy sector .
While the Commission is correct to adopt a long-term view , it cannot detach itself from reality - and the stark reality is that the agriculture industry , in particular the dairy sector , is in real danger .
The lowest milk prices since 1983 , together with high costs , poor weather and lack of credit , have created an unprecedented cash flow and income crisis for dairy farm families in 2009 .
While the indications are that markets have bottomed out , badly needed price increases still appear some way off , and EU action is needed .
I agree with IFA President Padraig Walshe and Dairy Chairman Richard Kennedy that the quickest way to speed up price recovery is for the EU Commission to make more aggressive use of all market supports such as :
Export refunds
Processing aids
Extended full-price intervention
Longer private storage scheme for butter
Careful handling of stocks
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , last year the situation in the dairy sector declined dramatically .
The producer price for milk fell , and at present many milk producers are having to sell dairy products at a price that does not reflect production costs .
The survival of milk producers is now seriously under threat .
Up until now it has not been possible to resolve the crisis in the dairy sector with the measures the Commission has implemented .
Now it is time to roll up our sleeves and come up with new solutions .
The Commission must stabilise the dairy market in Europe quickly .
At the same time it should also undertake a thorough evaluation of the future of the dairy industry together with actors in the sector and the Member States . Thank you .
In order to tackle the particularly difficult economic circumstances currently confronting the dairy sector , strong action by the European Union is now urgently required .
In common with the majority of the Member States , I believe that the solutions put forward by the Commission are unsatisfactory .
Of course , I welcome the flexibility that it is permitting , which will enable the national aid ceiling to be increased from EUR 7 500 to EUR 15 000 for producers who are struggling .
It is nonetheless vital for us to adopt more effective intervention tools .
In order to deal with the growing volatility of prices , our markets must be regulated to a greater extent .
The joint statement made by 16 Member States on the state of the European dairy market offers the Commission some valuable suggestions on improving the regulation of dairy markets .
I also believe that it is necessary , as seven Member States are requesting , to look at temporarily suspending the increase in quotas .
I would also like to reiterate my support for the introduction of a ' Dairy Fund ' to help producers ' organisations and cooperatives , and also to support agricultural investment , modernisation , diversification of dairy farming , measures linked to geographical location and marketing measures for dairy products .
in writing . - ( ET ) Observing the present situation in the dairy market , it is clear that our sector is still largely unprepared to cope with the consequences of the global economic crisis .
As a result , the development of the common agricultural policy should continue to be aimed towards improved competitiveness and , in the long term , less market management .
Giving the common agricultural policy a ' check-up ' is a step in the right direction , and maintaining the same direction in discussions of the common agricultural policy after 2013 is the only way to strengthen the sector .
We are currently going through the deepest crisis in the dairy sector , triggered by the global crisis , which is basically a result of a discrepancy between demand and supply .
The fall in the prices of milk and dairy products primarily affects farms with low incomes .
For this reason , I do not think that the quota system ought to be frozen in all Member States , but each state ought to decide how to set their own quotas .
The problem is that , compared to 1983-84 , only one-fifth of producers have remained in the market , and we are now at risk of more farms closing down .
We therefore need to adopt urgent measures to prevent this from happening .
We ought to take the following measures to end the crisis in this sector : extend the measures envisaged for storing butter , milk powder and cheeses , speed up the creation of a dairy product fund to meet the needs of small producers and young farmers , and reach an understanding with the supermarkets in terms of setting a fair price for both agricultural producers and retailers .
Energy security ( Nabucco and Desertec ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on energy security in relation to the Nabucco and Desertec projects .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , energy will definitely continue to be the focus of this Parliament for the next five years .
At the same time , we have made good progress over the last five years in establishing a robust European energy policy with three goals : security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness .
In achieving all these goals , the external dimension is extremely important for two reasons .
Firstly , EU import dependency - currently , 50 % of energy resources come from outside the European Union , and the trend is upwards .
Secondly , issues related to sustainability .
The climate change goals cannot be achieved anywhere in the world unless energy is produced more cleanly and used more efficiently .
For this reason , dialogue with the producer , transit and consumer countries is crucial .
The two projects mentioned in today 's plenary are , in a way , complementary and at the same time fit well into the overall strategy .
First of all , Nabucco .
I came from Baku yesterday , and we are definitely still on course to fulfil this project .
We made a major breakthrough this July .
An intergovernmental agreement was signed between four European countries and Turkey , which means that we could already take a final investment decision next year with a view to having gas supplies by 2014 .
We have identified three sources that are ready to commit gas volumes .
Firstly , there is Azerbaijan , where the final investment decision about Shah Deniz 2 should be made in the very near future , and then there are other fields , in Turkmenistan and Iraq , which at this stage are the biggest sources of supply .
Where are the difficulties ?
There are always difficulties related to the particular way we operate in the energy field and how a lot of producer countries are organised .
In the European Union , projects are industry-driven , which means that there is always a very clear calculation of all the commercial risks .
The countries that have the resources would expect more forward-moving decisions .
That means , for example , the EU decides to build a pipeline , it builds a pipeline , and then we commit the gas .
The philosophies are different .
At the same time there is a clear understanding that EU companies are ready to buy the gas , and we are moving forward towards it .
I believe that the transit issue is more or less solved .
We are still awaiting the ratification of the intergovernmental agreement , but I would not expect too many difficulties .
Also , to facilitate buying gas from regions that have particular ways of selling gas , we are developing the concept of a ' Caspian development corporation ' that would allow for reduced risks for companies buying gas , for example at the Turkmen border , or investing in areas where the political and economic risks are quite substantial .
We are well on track , and I believe this is a good example of cooperation between industry-driven projects with political support from the EU institutions .
We have also committed some funds for the southern corridor and particularly for the Nabucco project .
We have launched a call for proposals .
At this stage I cannot say whether this was successful or good enough but at least the invitation was made .
Desertec is also an industry-driven initiative that is currently at an initial stage .
It sounds very interesting that we use the solar energy potential of Africa and transport it to the European Union , but we need some flanking measures for this project to materialise .
First of all , there is the technological development that we have supported for many years .
A large concentrated solar power plant will be inaugurated this month in Seville .
This is one technology that could be used for this Desertec project , and I believe that we would not have advanced so far in this technology without EU support .
Secondly , we need to work with partners because it is very clear that we cannot just say we will take your territory , we will put solar panels in and transport electricity to the European Union .
There should be common ownership of these projects , if they are to happen at all .
For this reason we will have a conference in October on using renewable sources together with countries from the Mediterranean and the Gulf .
It is clear that for Desertec to be successful we need common ownership of these projects , otherwise there will be no successful outcome .
Last but not least , there is definitely the issue of interconnection .
There are two types of interconnection that we need to separate .
One relates to the philosophy and markets .
We have supported the integration of markets in North Africa for some time .
Progress has been made , but we need to strengthen these measures .
The second type is physical interconnection with the European Union , using cables .
I believe that Desertec will come step by step .
It will not be one big project but I believe there will be elements that could ultimately fit our objectives : clean energy for the countries involved and additional exports to the European Union .
We have also provided for commercial incentives .
With the Renewable Energy Directive we have established the possibility for EU countries to invest in third countries and transport electricity to the European Union , and then the goal will also be fulfilled with energy produced in the third country .
That said , it is definitely difficult at this stage to give any timetable for Desertec .
It is a new initiative , which is still in its infancy , and we cannot say Desertec is part of our security of supply strategy .
It is a promising move towards a climate change strategy that we need to promote , but Nabucco is there for security of supply , and it is too early at this stage to rely on Desertec .
I would like to conclude that the best security of supply measures we can take are inside the European Union .
This House has been a very strong supporter of energy efficiency .
Energy efficiency is not only to do with climate change .
It really is a very important element in the security of supply .
I would say it is more important than Desertec and Nabucco , plus even South Stream and Nord Stream , combined .
It really is the biggest element .
Three legal instruments are being discussed with the Council , and I would emphasise that we need to be ambitious and successful with these .
On renewable energy , I am very grateful for the support of this House for the recovery plan , and I am quite positive regarding what I have heard about the applications for offshore wind energy .
It seems that all the funds that were committed to support offshore wind energy will be committed .
This is not only EU money because the overall envelope was roughly EUR 600 million , but the overall size of this project is EUR 4 billion , so industry is investing most of it .
I believe this is a very good combination , as renewable energy also gives security of supply .
Last but not least , I know that sometimes there is an issue about carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) .
CCS is usually needed for two reasons . One is as a global response to climate change but , from another point of view , we will also use coal and lignite for our security of supply .
There has also been very good progress on applications for the financing provided with the recovery plan , so the recovery plan was successful , in my opinion .
After announcing the results , we - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - definitely need to review how to channel EU funds to strengthen the European Union 's security of supply .
Many other steps will also definitely need to be taken to strengthen the security of supply of the European Union .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , we all agree to speak with one voice and have a common foreign policy on the security of energy supply .
It is acknowledged that the energy mix and energy supply differs among Member States according to geography and other distinct factors .
So , diversification also covers supply .
A diversified and interconnected network can , if appropriately redirected , one day become the security of supply for all .
We support the need for a southern corridor , and Nabucco is a common European project .
However , questions need to be answered on the recent agreement between Mr Putin and Turkey , on the quantity of gas from Azerbaijan vis-à-vis the investment , on Gazprom 's offer to buy all Azerbaijan 's exports , on the stability of Iraqi supply , and on the Russian promise to pump double the amount through South Stream .
The energy dialogue with Russia is a necessity based on the pragmatic and equitable principle of security of supply and security of demand .
All other geopolitical considerations must be set aside .
On solidarity , we need tangible plans for emergencies , such as storage and new LNG technology .
Cyprus , for example , invests half a billion euro on LNG , and I regret that the Union assists with only EUR 10 million .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your report .
The question of security of supply for our citizens is becoming ever more important .
In this context in particular , your portfolio will play an even greater role in future - and it will be important for the European identity , too .
As you quite rightly said , diversification is also necessary .
I absolutely agree with Mr Kasoulides that cooperation with Russia will always be important , as it is an important partner with regard to gas supply .
However , we should not be too dependent on any one country , whichever country that may be , but we should diversify , and Nabucco is a good way of going about this .
My third point concerns the solidarity that is needed in the EU .
You have presented a number of proposals as to how we should increase our solidarity and also how the role of the EU as a mediator in conflicts that affect us , in particular between Russia and Ukraine , can be strengthened .
You also talked about Desertec .
I believe both projects are important , as they differ in terms of their timescales .
We also need to consider - and that would be a task for your successor , whether that is you or someone else - how we in Europe , on the one hand , can be in favour of a number of large projects , such as Nabucco and Desertec , while at the same time advocating the decentralisation of some of our electricity and energy production .
There are currently a number of industrial projects under development - which are also industry-driven - which enable consumers and even households to become more involved with a type of energy production that brings energy security .
This ranges from smart meters on the one hand to actual production by individual households .
In this regard , Europe 's approach could be to say ' yes , of course we need an external supply , we need security of supply and large , innovative projects like Desertec , but we must also ensure that the people , the companies and enterprises as well as individual households can have greater control over their energy budgets and energy consumption in terms of price , the economy and the environment ' .
on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is an honour , as a newly elected Member , to address this plenary session for the first time .
I do so also as a former member of the Lower House of the Dutch parliament and Deputy President of Liberal International , as I aim to see European politics , national politics and international politics as one .
In the field of energy , in particular , there is , of course , a direct connection between these forms of politics .
Mr President , when it comes to our position , Europe 's position , in the world , we are currently open to blackmail .
We are dependent on unstable regions and countries with undemocratic regimes .
This has to stop .
That is why my group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , supports Nabucco and Desertec , and I would like to draw attention to the major role that the former parliamentary leader of my national party , Mr Van Aartsen , has played in this project .
Mr President , there are two points that I want to make .
I am pleased that the Commission accepts that business has an important role to play .
It cannot be just the authorities - national government , Europe or international bodies - that are involved in energy .
Business emphatically does have a role to play .
Secondly , Mr President , we in this House should not accept taboos such as those on looking into nuclear power again , as part of our energy mix .
This also applies to Europe in international relations .
Nuclear power , nuclear fusion and nuclear fission are of vital importance .
There are major problems in relation to waste , but we must ensure that we allow research and development and knowledge exchange to play their part in this regard .
Nuclear power has a major role to play because it will help combat the greenhouse effect .
Once again , my group , too , does not have a definitive view here .
We , too , need to open up this discussion again , but we must not declare nuclear power a taboo in this House .
I would therefore like to hear the Commission 's opinion on this .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we are talking today about external energy security policy , we are , of course , aware of one particular fundamental truth , which has already been mentioned by Mr Piebalgs , and that is that the crucial front line in terms of energy independence is within the European Union .
To put it more precisely , if we could introduce low energy standards or zero energy standards for our buildings then we would save more natural gas than Nabucco , South Stream and Nord Stream combined could import .
It is important that our resolution states that the cost-effective options of renewable energy , the energy efficiency strategy and energy saving in particular must be a central part of this policy .
If that is the case , then no additional nuclear power will be needed at all , in our opinion .
Secondly , an important message in this resolution is that we need a common external energy security policy for the EU , which is something that we do not have at the moment .
This policy should include the promotion of energy efficiency and renewable energy within the framework of a neighbourhood policy and a common position to be taken by the EU in negotiations with the transit countries .
The Commission should make sure that it has sufficient capacity for this , as called for by Parliament two years ago in its resolution on this issue .
In our view , Nabucco is a high priority project , because it would strengthen our independence in terms of energy , particularly with regard to Russia , although I agree with Mr Kasoulides when he said that there are still a lot of questions that need to be answered in this regard .
However , it is a pity that some Member States , through their promotion of the South Stream project , which is openly competing with Nabucco , have been undermining the policy of energy independence .
With regard to energy policy , we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance also believe it is important not to forget human rights and to neglect the human rights dialogue when we discuss energy .
When we broaden our perspective to include Desertec or even the Arctic - as we do in our resolution - it is also important that we do this in a spirit of partnership rather than neo-colonialism .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I have three brief points to make .
Firstly , complacency over energy policy is putting us increasingly in the dangerous position of dependency on Russia .
Where possible it clearly makes sense to coordinate our response , but any unified EU policy would inevitably be skewed by those countries that are already in bed with Gazprom and related interests .
And we should not be handing yet another area of vital national interest to the European Commission , which sees every possible crisis as an opportunity to extend its competence .
Needless to say , many of us will vote against any endorsement of the Lisbon Treaty or further efforts to take forward political integration on the back of the various energy concerns of our countries .
Secondly , diversification of sources of supply requires greater commitment to Nabucco .
For the success of this pipeline , Turkish cooperation is essential , yet the opening of the energy chapter in EU negotiations with Turkey is being blocked .
What are the Council and Commission doing to resolve this unhelpful situation ?
Thirdly , I notice the word ' nuclear ' does not appear in the resolution .
Clearly , sustainable , diverse sources of energy supply require a greater commitment to nuclear energy and in that respect I agree with our colleague Mr van Baalen .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , energy security is quite rightly on the external policy agenda today .
However , instead of securing power and influence and the last reserves of fossil fuels , instead of insisting on giving priority to dependency , we are , in my opinion , facing completely different challenges when it comes to establishing a sustainable energy policy .
Firstly , there needs to be a global switch to more renewable sources of energy , more energy efficiency and energy saving .
In other words , we do not need disputes about external energy policy - and certainly not if that is all we are going to do - but rather we need intelligently-provided , affordable energy for everyone .
Secondly , energy security must be part of a responsible peace and development policy for the EU .
Access to energy is vital for every individual , for economic development and for the fight against poverty .
A project like Desertec must not therefore be a way of using energy policy as a means to continue colonialism .
What will the people of the African countries , where the population is growing and energy requirements are rising , get from this ?
Why have they not up to now been involved on an equal footing in the planning and decision-making processes ?
The global energy supply is also part of crisis prevention and peace policies .
This approach is also lacking in the European Union 's relations with the South Caucasus and Central Asia .
As energy suppliers - for example Nabucco - these countries are becoming of more and more interest to the EU , but I see no conflict prevention and sustainable development concept at a local level in these countries .
It is time that the EU put an end to an external energy policy that merely increases competition for oil and gas reserves or extends nuclear technology .
Genuine partnerships for renewable energy and for decentralised supply are what is needed now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know for certain that demand for energy will increase and that European gas production is on a steady decline .
It is crucial for the Member States , and therefore Europe , to implement policies to ensure an abundant , secure supply .
Diversifying the sources and the transport networks fulfils this requirement .
On that basis , no competition exists between the various projects under way , such as , for example , Nabucco and South Stream .
These diversification policies have also meant that , over the last few years , Europe has become less dependent on the main suppliers .
For example , the supply of Russian gas to Europe has gone down from 75 % in 1990 to 45 % today .
The Nabucco project is therefore fine , and the South Stream project is fine .
Until Europe has a single , common energy policy , Italy has not only the right but also the duty to take action in every way possible , from energy saving to nuclear ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) On 13 July in Ankara , at the time of signing the Nabucco agreement , Mr Barroso said that the gas pipelines were made from steel .
However , Nabucco is ' cementing ' relations between the people involved in this venture , establishing a strategic link between the European Union and Turkey .
Prime Minister Putin said that anyone can lay as many rusty iron pipes in the ground as they want , but they will need something to fill them up with .
It is precisely the uncertainty about sources that is the biggest concern with this project .
The only thing for sure is that the EUR 8 billion investment will be a good deal for those involved in it .
In actual fact , just like the concerns caused by Ukraine , the transit country for the Russian delivery , Turkey may similarly cause problems .
There are also many of us who do not agree with establishing a concrete link between Turkey and the European Union .
What is Desertec all about ?
North Africa , revolving mirrors , solar cells , continuous-current transmission and meeting 15 % of energy requirements .
At the moment , this is much more of a mirage than a realistic plan .
Desertec will not be the main course on the European Union consumers ' menu .
It is much more likely to be just a very expensive dessert .
This is why I am suggesting that we get involved in research into increasing the safety of nuclear energy , because this type of energy is clean and cheap as well .
This is a serious consideration because energy security stops with the consumer , or rather the bill and whether he can pay it .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , energy is a vital lifeline for the whole of society , for individuals and for the economy .
It is therefore important for us in Europe to find common solutions , although it is certainly right for the energy mix to remain a national responsibility .
This means that during our joint deliberations we do not need to fight over nuclear energy , low-carbon energy and other types of energy , where my opinions differ from those of Mr Bütikofer , for example .
However , we must try to reach a common position where the external aspects of energy security are concerned .
As regards internal policy , I fully agree with the Commissioner that the issues of renewable energy and energy saving , for example , are more important , as is research into new possibilities .
However , in order to reduce our dependence on external suppliers , we need to diversify .
Desertec and Nabucco are important instruments in this regard .
We also need to negotiate with Russia in connection with issues relating to the partnership and cooperation agreements and energy security now that Russia - wrongly , not rightly - has withdrawn from the energy charter .
This is also an important task for us .
However , we must recognise that we are dealing with countries that are not necessarily reliable and that , unfortunately , we cannot make a distinction between reliable and unreliable countries .
We must therefore counter supplier power with the consumer power of the European Union .
Interconnectivity , the issue of common gas stores - these things are important to ensure that the supply to any individual country cannot be shut off .
If we all help each other , we will be so strong that no one will be able to disconnect us .
That is the crucial point that we need to get across here .
In this regard , we must also make it clear that private investments are necessary , because the situation will be impossible without them .
Much has already been done , but our overarching common security interest must be brought into line with economic interests in order to achieve the best possible solution .
That should not be seen as a contradiction .
I believe that we will then indeed find an appropriate solution .
It means that matters relating to competition law also need to be considered here , and by that I mean that it should not be the power of large suppliers , for example Gazprom or even other companies ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I want to highlight the timeliness of this motion for a resolution and also welcome the effort made by all groups to achieve a joint motion .
Ladies and gentlemen , in order to prevent the reoccurrence of the situation of helplessness suffered by many of our citizens when Russia decided to cut off the gas supply through Ukraine , it is clearly vitally important to maximise the diversification of energy sources and gas transport .
In this respect , we urgently need to build new gas pipelines , which , like Nabucco and other projects , will help to improve security of supply in Central Europe .
However , to ensure a supply in all European Union countries , these efforts must be supplemented by supplies from the south of the continent .
Having said this , I want to underline , as the Commissioner has already done , another dimension to this problem .
The recent crisis showed us that the EU did not lack gas stocks , but rather transmission capacity .
That is why it is important to focus our efforts on improving interconnections within the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , you should believe me when I say that there is a great deal of room for improvement in this situation .
I will give you the example of my country .
As you know , Spain could become an important transit axis for Europe , thanks to its connection with Algeria via the Medgaz pipeline , which is already in an advanced stage of construction , and its six liquefied natural gas plants , whose capacity could be doubled if another emergency situation were to occur .
However , Spain cannot help without improving its interconnection capacity through the Pyrenees .
Lastly , we should be aware that the construction of major infrastructures is only one part , albeit an important part , of the EU 's security of supply policy .
This security also particularly depends on energy saving and the use of renewable energies .
It is in this context that we regard as vital our cooperation with the North African countries in the development of renewable energies .
This is linked to my call to reinforce the supply from southern Europe .
As a result , Commissioner , the Mediterranean Solar Plan , led by the Union for the Mediterranean , is an attractive idea that we in this Parliament want to support .
Mr President , we have three great challenges in this area - security of energy supply , the inefficiency of our internal market in energy and the imperative of combating climate change .
Desertec and Nabucco are central to meeting these challenges .
If we succeed in developing high-voltage solar thermal power in North Africa , we can give a sense of purpose to the Union for the Mediterranean , we can assist in water provisioning in the countries on the southern Mediterranean rim and we can develop electricity generation technology , for which there is a massive world market .
If we can convince Member States of the political need for greater energy independence , and stop Berlin and Paris from undercutting it at every turn , Nabucco can help us diversify our supply of oil and gas .
The motion for a resolution before us today says little about what we need to do here in the European Union .
We need to develop renewable energy production - solar thermal and other .
We need to build high-voltage DC electricity distribution capacity through a smart grid - some EUR 50 billion of investment , but creating many jobs - and we need oil and gas storage facilities and , even more , a storage policy to reduce our dangerous dependence on Russia .
Our energy provision will continue to rely on oil and nuclear power but , as we prepare for the World Climate Change conference in Copenhagen , the only big idea is the switch to renewables .
Wind could meet all the new electricity demand in China in the next 20 years and replace 23 % of their coal generation .
Deserts get more energy from the sun in six hours than humankind uses in a year .
Commissioner , you said this is not part of our strategy for security of energy supply .
Well , it should be , and it must be .

Mr President , energy security is for us to a large extent a question of energy independence , as many have said , and , as Mr Piebalgs said correctly , the most effective strategy is that of efficiency , savings and renewables .
But we , as Greens , are also realistic and realise that , in the medium term , we will need gas supplies .
Therefore , we are in favour of diversification and also see the Nabucco project as a European priority project .
But let me say why we do not believe that a nuclear strategy is a strategy of independence , certainly not of energy independence .
After all , uranium is imported , and not only from countries we like .
And , if we speak about security , we have to mention the security implications of nuclear energy , namely nuclear proliferation , and we see the problems that we have with that in other very high-profile security issues .
We cannot neglect that , and we cannot say that nuclear energy is completely separate from the question of nuclear proliferation .
In addition , our group strongly believes that all projects have to address concerns about transparency and corruption and cannot stand in the way of a frank and strict human rights dialogue with the cooperation countries , as well as a holistic and political approach to these countries .
( PL ) From the moment when the agreements on the construction of the Nabucco and South Stream projects were signed , a great race began .
Time will tell whether Nabucco will play its part in the European Union 's foreign and security policy .
That is why I am surprised at the European Commission 's policy towards Russia with regard to this matter .
The Commission is gravely mistaken in thinking that South Stream is not a rival project to Nabucco .
The Commission is wrong not to react to Gazprom 's further encroachment onto the European energy market .
Moreover , the Commission is wrong to agree tacitly to the implementation of Gazprom 's projects in the Baltic and the Black Sea .
Nabucco will only be successful if it receives long-term political guarantees .
That is why we need active policies in Central Asia , in the Black Sea region .
Creating links , in terms of the energy sector , between these countries and Europe will strengthen their sovereignty , improve European security and perhaps even open the door to the reforms we anticipate will take place .
If Afghanistan constitutes a test for NATO , then energy security is certainly a test of the European Union 's mettle and maturity .
The success of these plans depends solely on our political will .
Amendments to the treaties are a lesser issue .
( FR ) Mr President , the independence of our region 's energy supply and the security of energy installations and consumers ought not to go hand in hand with defiance of the interests of the peoples of the gas-producing countries and the transit countries , otherwise we risk generating conflict .
Competition between gas pipeline projects is not only a source of trouble , but is also a factor in tensions in Eastern Europe , the Caucasus and Central Asia .
Removing gas and other energy sources from the serious problems caused by the speculative markets , through tariff agreements that respect the producer countries and the transit countries , and that provide security to European consumers , would make it possible to guarantee security all round .
That could be the task of a European Energy Agency supervised by Parliament and the Council , whose sole policies would be cooperation and promoting the public interest .
Why , then , do we have the feeling , in this case , that commercial interests prevail over the interests of the European people ?
I would also like to issue an official warning to the Commission to avoid the temptation of using the Nabucco project as a Trojan horse for obtaining Turkey 's accession to the EU by forcible means .
Respect for secularity , for women 's rights and for the rights of the Kurdish people , as well as acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide , must remain the criteria by which Turkey 's potential accession is decided .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , you are known for your pragmatism and sense of realism , but I would say with all due respect that I do not see the Nabucco pipeline as final or as quite such a given .
Having examined the capacity of this pipeline , we have established that , in order for it to be viable and efficient , it needs 31 billion cubic metres of gas a year .
You have just returned from Azerbaijan and you feel certain that it is a supply country .
Azerbaijan promises everyone gas .
Where it will find the gas to fill the pipeline is a question which continues to distress the countries involved in the Nabucco pipeline .
So far , Baku is saying ' I 'll give you all gas ' , but it is not in a position to guarantee even its safe transit .
As for Iran , to which you referred Commissioner , it will have stormy and possibly explosive relations with the European Union for a long time before it becomes a gas supplier .
The international energy market is saying that Russia is behind the Azeris and that we shall find ourselves face to face with them .
My question is , before you commit financially , can you please secure our supplier ?
( DE ) Mr President , Nabucco was Giuseppe Verdi 's first hugely successful opera .
In harmony with the new Italian-Russian remix , South Stream , the energy project of that name is , however , in danger of being scrapped .
When we consider that a supposed member of the Green party like Joschka Fischer has signed a lobbying contract for a six-figure sum , then the entire composition sounds more like a pointless pop song aimed at a limited market than a symphony of sustainability and economy .
Over the next few years , electricity produced from solar energy will become significantly cheaper .
The entire investment could be used to generate a total of 8 000 megawatts of wind energy .
If natural gas fields in Iran and Iraq are also to be closed to Europe , then we will probably experience the same fate as Verdi himself , as he did not find peace for years after his Nabucco project either .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for being very clear in your explanation of the current situation in relation to Nabucco and its potential and viability - seemingly in the short term , according to what you said - and also for the information on the Desertec project .
There can be no doubt that the Sun is an extraordinary source of energy .
Converting this energy into energy that can be used by people is an area which has seen major developments in the last 20 years .
However , there is also no doubt that we still have a way to go before the full potential and viability of this source can be technologically assured , particularly in projects such as the Desertec project which we are now discussing .
This project is very welcome and we must therefore support it and keep moving forward in order to solve the technological problems .
However , I must really draw your attention to the fact that , when talking about energy efficiency , and particularly about security of supply and therefore diversification of energy sources , one particular energy source is ignored to a certain extent .
I am of course talking about nuclear energy .
This energy source is systematically being discriminated against , because it does not fit with what is happening in many EU countries or with global trends or with mankind 's current energy needs .
This situation must be turned on its head .
We must adopt an attitude of considering all possible energy sources in terms of the role that they can play .
Here in this Parliament we cannot so obviously turn our backs on this reality .
( BG ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is no coincidence that the issue of energy policy and energy security comes up quite often in this House , particularly following the situation early this year when several members of the European Union were virtually left without gas supplies .
This was probably the breaking point in relations between the European Commission and the Member States as a whole regarding this issue .
What we are now discussing is not so much the technical questions and details of developing energy policy within the European Union as the external aspects of energy security and the European Union 's development in this sphere , because at the end of the day there are two sides to this issue .
It is , after all , an important question , as it ultimately affects every single citizen .
We must be clearly aware of this when discussing Nabucco , which is undoubtedly one of the highest-priority projects in this sphere , along with Desertec .
We must also be clearly aware that there are countries in the European Union which rely not only on a single supplier , but also on a single supply route .
I therefore cannot accept that Nabucco will pose a challenge to projects such as South Stream and , to some extent , Nord Stream , whose aim is to supply gas directly from Russia to a European Union Member State , thereby ensuring that the European Union is not dependent on transit supplies through countries which are both politically and economically unstable .
In this respect , the European Commission is right to declare that there is no challenge posed , and that we have to try to integrate all these separate projects into a common strategy where , I stress , Nabucco is obviously a major priority .
We expect the Commission to come up with its own proposal for increasing gas reserves within the European Union , which is very important , and for developing an interconnection system between Member States with a higher capacity , which is also a very important element in guaranteeing security both for citizens and for business in the European Union .
We should not , of course , underestimate the issue of energy efficiency , which is another important element in our policy of guaranteeing energy security for the European Union .
Mr President , I want to thank the Commissioner for reminding this House that there is also a demand side to energy security .
The decision to take incandescent light bulbs off the European market will save the equivalent of the annual electricity generation of Finland .
This autumn we are seeking agreement with the Council on a package of energy efficient measures .
Forty per cent of the energy we use is consumed in buildings , so it matters a great deal for the future of energy security that we set high standards of efficiency for both new and existing buildings .
I hope that Member States in the Council will support the Parliament 's proposals , which are designed to put a stop to the utter waste of energy which is currently used in heating , cooling and lighting .
If nothing else , Ministers should support those proposals out of self-interest because it will considerably ease their job and their responsibility of keeping the lights on and the gas flowing .
Mr President , we have three main concerns with Nabucco .
The project is being developed too slowly and in a lacklustre way , and we do not like the Commission 's position , reiterated by Mr Landaburu a week ago , which stated that the Commission is neutral between South Stream and Nabucco .
The Commission should be in favour of Nabucco .
Secondly , we wish the Commission to become more active vis-à-vis those Member State governments that time and again seek to gain a competitive edge and advantages at the expense of other Member States .
I will not mention those countries today other than to say that one has a capital called Rome .
If we do not move quickly with Nabucco we will witness unpleasant events similar to those in Hungary where the Surgutneftegas company obtained a critical amount of shares in the Hungarian company MOL .
A similar situation also prevails in Baumgarten , Austria .
Otherwise , Mr Commissioner , we wish you good luck in creating the common energy policy still missing in the EU .
Mr President , Europe 's future depends on securing energy .
As both the Nabucco Agreement and the Desertec initiative show , Turkey is an essential gateway , and in this regard I echo Mr Van Orden 's point .
It is critical at this time to be building greater trust and deeper ties with countries who will be our energy partners , including Middle Eastern and North African states .
In relation to many of these there is a connected development issue .
With Desertec the mass generation of electricity from solar power is a unique opportunity for revenue generation , which must be used for the benefit of their people also .
This opportunity must not be squandered .
Unfortunately , some Member States - including my own - have not used the recent past to prepare a coherent energy strategy .
My own constituency , the North West of England , has been identified as a prime area for wind power generation , and yet the UK 's planning laws are an obstruction .
Whilst we must look outward for future energy supplies , Member States must also make the best use of the resources and potential they already have .

( PT ) Mr President , I have been listening carefully and would just like to raise three issues .
The first is : what are we actually talking about when we talk about energy security and energy ?
Are we talking about people - people for whom we must guarantee equal access to energy and guarantee security so they are not left without energy during the winter ; are we in the end talking about the power relations between great powers ; or , worse still , are we using energy security and these projects , like Nabucco or Desertec , as excuses to send out messages to other regions of the world or other countries ?
If it is to send out messages , with what moral authority are we doing so ?
The second point I would like to make is that , whenever we speak out against non-transparent transactions by foreign entities within the European market , we ask the Commission to take immediate action .
I would like to know how this request of ours stands in relation to non-transparent transactions on the European market by Europeans themselves .
To finish , Mr President , I would like to make a third point .
I just feel we have all missed a great opportunity to have a medium- and long-term policy .
We chose the short term and , once again , we have been left with a strengthening of the interests of the internal market and of the big industrial companies .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is not before time that the security of supply is recognised as a key energy policy issue .
Unfortunately , it is not as simple as it is sometimes made to appear in political debates .
We are talking today about two projects : Nabucco , a very tangible project that we can work on , and Desertec , an interesting project or an interesting idea or a vision and no one can yet judge precisely whether , where and how it can be put into effect .
We need to concern ourselves with concrete matters and work on those .
We must also promote visionary projects , but we must guard against believing that there is only one solution to any particular problem or only one strategy for solving the problems .
Thus , the point made by many fellow Members here is absolutely right : there is not just one answer , there are many solutions to these problems .
These include , for example , the fact that we must not allow a very intensive debate on the CO2 problem to make us increasingly dependent on gas , which then brings us problems once again because we need new pipelines .
We must say ' yes ' to the coal policy , and that is why we need new power station technology .
We must say ' yes ' to CCS , ' yes ' to nuclear power and to renewable energy and ' yes ' to energy saving .
It is not a question of one thing or the other , but of doing all of these things together .
Anything else would , in my opinion , be immoral and irresponsible and I believe we would not be doing ourselves any favours .
This also relates to the question of the source of supply and transport routes .
Here , too , there is not just one answer .
Anyone who believes that they can simply rely on a debate about pipelines is mistaken , of course , for if we want fewer dependencies we must keep a variety of options open , including LNG , and set about dealing with these .
The question then remains - and it is a very important question - as to how we ensure that the necessary capital is made available to implement the required projects .
What is the use of wonderful plans if there is no one willing to invest in them ?
Therefore , the way in which we pursue our energy policy and how we deal with those who we expect to invest in the projects is important .
Companies must be encouraged .
We must guard against believing that we can force everything to happen and predetermine every last detail .
Last winter many solutions worked without any political decisions being taken because clever people cooperated wisely in different places and because the Commission provided helpful mediation .
( SV ) Mr President , it is , of course , unacceptable for people in Europe to be without power in the middle of winter or for people to be forced into unemployment because the industries in which they work are unable to pay the high energy prices and are therefore forced to lay people off or even close down their operations .
It is therefore extremely important for us to take wise decisions in order to safeguard energy supplies .
At the same time , the requirements made of the large infrastructure projects that are needed must be clear with regard to both environmental impact and the countries ' independence .
Member States must not be placed in a situation where they are at risk of being at the mercy of another state .
The environmental impact analyses must be carried out by reliable and independent bodies before large projects are allowed to get underway .
This of course applies to all of the large projects identified , but I would like to mention the Baltic Sea in particular , which is a large and sensitive inland sea .
We need analyses and decisions that guarantee that the Baltic Sea will not be turned into a dead sea because we in the European Parliament did not have a sufficiently long term view and were not demanding enough when we took our decisions .
We owe this to our children and grandchildren .
Mr President , everyone wants energy security , so why do we not have it ?
Maybe it is because there are 27 interpretations of what energy security means .
Personally , I interpret it as meaning , among other things , diversifying the sources and moving away from our gas dependency on Russia .
We do not have to look too far for evidence of this , just at some of our Member States which , being too far from Russia to have a pipeline , do not have all the problems attendant on dependency .
I think we should focus on LNG , developing technologies , building LNG terminals and bringing gas from all over the world .
We should also contribute to establishing a global market for LNG such as there is for oil and commodities .
Concerning the Nabucco pipeline , I think the project should be quickly redesigned to take into consideration gas from various sources , and reconsider a shorter route which might lead from Georgia , Ukraine , under the Black Sea to Romania .
We just have to look at the map .
The fact that Member States have different interpretations of , or interests in , energy security is also proven by the fact that some countries involved in Nabucco have also signed up for South Stream , thereby lowering Nabucco 's credibility and the chances for a common European energy policy .
South Stream definitely means increasing dependency on Russian gas .
( PL ) Listening to my fellow speakers , I wonder whether the citizens of the European Union are doomed to merely listen to our words .
It is something we could have tested in January of this year , during the energy crisis .
After all , we are adopting resolutions as we all feel that the Union is not coping with the issue of energy security .
We also note , Commissioner , that there is less interest in Nabucco among the EU Member States , although this is not the case for all energy projects .
In the north , we have the Nord Stream project , which is a very serious move against the common foreign policy .
In the south , there is the South Stream project .
Here , too , the EU Member States are keen to get involved .
However , when it comes to Nabucco , all we hear are promises , but there is neither sufficient money nor political support .
While we are discussing the subject in Strasbourg , the cement mixers have arrived on the shores of the Baltic to work on the Nord Stream project .
I would like to know whether I can hold supporters of the Treaty of Lisbon to their word , namely that when the Treaty is ratified , they will cease to support the Nord Stream and South Stream projects .
Nabucco may prove to be an excellent step towards ensuring energy security .
If we continue to merely issue statements then , during future energy crises , when we send EU citizens pamphlets containing our resolutions , they will burn them .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with Commissioner Piebalgs .
His statements just now confirm that South Stream is not Nabucco 's competitor but a further contribution to the diversification of Europe 's energy supply sources .
Europe 's energy security is based on a variety of sources , routes and supply countries .
At zero growth , future demand for gas is estimated at an additional 100 to 150 billion m3 by 2020 .
Based on these assumptions the development of different options is imperative , and South Stream is not an alternative to Nabucco , but in fact complements it .
The Commission regards the southern corridor as a series of projects including Nabucco , South Stream and the Turkey-Greece-Italy interconnection ( ITG ) .
The anti-Russia debate is therefore in conflict with what we will see happening over the next few years .
The European Parliament must call for pragmatism and above all consistency in the decisions that the European Union has essentially already taken : with the European economic recovery plan , with Decision No 1364 / 2006 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down guidelines for trans-European energy networks , and with the second energy security strategy .
The diversification of sources , routes and supply countries is the real pillar of Europe 's energy security policy and , leaving aside the political and economic interests of the various countries most directly involved , the South Stream-Nabucco challenge must be analysed with realism , not through the distorting prism of ideology but rather with a clear vision of what needs to be done .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , if we are to address the problem of our energy security in a reliable and viable manner , we need a global strategy which responds to the need to differentiate energy sources and adopt common rules in terms of transit countries , because our dependence on a single energy source is as bad as our dependence on a single transit country .
We therefore need a balance and that will not be achieved either by adopting a cold-war tone of voice towards Russia , on which we are or will be energy-dependent anyway , or by supporting a single alternative pipeline , namely Nabucco , at a time when there is still uncertainty about its supply capacity and the political and economic conditions in the countries on the Caspian Sea and in the Caucasus .
As for Desertec , I agree with many of the objections formulated and I want to add this : the strategic objective of the European Union must be to gradually make ourselves independent of energy imports , not to replace imported natural gas with imported electricity from renewables .
If we really want to become energy self-sufficient and independent in the long term , we need to promote energy efficiency and make the best possible use of renewable national energy sources .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate you on your integrated approach in this proposal .
This diversification is very important and I would also like to concur with what my colleague Mr van Baalen said , namely that we need to consider all forms of energy , including nuclear power .
Yet - and this is something I learnt at primary school - the Sun is the source of all energy and I believe that we must focus on the Sun in future .
When it comes to diversification , it has to be about not only the types of energy , but also the suppliers .
Many of you have spoken about Russia .
So far , Russia has always supplied us when we have asked it to , but in the future it will be important to have more suppliers .
Next , how can we guarantee energy security ?
We can only guarantee it if we can also get our energy supply via the networks and I believe that your most important task - you have negotiated a number of obstacles , Nabucco , Desertec - in the coming years will be to realise an integrated network where the countries involved , all the EU Member States , are pulling in the same direction and are also willing to implement energy policy in an integrated way .
You can ask institutional financiers , private investors , for the money , but I believe that you need to start working on an integrated network right away , a kind of supergrit , an induction loop for Europe capable of reaching every end-user .
( FR ) Mr President , energy is not an area over which the European Union has jurisdiction .
Mr Piebalgs , congratulations on all that you are doing .
Energy and access add up to war - sometimes in military terms , sometimes in political terms , and sometimes in economic terms .
As for gas , we are going to have a gas war .
We will not know , moreover , if gas is the cause of the war or a consequence , but in any case we will have a gas war .
We know the figures : in the countries of the Caucasus , there are two centuries of reserves ; in Russia , one century ; in North Africa , half a century ; in the Baltic , half a century ; and in Europe , about 20 years .
We must therefore prepare to import gas .
Yes , Commissioner , Nabucco is a sound project , and we must support it , but we must give financial and political support to all the diverse sources of energy supply , both Nord Stream and South Stream , from the North and from the South .
We must also rely upon our industrial companies , which are competent and fair , and which have an ethical code , but let us not be naive .
Commissioner , I urge you to study , straight away , the proposals by certain Member States that would like us to have an operational European instrument for taking action on the gas market , that is , to create a European central buying office for gas , something which you are , moreover , doing for the Caucasus with the Caspian Development Corporation .
With regard to Desertec , I would like to offer my congratulations .
We know the figures : 1 km2 of desert receives the equivalent of 1.5 million barrels of oil .
This is an excellent project for the Euro-Mediterranean area .
We know that 0.3 % of the planet 's deserts could supply the entire world with energy .
We know that we will solve our energy problems through human ingenuity and science , but in an ethical and moral way .
Commissioner , you are doing a very good job , because we have here a Europe that produces results , a Europe that protects , and a Europe that acts .
Well done , and please continue - you will have the support of the European Parliament .
( LT ) The ' Nabucco ' gas pipeline would allow Europe to feel strong and safe .
However , not all countries in the Caspian region are following the road to democracy and not all can be trusted .
Much depends on relations with Turkey .
Even if , for the time being , there is no prospect of opening the door to that country 's membership of the EU , we must not push it away and not provoke anti-European feeling there .
The Desertec project is especially significant in that it points to the future .
When discussing energy security , too little attention is paid to renewable energy sources and , in particular , energy efficiency .
I am pleased that this is exactly what the Commissioner underlined today .
Financial and economic mechanisms should be established at EU level , which would encourage EU Member States and individual companies to save energy and switch to the newest and cleanest technologies and this would be a serious contribution to energy security and to combating climate change .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , as a Latvian politician , I know very well what it means for a state to be energy dependent .
Although Latvia generates about one-third of its energy needs from its own renewable resources , the remaining two-thirds of our energy balance-sheet comes predominantly from one supplier state - Russia .
As a small country heavily dependent on energy supplies , we understand very well how expensive this dependence can be both for the end-consumer in terms of price and for the country as a whole in terms of potential political vulnerability .
The energy balance-sheet of every European Union Member State is different , but we are all concerned by one and the same question - the security of energy supply .
Security of supply can be achieved by diversifying sources of supply , for the more suppliers we have the less dependent are we on each individual supplier .
Russia is an important partner for the European Union in terms of gas supplies .
In Europe , we import in total about one-quarter of all gas consumption from Russia .
Some countries , such as Latvia , are even wholly dependent on supplies of gas from Russia , and with every year Europe 's overall dependence on supplies from that country is tending to increase .
One of the alternative sources of supply is the projected Nabucco pipeline , which would deliver gas from Central Asian countries to Europe , via Turkey .
I consider it very important for Parliament to give special support for this project , for it will directly strengthen our common gas supply security .
The Nabucco pipeline , however , is only the start of the solution for our common gas supply security .
We have to achieve a united European energy policy that would coordinate our activity across all energy issues . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Mr President , first of all , allow me to express my thanks that I can speak in Hungarian in this House , which allows me to greet the Vice-President in this language .
I would like to begin by saying that , if we look back at the last five years , Commissioner Piebalgs has probably become one of the most successful commissioners for the balanced , forward-looking policies which we have jointly accepted with Parliament up until now .
In January , at the Nabucco conference held in Budapest in Hungary , Commissioner Pielbags stated for the first time that the European Union wants to offer political and financial support to the Nabucco project .
We will have to raise an estimated figure of some EUR 8 billion for the 3 300-kilometre pipeline .
The two most important tasks we have ahead of us then are to find some EUR 2 billion from the European Union budget and , secondly , to draw up those conditions which will make it easier and simpler for the project to access credit , and on better terms .
The original promise was for some EUR 30 million .
We need to realise that we have to go further .
I am confident that in the few months that lie ahead , the Commissioner will make every effort or leave it to the next commissioner to ensure the project 's success .
We are all very aware that in the event of an economic crisis , it is not households which bear the main brunt of current and power failures , but companies .
We are talking , fellow Members , about those companies where our voters and our citizens work , and we are jeopardising their income by jeopardising energy security .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , energy security is undoubtedly a fundamental priority that must be enhanced firstly by increasing energy efficiency and diversifying the suppliers , sources and supply routes , but above all by promoting the Union 's energy interests in respect of third countries .
Now , the March European Council declared that , in order to achieve its energy security objectives , the European Union collectively , but also each of the Member States , must be prepared to combine solidarity with responsibility .
This , in my view , is the crucial point : European energy policy must be inseparably linked to the Union 's foreign policy , because , while we keep on saying that our foreign policy action will be truly effective when we speak with one voice , that is just as true for energy policy .

Yet that is precisely the point ; until that time - that is , until we are able to speak with one voice - the efforts of many governments that are involved in complex operations such as Nord Stream and South Stream must be viewed not as in conflict with support for Nabucco but as part of the same strategy , in which we combine pragmatism with realism in order to put our citizens ' interests first .
For that reason it is a definite ' Yes ' from us to Nabucco , but just as definite is our decision to support the efforts made by our governments to ensure that diversification of supply guarantees the well-being of our populations .
( RO ) In 2008 the European Union posted a record commercial deficit of EUR 242 billion , mainly due to the increase in the price of imported energy .
The Nabucco project pipeline will pass through Turkey , Bulgaria , Romania , Hungary and Austria and will provide the European Union with an annual supply of 30 billion cubic metres of natural gas from the Caspian Sea .
The EUR 200 million allocated to the European economic recovery plan are insufficient .
We call on the European Union to supplement the funds allocated significantly .
Desertec will use solar power from North Africa and will also include the implementation of a Mediterranean plan for capturing solar power and the construction of an electricity transmission network , which will link the European Union with the Middle East and North Africa .
The EU must invest more in the diversification of energy supply sources .
As rapporteur for matters relating to the energy performance of buildings , I call on the EU to provide innovative financial instruments to boost the investments in the use of renewable energy sources and in improving energy efficiency , especially for buildings and in the transport sector .
( RO ) Nabucco will provide for a large part of the European Union 's demand for gas .
However , what is even more important about this is the political aspect : it will eliminate our dependence on a single source .
The recurring crises have highlighted that the current situation , with Russia as a single source and Ukraine as the only transit country , does not provide any security for Europe 's economy and citizens .
The development of new energy supply routes must be just as important as developing relations with Russia .
The delay in launching the Nabucco project has been due , unfortunately , to the individual interests of certain Member States .
Member States must realise that it is not only the countries which the pipeline passes through or the commercial companies involved which will enjoy the benefits of this project , but all Europe 's citizens whose national governments must guarantee their well-being and safety .
The mistakes which have led to this project being delayed must not be repeated in relation to securing sources of gas .
There are countries in the region , such as Azerbaijan , Turkmenistan , Kazakhstan , Iraq and Iran , which want to supply the gas pipeline with their reserves .
The Commission must repeat what it has done for the intergovernmental agreement , which is take part in the subsequent negotiations and reach a positive outcome as quickly as possible .
If we do not get on and do it , others will , and I am very sure that it will not be in the interest of Europe 's citizens .
( ES ) Mr President , given the EU 's dependence on external energy supplies , securing its supply is an issue which must always form part of the EU 's external policy .
In addition , all predictions agree that energy demand in the world will increase significantly over the next 25 years .
Here in Europe , we have to reduce our high dependence on Russian gas , particularly following the crises in recent years .
There is also a clear strategy in Russia to secure its dominance in Europe over the gas sector .
That is why we have projects such as Nord Stream , Blue Stream II and also South Stream .
We therefore need to diversify in terms of suppliers and routes .
That is the reason for the interest in Nabucco , which will give access to Azerbaijani and Iraqi gas , and also to gas from Turkmenistan , thus reinforcing our energy relations with Central Asia , which is an increasingly important region .
I am therefore delighted about the agreement reached last July , as reported by the Commissioner , and also the explicit support given to Nabucco by President Barroso in the political guidelines that he recently presented .
I know that there are doubts about the viability of Nabucco , but I also had doubts about the Baku-Tblisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline , which is now a reality .
I must stress that the countries around the southern rim of the Mediterranean also have an important role to play in the supply of gas to Europe .
The main country in this respect is Algeria , which is an important supplier of gas to my country and to Italy .
We must ensure that the work on the Medgaz pipeline is quickly completed .
I also want to highlight countries such as Egypt and Libya in terms of gas supplies .
To sum up , energy issues must be a priority in the Euro-Mediterranean relationship , to the benefit of both sides .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon includes energy as a shared responsibility and lays down that one of the EU 's energy policy objectives will be to guarantee the security of energy supplies .
This really encourages us to move forward with developing an increasingly essential common foreign policy on energy , as stressed by the motion for a resolution to be adopted today .
I will end by saying that this is a difficult objective , as proven by our failure in Europe , in the European Union , to achieve a true internal market in energy , because we do not even have the necessary interconnections .
That is why I am delighted about the commitments made in this respect in the document mentioned by President Barroso .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as my fellow Members have just said , the recent gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine demonstrates the urgent need to increase the European Union 's energy security and independence .
The European Union is still too dependent , particularly on its gas imports , since by 2020 it will probably have to import approximately 80 % of its gas .
This situation cannot continue , because if it does it will permanently jeopardise the European Union 's energy security .
Clearly , the infrastructure projects in progress , which you have just alluded to , are a step in the right direction .
The recent gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine is already several months behind us .
Commissioner , what about the coming winter ?
It is absolutely vital for those who have experienced shortages and those who fear them in the future to know how Europe will protect them from these possible new crises .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present resolution makes clear once again the need to develop a consistent European foreign policy , including from the point of view of the security of energy supply .
A lot has already been said today regarding Nabucco and Desertec .
As regards diversification of the sources of supply , I would like to draw your attention to a neighbouring region which up to now has been characterised by stability and reliability in supplying Europe and which also has a huge exploitation potential and will become more accessible as a result of climate change .
I am talking about the Arctic region .
Here there is , on the one hand , an existing tradition of pragmatic cooperation , including with Russia , for example , and , on the other hand , the EU as such does not currently have a presence there , unlike Russia , the US , Canada and even China .
In order to secure the long-term interests of Europe in this region too , I would therefore argue in favour of developing a pragmatic , long-term strategy , together with partners such as Norway and Iceland , with the aim of cooperating with Russia , the US and Canada to balance the various interests there , not only with regard to the common security of supply , but also environmental issues and access to the new ice-free transport routes .
This will also avoid the potential conflicts which could otherwise arise there in the rush to secure the energy sources that are still available .
( NL ) Mr President , Turkey has an important role to play in reducing Europe 's dependence on Russia .
The question now is what price Europe is prepared to pay Turkey .
In the meantime , Turkey is playing two hands and is seeking to benefit both from the Nabucco project and from South Stream .
It is not in Europe 's interests .
I call on the Council and the Commission to make an unambiguous choice for the Nabucco project .
This project would directly reduce our dependence on Russia and , given the slow decline in the demand for gas in Europe , it is in any case totally unnecessary to realise two southern supply routes .
Turkey must nail its colours to the mast and put its weight fully behind the Nabucco project .
The negotiations with Turkey on this topic should , however , be kept strictly separate from the country 's accession negotiations .
It should not be the case that Turkey receives an entry ticket for the Union in exchange for being cooperative .
( PL ) The European Union needs suppliers whose business dealings remain transparent and who fulfil their obligations .
The Energy Charter and the Transit Protocol are an attempt to establish a system based on clear principles .
Russia 's recent indication of its desire to withdraw from the Energy Charter Treaty should be viewed as a warning .
It should be a warning for companies investing in Russia , as well as for the Commission .
It should also encourage the Commission to take action , as soon as possible , to create a European energy security system .
We can only hope that Russia will respect the Charter and will not take any definitive action .
The European Union 's internal gas market has to operate without any restrictions , allowing cross-border connections and gas networks .
European gas consumers cannot be left at the mercy of monopolies .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much liked what the Commissioner described here today with regard to the Desertec project .
This project has huge potential and its appeal indeed lies in the fact that it is made up of many separate small projects .
This will create jobs and will prepare the way for the environmentally sound industrial policy that we are striving for .
I have a question for the Commission .
When you were talking about the Desertec project , I had the feeling that the handbrake was on to some extent .
What concrete measures are planned with regard to network infrastructure , which is a massive problem in connection with the development of renewable energy ?
The idea is , of course , to transmit the electricity to Europe via high voltage direct current lines from the deserts .
What supporting measures can the European Commission take with regard to this ?
Is something already being considered in this regard ?
What can we expect from the next Commission in this area ?
Mr President , the ECR Group supports the need for an EU common external energy security policy based on solidarity between Member States , but energy mix must remain a Member State competence .
We must , of course , diversify away from overdependence on Russian oil and gas , of which even the UK , traditionally dependent on the North Sea and Norwegian gas , is now an importer .
We must develop the southern corridor and should consider the White Stream project , in addition to the Nabucco project , as a priority , but also with trans-Caspian and even trans-Saharan routes as exciting future prospects for the European Union .
We need better gas-storage capacity in Europe and more integration of our pipeline and electricity grids .
In the UK we are keen on new nuclear power stations as well .
I welcome investment in renewables , including the Desertec solar project , which combat climate change as well as aid diversification .
We also need better energy efficiency - though the recent EU ban on incandescent light bulbs is draconian , ignores the health hazards to the skin and the environment from the mercury , and makes the EU needlessly unpopular in my country .
( ES ) Mr President , the predictions indicate that , between now and the year 2030 , gas consumption in the European Union will increase by more than 40 % and that our own internal production will fall .
This means that demand will not be met , even with all the projects currently in hand .
As a result , we need all possible sources of supply , and we particularly need to coordinate all the actions of the Member States in order to optimise their contribution to our joint needs .
The South Stream and Nabucco projects involve very important economic , energy , historical and political aspects .
We must consider these very carefully , with great intelligence , and remain mindful of the concerns and needs of all the countries affected .
Many of the problems that we are now suffering could be solved if we , firstly , decisively coordinated the actions of all Member States , if we built more liquefied gas terminals , if we improved the internal market and if , once again , we spoke with one voice .
Mr President , I welcome the text put forward today by the various political groups and the earlier statement by the Commissioner , particularly the recognition of the need to diversify our energy technology and to secure our supply .
But of course there is no one answer to ensuring our supply .
All technologies must be considered .
There has to be a mix , including CCS , and , of course , where I come from is Wales , which still has a plentiful supply of coal .
Energy efficiency must also be improved .
That is why I believe we should be spending more of European Structural Funds on energy efficiency measures to save energy , but also to boost the economy .
I would also like to make two further quick points .
Firstly , on Desertec , which I believe is an exciting project , but we have to recognise that it is a long-term project .
It is not a quick fix .
Secondly , the storage of gas reserves is important , but again we need to recognise that it is expensive and funding will be required .
So , I support all the texts put forward today , particularly by the S & D Group , but these are important points and I would welcome the views of the Commissioner on those points .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a decision mentions that the Russian company Surgutneftgaz , whose ownership is unclear , recently acquired a major stake in the Hungarian oil company MOL .
I would like to say something more about this .
I personally submitted a written question to the Commissioner following this transaction .
He stated in his reply that he considered legitimate our demand to provide stronger protection for European energy companies against external acquisitions lacking any transparency .
This is good news .
We must also add that the current regulations are unsuitable for achieving this objective .
However , regulations on transparency can be easily circumvented .
This is why we are asking the European Commission to abandon its convenient position of idle introspection .
It should draw up , in cooperation with governments , the legal framework for providing effective protection against hostile takeovers .
Mr President , the open market is a joint European achievement .
Let us not make ourselves vulnerable precisely on this issue .
( SL ) It seems that the ' catch-the-eye ' system is working well and I am happy to hear that that is the case .
We need a secure and diversified supply .
We all agree on that .
However , I think that too much of our discussion today has centred on a single issue : on warnings of a Russian threat .
Such talk can have no constructive consequences for Europe and I think that we would be much better served if we developed a partnership with Russia .
I would also be grateful if Commissioner Piebalgs could let us know what progress has been made in the dialogue on energy security , on improving our relations with Russia and on the implementation of democratic standards , which is something to which we would like Russia to pay greater attention .

( PL ) In September 2007 , on the basis of the decision of the European Parliament and the Council in 2006 and with regard to the matter of - amongst other things - the Nabucco gas pipeline , a European coordinator for the project was appointed , namely Mr Josias Van Aartsen .
In 2009 , he presented an interesting report , which contained equally interesting conclusions .
One of these conclusions concerned the difficulties that may be encountered when implementing the Nabucco project .
Even the current levels of funding point to this fact .
I would like to ask whether you think that , notwithstanding your personal interest in the matter , the appointment of a coordinator for the implementation of the Nabucco project might make its implementation more efficient , so that we may be sure that what we are discussing today , and what the Member States - including my country , Poland - also expect to happen , will have a 100 % chance of becoming a reality .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it would be difficult for me to answer all the questions raised , but I would like to emphasise a couple of points .
First of all , the policies we follow in the energy sector seek to promote the wellbeing of our citizens and our industry .
What we are looking for is a secure supply of well-priced and clean energy .
This is our overarching goal .
Secondly , we never make any side deals when we are discussing energy agreements .
There are no compromises either on enlargement or on human rights .
We work from the point of view that interdependence in energy supply is the most important thing and is beneficial for all - for suppliers , transit countries and consumers .
It takes time to convince our partners , but that is the only way to achieve stability .
Thirdly , even if it sometimes seems that we are slow , I think that basing ourselves on the industry proposals , and on support for industry , is crucial because that makes us strong .
Perhaps it does not make us a speedboat in the energy ocean , but it makes for stability .
When we make a change , we have a much broader basis for it , so we are much safer .
All the projects have been well checked for cost efficiency and future viability .
So I believe that is the right support to give .
The next area where we have a weakness , and which we are continuing to discuss , is external energy policy and coherence .
It is true that there is a lot of controversy - or at least perceived controversy - and , as a Commissioner , I would definitely be happy to see a more coherent external energy policy .
The motion for a resolution addresses exactly this issue because , although there is no in-built conflict between Member States , there is perceived conflict .
All the activities pursued by the Member States also benefit the European Union .
So we should follow this up and really try to build a system where we speak with one voice , not only verbally but also in terms of the points of view that we want to emphasise .
For this reason the second strategic energy review is still very important .
All the points that we put forward in the second energy review are still there .
At the same time , from the Commission 's point of view , we clearly see that we cannot afford to move from interdependence to dependence .
That is why we particularly support diversification projects like Nabucco and LNG - not that they completely change our relationship of interdependence with other countries , but they give us additional safety margins .
So that is what we are doing , but at the same time we definitely take note of what happens in the energy world .
Regarding the point on nuclear energy , we have moved away from this option .
We have adopted a Nuclear Safety Directive but it is very much a national and very sensitive point .
I really believe that , from the Union point of view , we should build upon the cooperation of nuclear safety regulators and try to establish a safer and more coherent system .
But I doubt that we could go further than that .
Last but not least , I really believe that these issues and debates very much help to shape energy policy , but there is no single instrument that provides for it .
There are many instruments , and we will come back to this debate in the future .
Thank you very much for this debate .
I will be very happy also to answer questions in the ITRE Committee , or in any other committees that would like to discuss energy issues in more detail .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for a resolution which have been submitted in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the progress that has been made through the signing of the agreement in Ankara launching the Nabucco project and the protocol to the agreement for launching the Desertec project .
The Nabucco project must be made a priority as it provides a solution to the gas supply problem , which has intensified in recent years .
I know that , although Nabucco is a project which is just as important from a geopolitical perspective , the project 's partners must also have , at the same time , strong commercial motives so that it becomes a reality as quickly as possible .
The economic crisis , which has reduced the money that the participating companies have available for investment , along with a number of uncertainties linked to the sources supplying the pipeline are obstacles which must be overcome .
The EUR 200 million we are offering the project are welcome , but we also need to step up political and diplomatic measures with Turkey and the countries in the region supplying the gas .
I would therefore like to call for a show of solidarity by Member States in order to be able to avert gas crises similar to those that we have had in recent years .
We cannot wait for the Treaty of Lisbon to come into force and the Nabucco project to be completed while Europeans are running the risk of remaining without gas in the middle of winter as a result of disputes between Russia and Ukraine .
in writing . - ( BG ) Unfortunately the EU still does not have an effective energy security policy .
In recent years the first steps have been taken in this direction , for which I would in particular like to congratulate Commissioner Piebalgs .
Bulgaria has also contributed in this respect .
However , these processes are still too slow , particularly in the light of the particularly dynamic activity on the part of Russia and other competitors .
We need a much clearer and more active policy which must include some of the following strands :
encouraging the completion of all projects involving the supply of gas to Europe , which can realistically secure market-based funding , including the Nord Stream and South Stream ;
encouraging the construction of new facilities which will contribute to energy independence and reduce CO2 emissions , in particular plants powered by nuclear and renewable sources of energy ;
developing common rules for the supply and transit of gas ;
an active policy towards the countries of Central Asia and the Caucasus to secure supplies of Caspian gas for Europe .
, in writing . - This debate has become an additional proof of how badly the EU needs a united energy policy .
There are Members who urge the Commission and Member States to take concrete coordinated measures in the spirit of solidarity and who propose to act like the EU already had such a policy .
Their efforts have not only political and moral but also practical value because as representatives of the citizens they can speed up the creation of the common energy policy .
There are others who use the absence of such a policy as an excuse to justify their bilateral deals with suppliers which often ignore the requirements of transparency and fair competition , not to mention European solidarity .
This is a short-sighted and risky approach which plays into the hands of those undemocratic suppliers whose political strategy is to split and weaken the EU .
The Commission should provide not only political and legal but also financial assistance to companies which are engaged in efforts to diversify our energy supplies .
To really advance towards genuine energy solidarity , the Member States should start to inform each other and the Commission on their agreements with third partners .
in writing . - ( RO ) As we are at the start of a new mandate , I feel that one of the areas where the European Parliament must be more actively involved is safeguarding energy security .
Bearing this in mind , I want to highlight the importance of the Nabucco project , which will help safeguard the European Union 's energy security as this will guarantee European consumers access to alternative sources via a secure route .
The signing of the agreement on 13 July 2009 between Austria , Bulgaria , Romania , Turkey and Hungary on the Nabucco project , marking the political commitment of the partner states participating in this project to continue their efforts to construct the gas pipeline , has sent a positive signal to investors and the countries supplying natural gas .
The countries involved in this project must , along with the European Commission , continue to focus their efforts on attracting investment and guaranteeing reliable suppliers for Nabucco .
in writing . - ( RO ) In addition to achieving number one position in the list of gas exporters , Russia has recently become the largest exporter of oil in the world , overtaking Saudi Arabia .
This situation puts Moscow in a special position of influence , based on having control of these resources .
However , energy is a commodity which must be subject to the principles of the market economy .
It must not be possible for energy to be used as an instrument of political pressure .
The energy crises which Europe has faced have highlighted the importance of diversification of energy supply sources .
They have also demonstrated the added value Nabucco offers in this respect for the entire European Union .
Romania has been and remains a strong supporter of the Nabucco project .
In fact , Romania signed the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Nabucco project in July , along with Turkey , Bulgaria , Hungary and Austria .
We regard the conclusion of this agreement as a success and an important step forward .
A gas pipeline of the size and ambition of Nabucco will need to face many challenges before it becomes a reality .
The only solution for overcoming these challenges is to persevere with the appropriate measures .
in writing . - We try hard to encourage a coherent energy policy , but such a policy exists and is fully implemented .
There is only one small problem : it is NOT ours .
It is Russia 's .
Now , we have the French EDF company signing into South Stream .
Before that , we had the Russians taking over the Hungarian company MOL 's interest in Nabucco .
And before that we had the Austrian gas terminal in Baumgarten being taken over by the mysterious Centrex company .
We need a clear , European energy policy , and we need it now .
This is possibly our last opportunity to rally behind Nabucco .
Otherwise , if the Council and the Commission remain neutral , they should be prepared for very cold winters and very hot politics .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to call for silence in the House because we have received news from Kabul of a very serious attack against the international peacekeeping force , and the sketchy information that we have so far talks of six deaths in the Italian contingent , among the Folgore paratroopers .

I would therefore ask you to call for a minute 's silence in the House precisely so that we may remember those who are fighting to establish our ideals of peace and freedom throughout the world .

Ladies and gentlemen , as you have just heard from Mr Mauro , a tragic incident has taken place in Afghanistan : six peacekeepers have lost their lives .
I would kindly ask that we rise and observe a minute 's silence as a mark of respect in light of this tragic incident .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
1 .
2009 and 2010 intervention periods for butter and skimmed milk powder (
2 .
Common agricultural policy ( CAP ) : support schemes for farmers (
3 .
SWIFT ( vote )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the ALDE group does object to this change .
( Requests by the Verts / ALE Group for the text of Amendments 1 and 2 to be moved )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , again the ALDE group does have an objection .
( Requests by the Verts / ALE Group for the text of Amendments 1 and 2 to be moved )
4 .
EC / Tajikistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
5 .
Conclusion of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EC and the Republic of Tajikistan (
6 .
Situation in Lithuania following the adoption of the law on protection of minors ( vote )
7 .
Crisis in the dairy farming sector ( vote )
8 .
Energy security ( Nabucco and Desertec ) ( vote )
That concludes voting time .
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I voted against the resolution concerning Lithuania because I found this resolution to be a premature and unbalanced reaction to a law that has not yet even entered into force , let alone in its original wording .
It is true that human rights fall within the competence of the Union .
However , in this case the Union comes very close to infringing the principle of sovereignty of a Member State , and that is why I have opposed this resolution , also bearing in mind that it would have a negative result on the Irish referendum as a bad example of how the sovereignty of the Member States could be treated .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted against this resolution because Lithuania will be able to deal with the problem on its own .
The Lithuanian President has created a special group to review this legislation , which is only supposed to come into force in 2010 .
Moreover , I think that the resolution would constitute an excessive amount of interference in the affairs of a sovereign nation such as Lithuania .
Furthermore , this resolution contains a statement to the effect that the legal opinion of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights should be requested .
It does not fall within the remit of the Agency for Fundamental Rights to evaluate individual countries and draw up an opinion on such cases .
It would set far too dangerous a precedent .
( DE ) Mr President , I am an enthusiastic pro-European and advocate of a European constitution as well as the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am also a fighter for human rights .
However , this resolution inflicts a lot of damage on Europe , particularly in the run-up to the Irish referendum , and it misuses the issue of human rights for ideological purposes .
The Lithuanian law has nothing to do with human rights , but if anything it actually protects the human rights of Lithuanian children rather than violating them .
I therefore consider this resolution to be an ideological disgrace .
The Left and the Liberals in this House have caused serious damage to Europe and to human rights with this resolution .
( NL ) Mr President , our Lithuanian friends would certainly have envisaged something else for themselves .
After liberating themselves from the yoke of the Soviet Union , they wanted to be members , as quickly as possible , of that other union , which likes to put itself forward as a unique association of free nations .
Now , though , it seems to be once again the case that one form of guardianship has simply been replaced by another , albeit a more subtle one .
Today , too , Lithuania is no longer free : when the Lithuanian Parliament adopts a law aimed at protecting minors , it is castigated for its trouble and shunned .
There is not a single area that is still free of European meddling and this is something that is definitely not going to improve over the coming years .
On the contrary , in fact , the new European Commissioner for Human Rights - what 's in a name ? - will reinforce this European guardianship still further .
Thank you , Mr Verhofstadt , thank you , the other mandarins of the Commission , for the likes of this suffocation of freedom .
Mr President , see how the thicket of EU regulation grows .
See how Brussels shoots its tendrils into every crevasse , every nook of national life .
Issues like this , the protection of minors , are for many of our constituents sensitive and ethical issues .
If we in this Parliament presume to legislate for the nation states , what is the point of them ?
Is there no limit to our presumption ?
Let me make my position absolutely clear on this .
When the United Kingdom had the closest equivalent to this legislation , which was called Section 28 , I was virtually the only Conservative to oppose it .
I was years before the rest of my party in pushing for full equality for gay people , including on the equalisation of the age of consent , and on civil partnerships .
I am delighted that the rest of my party has now reached that point of view .
But I am not a Lithuanian legislator !
The people who should determine this issue in Lithuania are those who are answerable through the democratic mechanisms and procedures of that country .
If we are not prepared to allow them to do that , we might as well mothball our national parliaments , turn them into museums and lock the door .
( DE ) Mr President , the survival of many farms is in serious jeopardy .
I am therefore pleased that we have today adopted a cross-party motion for a resolution on the crisis in the dairy farming sector .
I deeply regret that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance did not participate in drawing up this motion .
It should be made clear that we cannot overcome this crisis with the measures proposed by the Commission alone .
First and foremost , we must increase the consumption of milk products in order to reduce the strain on the market .
In this regard , the promotion of sales is more important than stockpiling .
Constructive proposals such as the use of milk powder to feed calves , establishing minimum prices for cheese products , clear labelling of cheese analogues and the use of butter fat to assist in the manufacture of ice cream and bakery products have been around for a long time .
Why they have not , as yet , been implemented by the Commission is beyond me .
I would urge the Commissioner to take note of the proposals in the motion for a resolution and implement them as a matter of urgency .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to explain why I abstained from voting on the crisis in the milk and dairy products sector .
It is a sad fact that the situation in the dairy sector is extremely critical .
Despite the fact that consumer prices have risen by 14 % over recent years , the purchase price of milk has fallen by almost 40 % .
Many European dairy producers are therefore now facing ruin .
In the Czech Republic , for example , 15 Czech dairies are clinically dead in financial terms , according to the managing director of Madeta , Mr Teplý .
The situation must be resolved on a systematic basis , however , through long-term management of the sector , not just through short-term support measures such as subsidies , intervention purchases and support for private storage .
This only distorts the market while not preventing price instability .
At the same time , we must establish a level playing field for farmers from all Member States , and not just in the diary sector .
( DE ) Mr President , this proposal from the Commission is essentially to be welcomed and it is a sensible one , at least from an economic and politically realistic point of view .
However , it should be added that , if we look at this situation from all angles , the drop in prices is not merely the result of a fall in demand .
We also need to take into account the problems of the dairy farmers in Austria and the Alpine region .
The small domestic farms cannot realistically compete with the huge dairy farms in northern Germany and the Netherlands .
This gives rise to an imbalance .
The release of the entire quantity of milk would force dairy farms in Austria to close down and it would have serious and unpredictable consequences , including for the cultivated landscape .
A few multinational companies would then dominate the European market .
I can well imagine what consequences this would have for food quality as well .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the last few days the legitimate protest of milk producers about prices , about the lack of European Union intervention and about the authorisation - not in the future , but immediately - of labelling , especially that of artificial dairy products , has been taking place throughout Europe .
We want fresh products on the tables of our consumers , products of which we can know the origin , and not the rubbish that we get from other countries : powdered milk passed off as fresh milk from our own producers .
Tomorrow , milk will be poured away in Padania , as in the rest of Europe - and this is an important protest , because it maintains the quality of our products .
We in Europe want to eat wholesome food , from our region : good , fresh milk , milk that I obviously drink .
We in Padania drink in memory of the sacrifice made by our producers , which this Europe must protect .
The European Commissioner has excluded cheese with a long maturation period from the provisions ; powdered-milk producers are the only ones it safeguards .
This is a disgrace !
( HU ) We are living , Mr President , at a time when dairy farmers are committing suicide every day , even in rich Western countries like France .
This is therefore a huge tragedy .
I voted in favour of both of Mr De Castro 's reports because immediate , urgent intervention is required .
However , we know that milk powder and butter have been stockpiled in the intervention stocks .
They will be taken out of the intervention stocks and will only end up pushing down prices again .
This is one problem I have .
The other problem is that this measure is much more likely to help large farmers than small ones .
We should not forget , however , that smallholders are in need of immediate help to make a basic living , whereas for larger farmers it would simply preserve or increase their profits .
Fundamental changes are needed .
We finally must guarantee food sovereignty instead of using the free trade model dictated by the WTO .
As other speakers before me have said , we need food produced locally by local farmers .
Mr President , like all those who have spoken I am aware of the extent of the crisis in our agrarian sector .
Any Member who represents farmers knows that .
But the crisis is a product of our existing agricultural system - the common agricultural policy - which has had calamitous consequences for farmers in my part of the United Kingdom .
And not only for farmers : for our consumers , for our taxpayers , and indeed for the poor of the Third World who find that their markets are denied and that they then have surpluses dumped on them .
We were gradually moving , in the European Union , away from the system of direct support that had such deleterious environmental and economic consequences , and now we are rushing back in .
I can tell you that in the United Kingdom people have clear memories of how the milk quota system worked .
We were allocated a quota that was less than our national production , so we have the extraordinary sight of British farmers using milk as fertiliser or pouring it away down the drain and then having to re-import milk from the Netherlands , France or other parts of the European Union to get up to the level of demand .
We were just beginning to get away , and now this House has voted to bring it all back .
Anyone who thinks that the European Union is going in the direction of doing less and devolving power need only look at today 's vote .
Mr President , last week saw the re-release of several albums by the band The Beatles in digitally remastered form .
This week we are debating the milk quota system in a remastered form .
They might not have much in common at first glance until you consider the title of one of the Beatles ' songs , Back in the USSR .
That , I think , sums it all up .
Here we have a system where prices and quotas are decided by bureaucrats , not by the needs of consumers or even the needs of suppliers .
Here we have a system where consumers pay twice over for higher prices and higher taxes to support a system that did not complain when prices were high .
I remember towards the end of the last mandate , Martin Schulz saying that at last he had seen a social democratisation of the EPP .
Well , actually I think his dream has gone further and we are seeing the Sovietisation of the EU .
Are we really looking at an ' EUSSR ' ?
( DA ) Mr President , we Danish Liberals have a great deal of sympathy for those farmers facing the great economic challenges of our day and , in fact , we also have a great deal of sympathy for the idea of giving short-term assistance to those in need .
The only problem is that short-term , institutionalised support schemes never remain short-term , despite the many fine declarations of intent .
They always become permanent in the end , and this is something that all those of us who have been involved in implementing them , be it here or in our national parliaments , do know .
That is why we fear - and we think it is right that we should do so - that the measures that this resolution recommends , and the Commission 's initiatives , too , seen in this light , will lead , de facto , to a more permanent route away from the excellent reform process towards efficient agriculture that the Commissioner has been responsible for , and we therefore feel we must reject this resolution .
Mr President , I voted in favour because the issue of energy supply security is of paramount importance today for all Member States of the European Union .
The recent Russian-Ukrainian crisis has clearly demonstrated existing problems in the energy sector , and especially the total dependence of some Member States on single suppliers of natural gas .
The Baltic countries , which are isolated from the rest of Europe , are left to the mercy of gas suppliers from eastern Europe .
Now it is more important than ever to develop a comprehensive common energy policy based on solidarity , the diversification of energy sources and defence of common interests .
I would like take this opportunity to thank the Commission and especially the Swedish Presidency for presenting the Baltic Sea Strategy , which will allow effective mobilisation of structural funds to be used more efficiently to achieve common goals .
I am convinced that , if properly implemented , the strategy will become an example of regional success .
Finally I would like to urge the Commission to take a leading role in the implementation of the Baltic Sea Strategy in order to ensure that in certain cases the interests of individual Member States do not take precedence over the achievement of common strategy goals .
( PL ) I voted in favour of this resolution , as the question of energy is an important test of European solidarity .
The Member States have to work together on this matter .
Energy policy must be linked to foreign policy .
The Commission also has to look at diversifying energy security in the various EU Member States .
The battle against climate change means that energy which depends on coal may face dire financial straits .
Price hikes will then affect the citizens .
It is high time that we introduced a common , EU-wide policy in this field .
The Commission must clearly state that it will combat the selfish attitudes of Member States which see no danger in a continued dependence on one supplier , such as a reliance on Russia for gas , for example .
We need action .
The European Commission and the Commissioner for Energy need to express their political will clearly .
( RO ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this resolution and I will now explain why I did .
The European Union is dependent on energy imports .
Energy consumption is continuing to grow , but the natural resources are limited .
Energy security assumes at the same time diversification of sources and transport routes , as well as highly efficient interconnection between Member States , which is currently being worked on through various projects , with European financing for the gas pipelines between Romania and its neighbours , Hungary and Bulgaria .
This is where we are at the moment , I told myself , but what do we still have to do ?
I would like to draw a perhaps bold , but simple comparison with electrical energy .
At the moment , our houses are supplied with electrical current without us knowing where it comes from .
A diversified network supplying natural gas and numerous transport networks must enable us to achieve the exact same aim : guaranteeing a gas supply in any situation , regardless of the situation .
This is why I supported and still do support the Nabucco project , but also the move towards diversification of renewable energy sources , at the same time .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the report on a proposal for a Council regulation as regards the 2009 and 2010 intervention periods for butter and skimmed milk powder , because I see these measures as the continuation of a positive measure that has had immediate effects in regulating the excess supply affecting the milk and dairy market .
The drop in prices on the world milk and dairy market over the last 12 months resulted from a general increase in production and a fall in worldwide demand due to the economic and financial crisis .
That justifies continuing public intervention for butter and powdered milk .
On the basis of the report by my Italian fellow Member Paolo De Castro , I voted for the proposal for a Council regulation derogating from the regulation on common market organisation ( CMO ) as regards the 2009 and 2010 intervention periods for butter and skimmed milk powder .
Following 2007 's worldwide explosion in the prices of all foodstuffs , and therefore of milk , the last 12 months have seen a collapse in prices .
I back the Commission , which in early 2009 introduced aid for private storage of butter in an effort to support the market .
Given the exceptional nature of the situation , I support the extension until 28 February 2010 of the current public intervention period for butter and skimmed milk powder , through a tender procedure .
In addition , in view of the uncertainty regarding the time needed for the dairy products market to recover , I have backed the authorisation given to the Commission to extend the 2010 / 2011 intervention period , again through a tender procedure , should market conditions make it necessary .
in writing . - This report refers to the proposal for a Council regulation which derogates from the Single CMO Regulation with regard to the intervention periods for butter and skimmed-milk powder .
Due to the fact that there is a serious crisis in the dairy sector I have voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We are fully aware that the situation of dairy farmers is unsustainable .
However , we are equally aware and convinced that interventions by the EU are not the solution .
The time has now come for a transition to a market-based , insurance-based system that liberates farmers without upsetting the domestic or global market .
It is also high time that there was a review of the situation with regard to competition in the large-scale input industry and in the almost as large food industry , which stands between the farmer and consumers .
in writing . - ( PL ) With regard to the amendments which propose a freeze on milk quotas , I would like to state the following .
Firstly , there is no basis for assuming that a proposed increase in production quotas ( which would follow a review of the CAP ) would have an impact on the crisis in the sector .
Secondly , freezing an increase in the quotas ( which is what the amendments to the European Parliament resolution propose ) would punish farmers in countries which are currently on the verge of using their quotas .
It would be unfair and even immoral to change the rules at this stage in the game .
Thirdly , I would like to remind you that , at the 2002 summit in Copenhagen , we negotiated ( these negotiations included Poland ) on the subject of milk quotas , in the knowledge that these quotas would apply until 2007 .
In Luxembourg , the quota system was extended until 2014 , without our participation or right to vote .
We cannot resolve the problems in the dairy sector by giving some producers the opportunity to improve their lot at the cost of other producers .
Our concepts and actions should aim to give everyone an opportunity , regardless of what country they come from , whether it be the 15 old Member States or the 12 new Members .
in writing . - ( DE ) I agree with the Commission 's short-term solution of purchasing butter and milk powder .
However , I call for a long-term solution to the dairy crisis , for example by using flexible quantity control to give a milk price that covers costs .
The milk surplus must be stemmed at national level by imposing European requirements .
in writing . - ( DE ) The crisis in the dairy sector has also led to a slump in the price of butter and skimmed milk powder .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to continue to subsidise the market and to extend the intervention period up to 28 February 2010 .
It is to be hoped that , following this , the market will recover and that prices will once again be determined by supply and demand .
For a limited time , however , I believe that this intervention is necessary and have therefore voted in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal .
The serious crisis in the dairy farming sector is putting the very survival of dairy farming at risk .
Therefore , I think it is right to remain opposed to individual quota management , since this would in fact mean superseding the end-of-year compensation payments , a mechanism that is , on the contrary , crucial to the Italian production system .
Rather , I am in favour of a temporary increase in the intervention price , of initiatives and measures designed to achieve a balance within the sector , of enhancing the information offered to consumers , and of the important step of introducing labels of origin for milk and dairy products .
In particular , for the purpose of restoring the balance of supply and demand , we should support the proposal temporarily to freeze part of the quotas assigned to individual States and to provide for a compensation mechanism for producers forced to destroy part of their herds that is proportionate to the percentage of the milk quota frozen .
The European Union is currently going through one of the deepest crises ever recorded in the dairy sector , which is due to the increase in production and significant drop in global demand .
Given the dire situation which Europe 's dairy producers find themselves in , we must continue the period of public intervention ( i.e. for buying and storing skimmed milk powder and butter ) at least until February next year or until 2011 , if it is considered necessary .
I do not think that we can allow ourselves to stand by and watch farms in Europe being closed down because in a year 's time we would need to import milk and dairy products from outside the Community .
If we also consider that the health standards will not be anywhere near those we are looking for , we have far too much to lose .
This report is welcome in this context .
However , to be able to really solve the problem of the dairy sector , we must adopt related measures because this stock of products involves allocating considerable resources and it could happen at any given moment that this stock will be of no use .
We must invest now in a sustainable agricultural system , capable of meeting our food requirements , even if we are in the midst of a financial crisis , in order to prevent a food crisis occurring later .
in writing . - This is a proposal that amends the direct support schemes for farmers that are currently in place .
Due to the fact that I am in agreement on the need for such amendments I have voted in favour .
We are at the start of a new mandate when we set out the priorities for the European Union 's future policies .
I know that we are tempted to focus our attention on certain issues which we consider to be extremely important and ignore others .
On this point , I would like to emphasise that we can give up many things , but we cannot give up eating .
This is why agriculture must remain a priority area for the EU .
In my view , we must increase the minimum amount of aid granted to farmers above the limit of EUR 15 000 set by the Commission , as well as allocate an increased budget to promote the dairy and dairy product sector .
I strongly recommend support for farmers producing milk and meat , with a view to stabilising markets , by including them in the Temporary Crisis Framework for state aid .
Furthermore , the direct aid systems need to also take into account the particular features of the new Member States where agriculture plays an important role in the national economy and ensure that support is maintained for agriculture to enable them to overcome the structural problems and achieve the objective of convergence through boosting the development level in the agricultural sector and eliminating the differences in terms of efficiency and competitiveness in relation to the old Member States .
in writing . - The fight against terrorism has been high on the agenda of this House .
However , we must strike the right balance between the security measures and the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights .
We also need to ensure the utmost respect for privacy and data protection .
Balance and proportionality must be the key principles on which the fight against terrorism is based .
The European Union has always demonstrated a firm commitment to the protection citizens ' privacy , and that must be maintained .
The Community is based on the rule of law and all transfers of European personal data to third countries should respect procedural guarantees and defence rights .
It goes without saying that any transfers must comply with data protection legislation at national and European level .
SWIFT is a key infrastructure , and we must ensure that any requests for data transfers are duly justified , based on targeted cases and strictly subject to judicial authorisation .
The Community must take a firm stance in the negotiations with the US to ensure that SWIFT data cannot be used for any other purposes than those linked to terrorism financing .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Social Democrats have chosen to abstain from the vote on Amendment 1 .
It is vital for democratic control that the European Parliament and the national parliaments have access to the documents and negotiation directives prior to the negotiations with the United States ' authorities concerning access to financial payment messaging data .
European citizens must be able to be confident that the transfer of their bank details does not violate national or EU law .
At the same time , we realise the importance of being able to investigate crimes of terrorism effectively in the future , but not at any cost to democracy .
I voted for the joint resolution on the envisaged international agreement to make available to the United States Treasury Department financial payment messaging data to prevent and combat terrorism and terrorist financing .
However , as representatives of the citizens , and being aware of the sensitive nature of this subject , which affects fundamental rights , we require strong guarantees prior to the signing of any agreement with the United States on SWIFT .
These guarantees are : that data be transferred only in order to combat terrorism ; that a reciprocal mechanism oblige the United States to transfer relevant financial information at the request of the European authorities ; that the validity of this interim agreement be restricted to 12 months at most ; and that a new agreement be negotiated later on , once the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , with the full participation of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments .
I would also like the veil of secrecy that has to a large extent shrouded the heart of this issue to be lifted and we MEPs to be given far more information about the procedures laid down in this agreement than we have so far received .
in writing . - ( DE ) According to the planned international agreement , financial payment messaging data is to be made available to the United States Treasury Department to prevent and combat terrorism and terrorist financing .
The transmission of financial payment messaging data to foreign powers constitutes a serious encroachment on the fundamental rights of our citizens , particularly when the recipient of the data is the United States of America .
The US has shown many times in the past that it does not take data protection seriously , particularly if it has to do with achieving and implementing the projects and goals of the government .
Although this motion for a resolution has good intentions to protect European citizens , the inappropriate use of these important data cannot ultimately be ruled out .
For this reason , I have voted against the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - Tajikistan occupies an important geographical position since it is situated at a key intersection between Europe and Asia and therefore plays an important role in enhancing the stability of the region .
I have voted in favour of this resolution which seeks to identify a number of important issues that should be addressed in Tajikistan .
in writing . - I very much welcome the proposed EC-Tajikistan Partnership and Cooperation agreement which provides a framework for future EU cooperation with Tajikistan .
The Central Asia region is very important in economic and political terms for the Community and this agreement will help to consolidate and strengthen the EU 's political and economic and trade relations and presence in Tajikistan and Central Asia in general .
Moreover , it will also promote economic growth and support sustainable development , actions against poverty , and stability in Tajikistan and the Central Asia region .
I am delighted to see that this agreement also incorporates such issues as actions against terrorism and weapons of mass destruction , trafficking , the drug trade and organised crime .
From now on , both the EU and Tajikistan will pursue a close political dialogue which will open the way for deeper relations in a great number of fields .
In 2007 , under the German Presidency , the EU adopted a strategy for Central Asia aimed at a new association .
The Agreement with Tajikistan is part of this strategy and it has been indicated that its main ambition in the region is natural resources , particularly gas .
I voted against the report on a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Tajikistan because the EU is only interested in that country for its natural resources and its geostrategic position , given that Tajikistan has borders with Afghanistan and China .
The EU 's relations with third countries should be based on other interests , on mutual interests , always with respect for the sovereignty of both parties and of course with respect for the management of their resources .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues can agree with much of this report .
We remain wholeheartedly supportive of providing equal rights and opportunities for people regardless of their disability , race , religion , or sexuality , and abhor discrimination in all its forms .
However , we do have serious misgivings with regard to the involvement of the Fundamental Rights Agency and the European Union on issues which we believe to be the preserve of individual nation states .
That is why we have decided to abstain on this resolution .
in writing . - Members of the European Conservatives and Reformists strongly support equal treatment for all regardless of race , religion , sexuality , or disability , and strongly condemn discrimination in all its forms .
However , we do have serious misgivings with regard to the involvement of the Fundamental Rights Agency and the European Union on issues which we believe to be the preserve of individual nation states .
As a democratic nation , we believe this matter should be decided by the Lithuanian parliament and the Lithuanian people .
Therefore , we have decided not to support this resolution .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the Lithuanian Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information , since I believe that the law passed by the Lithuanian Parliament on 14 July 2009 , under which it is prohibited ' to directly disseminate to minors [ ... ] public information whereby homosexual , bisexual or polygamous relations are promoted ' , because it has ' a detrimental effect on the development of minors ' , should be urgently reviewed .
According to the European Union 's principles , all forms of discrimination , and in particular discrimination based on sexual orientation , should be eliminated , and therefore the Agency for Fundamental Rights should give an opinion on the law in question and the amendments to it in the light of the EU Treaties and EU law .
The motion for a resolution that is being put before us today is truly mind-boggling .
The finger is being pointed at a country because its democratically elected parliament is in the process of examining a law that - in common with the laws that exist in the majority of the Member States - is designed to protect minors , and that is aimed specifically at protecting them from any propaganda promoting homosexuality , bisexuality or polygamy .
What could be more natural , where children are concerned ?
Well , no , it seems that this is ' discrimination ' , and the entire EU is mobilising against poor Lithuania , which is ' guilty ' of banning proselytising and of encouraging family values .
What is even more astonishing is the fact that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which theoretically claims to be Christian democrat and to have certain moral values , has also put its signature to this absurdity , which the left initiated .
As usual , children 's rights count for nothing in the face of pressure from certain lobby groups .
It should be said that , in their time , some Members of this Parliament were advocates of paedophilia in the name of universal freedom and of the right of all , no matter how young , to sexuality .
This resolution is not just criminal , it is disgusting !
I voted for the resolution condemning the Lithuanian law for the protection of minors against the detrimental effect of public information , which sets out to ban any information on homosexuality if it is accessible to minors .
This law totally contravenes European laws , specifically with regard to combating discrimination based on sexual orientation , with a largely homophobic content , and also poses an obstacle to freedom of expression .
It has been widely condemned by NGOs , including the ILGA ( International Lesbian and Gay Association ) and Amnesty International , and by the Council of Europe .
We must offer young people a vision of society that is open to diversity and founded on the principle of respect for others , however different they may be .
For its part , the European Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , must act in a responsible manner and launch infringement proceedings against Lithuania , should it persist with its decision .
Through this vote , we are calling on the Lithuanian parliamentary representatives to pull themselves together and reject this text , which signals a return to a past that , personally speaking , I condemn .
in writing . - This is an explanation of vote on behalf of the Fine Gael Delegation to the European Parliament .
The Fine Gael MEPs abstained on the votes on Lithuania as the legislative / legal processes have not yet been completed there .
When the Lithuanian legal process has been finalised the question as to whether it conflicts with EU Treaties can be examined .
This is the normal and correct procedure .
We also note that the resolution sets one form of discrimination above others and is in itself a form of discrimination .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted against the resolution , which could set a dangerous precedent for the European Union .
In my opinion , its contents and subject matter are incompatible with the principle of subsidiarity .
These kinds of resolutions may foster euroscepticism , as they are proof of the EU 's tendency to become involved in the internal affairs of EU Member States .
The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of EU Member States is not an absolute principle , but there is nothing happening in Lithuania that would force us to take action .
Those who want to see a better Europe should vote against this resolution .
That is the reason for my decision . Thank you very much .
The Lithuanian Parliament has approved amendments to the Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information .
This law aims to prevent the dissemination of public information ' that agitates for homosexual ... relations ' or that ' defies family values ' .
For this reason , the Lithuanian authorities should amend the law , or repeal it , and should refrain from adopting the amendments to the penal and administrative codes , so as to ensure that laws are compatible with human rights and fundamental freedoms as enshrined in international and European law .
It was a step in the right direction when the new President of Lithuania asked the Lithuanian Parliament to reconsider the law to ensure that it complies with the constitutional principles of the rule of law , legal certainty , and legal clarity and that it does not contravene the guarantees of an open society and pluralistic democracy .
For these reasons , and due to the urgent need to revise this law , I voted for the joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament .
I voted against this resolution , which sets a dangerous precedent in that the points of view expressed do not abide by the principle of subsidiarity and are a form of intervention in the sovereign actions of the parliament of a Member State , at a time when the law in question has not even entered into force .
I endorsed and voted in favour of Amendment 28 to this resolution asking the Commission and the Member States to immediately adopt additional measures to intervene in the current level of Community production by means of a temporary freeze on quota increases , which were decided during the last common agricultural policy reforms , because this amendment addressed the interests of all Portuguese milk producers and especially won the support of milk producers in the Azores .
I therefore regret that this amendment did not gain the support of the majority of Members of the European Parliament .
in writing . - I voted for this joint resolution because , contrary to the European Commission 's prognosis on the substantial increase in the prices of dairy products , the dairy market is witnessing a dramatic deterioration , with falling milk prices despite intervention and export subsidies .
The economies of many Member States are heavily dependent on agriculture and farming .
Unfortunately , there is now a big difference between the prices paid by consumers for agricultural products in the supermarkets and the money received by producers .
Many EU dairy farmers are now at serious risk and are forced to sell dairy products below their production costs .
The Commission must take adequate measures in both the short and long term to overcome this crisis and to save the EU dairy market .
In this regard , I very much support the request to create an EU Diary Fund to aid producers and to support farm investments .
If we want to have a well-functioning diary market we must support farm investments in modernisations , small producers and young farmers .
And most importantly , to ensure that farmers receive a fair and adequate price for their production .
in writing . - The past 12 months have seen the deterioration of the dairy market with prices of milk falling below 21 cents per litre and leaving many farmers with no alternative but to sell dairy products at a loss .
This is an extremely serious situation and therefore I have voted in favour of this resolution .
in writing . - ( DA ) We have voted against the proposals for increased agricultural aid to the dairy farming sector .
Our group votes consistently in favour of reducing agricultural aid and continuing to reform the EU 's agricultural policy . In connection with the decision in this regard , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament voted against Amendments 16 , 17 and 19 , because , despite having a favourable content , these amendments were not relevant to the discussion in question .
I voted in favour of the motion for a joint resolution on the crisis in the dairy farming sector since I believe urgent measures are needed to resolve the serious crisis that the sector is experiencing , particularly by stimulating demand so as to restore market balance .
It is regrettable , however , that the compromise reached in Parliament does not include the temporary suspension of quota increases or other measures to reduce production , which would be very important in helping European farmers to face this crisis .
The serious crisis affecting the dairy farming sector makes it urgent to adopt more effective measures for supporting producers and to consider the usefulness of eliminating milk quotas in 2015 .
Stabilisation of the milk and dairy market will not be achieved just through one or two odd measures , such as not increasing quotas , designed to mitigate the immediate , temporary effects of the crisis .
On the contrary , medium- to long-term solutions will have to be considered , and the reasons why this market is not working properly must be assessed , together with the best ways to maintain sustainable production , not forgetting the consumers ' right to a fair price .
In this respect , I must point out the particularly fragile competitive status of those outermost regions that depend heavily on dairy production , such as the Azores .
I regret a certain insensitivity on the part of the European Commission and , at a national level , the poor management of this process by the Portuguese Government .
Our leaders ' ability to take action and support national interests is particularly important in times of crisis .
Regrettably , that has not been the case .
On the positive side , I note the success of the amendments of which I am a co-author , which support an increase in de minimis payments .
It is not an ideal solution , but it helps .
I am voting in favour of this resolution , although it does not go far enough .
To stabilise prices now , the bonus of 2 % of the annual increase beyond the quota must be withdrawn urgently .
The milk quota system will still need to continue after 2015 or be replaced with another regulatory mechanism .
It is vital to adjust milk production to European domestic demand so as to guarantee producers a fair price .
Market transparency is essential , and in that respect I suggest setting up a European observatory to help monitor and regulate the market from production to distribution .
The adopted resolution contains positive measures that are necessary in the current context of the severe crisis affecting the sector .
That is why we voted in favour .
These are just one-off measures , however , which do not solve the basic problems of the sector , particularly those of small and medium-sized producers , for whom the situation is likely to get worse in future , given the intention that has been announced to abolish milk quotas .
The battle that milk producers have been fighting , which goes beyond their immediate aims - to sell their produce at prices that ensure their survival - also has a broader meaning and importance that have to do with the kind of agriculture that we want in the future .
The neoliberal model of agriculture , which promotes flooding the market with products from countries with greater productive capacity and promotes intensive production in some countries and the abandonment of farming and food dependency in others , must be replaced with a model based on the concept of food sovereignty and food security - the right of each country to produce in a sustainable way .
In this model , public mechanisms for controlling production - quotas , adapted to each country 's needs - are essential .
When a policy drives farmers to suicide , when it leads men to deliberately destroy the fruits of their labours because that is no worse than what the policy is offering them , it is time to change the policy .
The liberalisation of agriculture , in general , and of the dairy sector , in particular , has been a disaster .
How many times must it be said in this House that , because it nourishes people , because it helps to make the countryside more attractive and to keep populations in rural areas , agriculture cannot be considered as an economic activity like any other ?
Foodstuffs are not products on which one can speculate on markets disconnected from any form of reality .
It is absurd to encourage the importing of products that do not even satisfy the quality criteria that our farmers have to meet .
It is scandalous to leave these farmers at the mercy of processors and predators from the large central buying offices , which make profits at the expense of both producers and consumers .
The timid , vague proposals in the text are neither sufficient nor wholly satisfactory , but at least they exist .
That is why we have voted in favour .
The state of the dairy market has worsened considerably over the last 12 months : the price of milk has fallen by 30 % in a year , which is the sharpest fall seen in the last 20 years .
We therefore urgently need to introduce new forms of regulation at European level to ensure that the dairy sector is not just dependent on the rules of the market but can actually prove a match for them .
Currently , the instability in producers ' incomes does not allow the best allocation to be made of resources that are vital for future investments in the sector .
Therefore , the European Commission has a duty to facilitate contractual relations within the agri-food chain , so as to balance the relations between the various operators in the sector , stabilise the markets and prevent market risks .
It must also encourage better organisation within the sectors .
In addition , consideration should be given to whether an increase in milk quotas might have a positive impact on producer prices .
Europe must act now .
We can wait no longer .
If we do not act , we will run the risk of seeing the European dairy sector suffer lasting damage , thus depriving our fragile rural areas of the hub of their economies .
The milk strike is growing in size in the countries of Europe , with its striking images of milk poured away into the fields .
In the face of the concerns of dairy producers , the European Parliament has adopted a position .
In this context , I voted for the creation of a EUR 600 million fund in the budget planned by the EU for 2010 to provide assistance to milk producers , who are currently experiencing a serious crisis , unprecedented within their sector , and are wrestling with the laws of supply and demand on the world dairy market .
My socialist colleagues and I have also tabled an amendment calling for the suspension of dairy quotas as currently in force , with a view to bringing about a rise in prices .
We ought also to adopt cyclical measures , in addition to the market management measures already taken , as the latter have proved to be ineffective in the face of price volatility .
in writing . - ( DE ) The dairy sector is currently in the midst of a crisis on an unprecedented scale : producer prices have fallen dramatically , consumer prices have risen and many farms in the EU are fighting for survival .
The Commission has stood by and watched this development for far too long .
In our motion for a resolution , which is supported by nearly all the groups , we make it clear that the decisions made in November 2008 in connection with the health check are not sufficient for the current situation .
The comprehensive agricultural reform that we have adopted is too little .
If the basic conditions have changed , the Commission must seize the initiative and implement a measure that will help the farmers of the EU .
In our resolution we call for comprehensive measures : market stabilisation , sales promotion , a comprehensive school milk programme , increase of the maximum amount of minimum payments from EUR 7 500 to EUR 15 000 for all areas of agricultural production , an early retirement scheme / quota buy-back scheme , the strengthening of producer organisations , proper labelling of dairy products , export credit insurance similar to that which exists in the US and , for particular measures , the dairy fund .
With this resolution , we are ready to take responsibility for European agriculture .
That is why I voted in favour of the present resolution .
The dairy sector is in danger .
For months now , dairy producers have been producing at a loss whilst the price of milk has not fallen for consumers : large distributors have been the ones to benefit .
Thousands of small French producers are under threat of bankruptcy .
The general dairy strike , which is the last step by the producers to try to make themselves heard , and not to die amid public indifference , is currently spreading in many European countries , correspondingly jeopardising many jobs in other branches of the dairy sector .
There is an urgent need to find effective solutions for this key sector of French and European agriculture , and to make a radical policy change , since - let us not beat around the bush - it is the European Commission , the Council , the European Parliament and their ultra-liberalism that hold sole responsibility for this tragedy .
We need to take urgent action : to maintain the quotas principle after 2015 ; to bring in an immediate reduction in these quotas in order to end the slump in the price of milk ; to set prices in line with the costs actually incurred by independent producers ; and to establish full transparency in the setting of prices by large distributors .
Farmers expect strong action .
in writing . - ( DE ) We saved the banks , because we had to .
That was recognised and accepted by all responsible politicians .
Now we are faced with a situation in the agricultural industry where we need to prevent the imminent bankruptcy of farmers , particularly in the dairy sector , because prices no longer cover production costs .
However , we need to ensure that our production potential is sufficient to supply European citizens with high quality foodstuffs .
I belong to a generation that experienced food rationing and the need to hoard food in order to have enough to eat .
Hopefully , things will never get that bad again .
However , those who have never experienced hunger do not understand how important a strong common agricultural policy is for Europe .
We need security of supply and not just in the energy sector .
I would ask you to consider the fact that , if too many farms in too many regions are forced to cease operating because we are not able or prepared to take the necessary short-term measures that are called for in our resolution , the cost to the EU and the Member States would be many times greater than the cost of taking appropriate short-term measures within the framework of the common agricultural policy .
The army of unemployed is large enough .
Allowing farms to go bust would be irresponsible on social , economic and environmental grounds .
I hope that our warning will be heeded .
I voted for the joint motion for a resolution , despite regarding it as inadequate .
The proposal to end the milk quota scheme in 2015 , and until then to increase the quota by 1 % per year , will , in practical terms , legalise the surpluses which already exist in certain countries , which are being produced above their quotas and which are then exported at very low prices , pushing down market prices , in many countries below the cost of production .
The measures which the Commission is trying to apply have the ultimate objective of deregulation , and therefore liberalisation of the dairy farming sector in Europe .
We are totally against these measures as they serve the interests of the large companies , in the same way as the common agricultural policy reforms , to the detriment of small-scale producers .
We support measures to regulate the dairy farming sector .
in writing . - ( DE ) In recent months a situation has developed on the dairy markets that is threatening the existence of many dairy farmers .
The price of their products has fallen rapidly .
Small and medium-sized farms have been particularly hard hit and they are having to draw on their reserves in order to survive .
For this reason , rapid action by the EU is sought .
The Commission has previously been far too tentative in its attempts to get to grips with the crisis , for which is it partly responsible because of its decision to increase the delivery quotas .
Parliament 's initiatives , most of which are also referred to in this motion for a resolution , are therefore even more welcome .
These include , first and foremost , the creation of a milk fund to which EUR 600 million will be allocated , measures for increasing demand for dairy products , greater quality control and precise labelling obligations .
With a view to supporting our farmers , it was therefore a foregone conclusion for me to vote in favour of the proposed motion for a resolution and the measures it contains .
A warning bell : that is the essence of our resolution ; it calls upon the Commission and the Council to take emergency measures in order to find a way out of the crisis , the full force of which is being felt by milk producers .
In Belgium yesterday this crisis took on a new dimension when over 2 000 producers poured away 3 million litres of milk in Ciney .
Ascribing sole responsibility for this to the removal of quotas is a way of cutting the debate short .
That is why I opposed Amendment 28 , calling for a freeze in quotas , as too simplistic .
The main causes lie elsewhere : a fall in demand , fierce competition worldwide , and above all , the unacceptable profit margins of the distribution companies , which have been criticised by many consumer associations .
That is what led me , in paragraphs 17 and 18 , of which I am the author , to ask the Commission for an enquiry to determine whether there are any cartels operating .
The credibility of the Commission is at stake .
On the other hand , I supported Amendment 1 , which extends the initiative taken by 16 Member States and calls for a balance to be re-established between the various operators in the sector .
Personally , I support the fixing of a minimum price for milk in each country .
Looking ahead to the vote on the resolution on the crisis in the dairy farming sector , I had tabled and endorsed some amendments for short-term regulation of the dairy market , specifically through a freeze in the increase of quotas , or a temporary reduction in quotas ( of 3 % to 5 % ) .
However , all these measures have been rejected by the European Parliament .
Producers have a right to expect Parliament to put forward the radical measures they need .
Despite certain positive elements , this resolution does not meet these expectations : that is why I abstained from the final vote .
Europe is highly dependent on imported energy .
To reduce our energy dependency , we must take action on energy efficiency , the diversification of energy sources through the increasing use of renewables , and the diversification of countries of origin and transit .
Consolidation of the internal energy market throughout Europe is also very important for increasing energy security .
Gas pipeline and electricity grids covering the whole of Europe must be given priority .
In this respect , two of the projects included in the economic recovery plan are highly important for Portugal : the electricity grid link between Portugal and Spain , which will help to consolidate the Iberian electricity market ; and the link between Spain and France , to prevent the Iberian Peninsula from becoming an energy island .
The Commission and the Council are called on to make every effort to ensure that the development of renewable energy projects in the countries of southern Europe with a high potential for renewable energy is encouraged .
Large areas of the Alentejo region have the highest solar potential in the whole of Europe , as shown by solar radiation distribution maps .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's resolution on external aspects of energy security because I believe the creation of a genuine common energy policy will be decisive for ensuring the security of energy supplies in the European Union .
Nonetheless , a properly functioning internal energy market and the diversification of energy sources will also be extremely important in preventing future crises and interruptions in energy supply .
In this respect , I think increasing investment in renewable energies and energy efficiency should be a core element of European policies .
The European Union 's energy dependence , the strategic need to reduce it and the threats to the EU 's stability caused by such fragility are well known and have been widely debated .
In that respect , my country has levels of dependence that far exceed the European average , revealing the absolute failure of successive governments in this area and raising considerable fears about a possible crisis in the energy markets .
In view of the difficult relations with some of our main suppliers , the limits to the diversity of energy sources and the inadequacy of supply capacity , I feel it is important for all the Member States that the European Union should act en bloc to protect its common interests and show that it can impose them in a very demanding negotiating context .
Similarly , I believe the Member States must not shirk their responsibilities but should decide on varied energy baskets , in which all the main alternatives , including nuclear , should be examined , evaluated without bias and put into practice when they are found to be useful , with priority for those that can be produced most efficiently , safely and cleanly .
Europe will not be able , at least in the short term , to rid itself of its dependence on countries outside Europe for its energy supplies .
It is true that in order to reduce these constraints , we need to diversify the forms of our dependence , from the viewpoint both of energy sources and of supplier countries .
To be honest , however , I do not see the point in placing ourselves in the clutches of Turkey , in a move motivated more , it seems , by hostility to Russia than by energy concerns .
Turkey is the necessary point of transit for this famous Nabucco gas pipeline of yours , which has systematically received priority over other projects .
This would give the country a significant means of applying pressure .
With regard to Desertec , here too I fail to see the point in becoming dependent upon what is , for the moment , a project which is part of a private initiative .
In fact , I believe that it is contradictory to want to conduct a centralised energy policy , in the hands of the Commission , and at the same time to hand the European energy sector over to private operators , entailing a rise in prices and a reduction in services , and adversely affecting energy choices .
Above all , I believe that energy is too crucial an issue to be left to Commission officials to deal with , or to be abandoned to the profit motive of a few companies .
in writing . - ( DE ) This joint motion for a resolution on external aspects of energy security contains important options for Europe 's future energy policy .
In particular , I consider the significant increase in the proportion of renewable energy sources in the current energy mix to be particularly important and I am therefore also in favour of the Desertec project planned by a private group of investors .
This is not least intended to reduce the dependence of the EU on individual states from which we have hitherto acquired our fossil fuels .
The planned Nabucco project will not , unfortunately , contribute to this , since , it will leave the EU open to blackmail with regard to the planned accession of Turkey to the EU .
Given the direct influence of the Islamic regime in Turkey , the project in its current form is therefore to be rejected .
For this reason , despite numerous positive elements in this text , I abstained from voting on the text as a whole in the final vote .
in writing . - We recognise the different concerns of our various allies .
However , from a British perspective , efforts to achieve a more coherent EU approach to energy security do not require the Lisbon Treaty or the extension of European Commission competence .
Sufficient mechanisms are already in place which would enable EU Member States to speak with one voice in dealing with Russia , should we so wish .
The references in this resolution to the Lisbon Treaty are highly detrimental .
British Conservatives are vehemently opposed to the ratification of this Treaty and to further attempts at EU political integration .
I regret also the failure to make any reference to nuclear energy among the mix of sustainable and diverse energy supply sources that will be required in the coming years .
Energy security is first and foremost the responsibility of our own governments .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Taiwan following the recent typhoon ( debate )
The next item is the Commission 's statement on the situation in Taiwan following the recent typhoon .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , let me express my sympathy to the people of Taiwan who suffered as result of Typhoon Morakot and its consequences .
The European Community Mechanism for Civil Protection made a contribution to the overall relief effort and showed Europe 's solidarity with the population of Taiwan .
On 7 August 2009 Taiwan was hit by Typhoon Morakot , causing major flooding and mudslides .
Over 150 people were killed and tens of thousands displaced .
Transport infrastructure , including roads and bridges , was damaged and communication networks were interrupted .
Around 700 000 homes were left without drinking water .
Taiwan requested international assistance on 12 August 2009 .
In response the European Commission activated the Community Civil Protection Mechanism .
The mechanism facilitates and coordinates Member States ' in-kind assistance during major emergencies .
The European Commission deployed a coordination and assessment team to Taiwan to assess the needs and to assist the Government in its relief efforts .
The team undertook several assessment missions to the affected regions , sharing its findings and recommendations with the local authorities and international partners .
The mechanism team also facilitated the delivery of in-kind assistance such as water purification equipment donated by Sweden and Poland , which was delivered to the most affected areas in Taiwan .
The rapid delivery of this assistance ensured a tangible expression of European solidarity .
The presence of the European team on the ground was also received positively .
The Community Civil Protection Mechanism is a very visible sign of European solidarity with countries worldwide , and I am convinced that it will continue to grow in strength and effectiveness .
Natural disasters can affect any country in the world .
They often carry a heavy human , economic and environmental cost .
In the future , climate change makes it likely that we will face more disasters .
In this regard , solidarity with other countries hit by disaster remains one of the pillars of the European disaster-management policy .
I look forward to continuing to work with the European Parliament to make sure our European emergency-management tools are fit for purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Republic of Taiwan was shaken to its foundations on 8 August .
Typhoon Morakot swept across the island with unbridled force , leaving more than 750 people dead .
Thousands lost their belongings and large areas of land were laid waste .
The damage amounts to more than EUR 2.5 billion .
The reconstruction of an infrastructure that has been widely damaged will take months .
As a token of our solidarity , we Europeans wished to support the Taiwanese people by providing disaster relief .
Mrs Kuneva , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) supports the initiatives that the European Commission has instigated .
It is all the more surprising that the Taiwanese embassies were instructed to refuse all foreign aid .
That led to strong criticism and on 13 August to much needed adjustments to a completely abortive crisis management programme .
Shortly after that , Prime Minister Liu Chao-shiuan resigned .
Another cause of irritation was the visit to Taiwan by the Dalai Lama over several days in September .
He merely wanted to pray for the victims with the survivors .
Sympathy has long been the message of the much-acclaimed speeches and books of the Dalai Lama .
Once again the Chinese government made loud protests and brought a huge amount of pressure to bear .
It is outrageous that Peking has once again made a political issue out of a purely humanitarian act by the Dalai Lama .
Taiwan must ask itself whose side it is actually on .
President Ma Ying-jeou only allowed the Nobel Peace Prize winner to enter the country after strong protests from his own people .
Commissioner , we need to intensify our dialogue with Taiwan - on humanitarian issues , but also on the issue of our fundamental values .
Democracy , human rights and solidarity are inseparable , even in this emerging Asiatic country .
on behalf of the S-D Group . - Mr President , first of all , please let me express my sincere sorrow for the huge tragedy that hit Taiwan on 8 August and in particular for all the people that were killed by the incredible energy of the devastation from this major disaster .
Morakot was the deadliest typhoon to hit Taiwan in nearly 50 years , ravaging the island in early August and leaving about 700 people dead or missing , forcing the evacuation of thousands and burying hundreds of village homes in mudslides .
On this occasion China showed great sensitivity by sending immediate aid to help Taiwanese victims .
Not only was the Chinese Government ready to assist the island , but also private companies and organisations of different kinds including the Association for Relations across the Taiwan Straits and the mainland Red Cross Society .
Also , the Chinese population afforded help with fundraising events organised to relieve the island from the disaster .
According to the last figures , the Chinese mainland has so far donated to the typhoon victims about a CNY 1 billion , which is the equivalent of nearly USD 150 million .
An important role in this situation was played by the several hundreds of prefabricated houses that were sent from China to Taiwan in order to put a roof over those who had lost their dwellings .
I would like to underline the fact that the European Union , attached to the One China policy , welcomes the help that China offered Taiwan on this tragic occasion because this shows an improvement in the relations between the two territories , and it is clear that an improvement in such relations can lead to greater stability in this region .
I also think , and with this I conclude , that , given the dimension of the disaster , the European Union should make use of one of its core values - solidarity - and offer Taiwan additional material and financial assistance in order to help with the massive task of reconstruction .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the scenes of devastation and destruction caused by Typhoon Morakot will remain in our minds for a long time , but many people in Taiwan will be living with the consequences of this tragedy for years to come .
Over 700 people lost their lives and thousands of others have faced major disruption .
The Taiwanese Government under President Ma responded promptly by deploying soldiers to the worst-affected communities and areas , and requesting assistance from the international community .
The Swedish EU Presidency and the Commission should be congratulated on their work in activating the Community Civil Protection Mechanism .
I do hope now that the Commission will commit to longer-term assistance to Taiwan to enable full recovery of its people and economy and the rebuilding of the infrastructure .
I have no doubt of the gratitude of the people and Government of Taiwan for the solidarity and support shown by the EU .
Furthermore , as chairman of the EP Taiwan Friendship Group , I look forward to finding out the latest situation when I lead a delegation of MEPs to Taiwan next month .
The calamity that has affected Taiwan may well become more commonplace , both in Taiwan and around the world , as a result of climate change .
It is therefore essential that Taiwan , as an island vulnerable to such meteorological phenomena and as a major global industrial power , is enabled to participate meaningfully and with dignity in appropriate international organisations , not least those related to weather and climate change .
In particular , Taiwan should be allowed to participate in the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change and the World Meteorological Organisation .
Both the Council and the Commission support Taiwan 's meaningful participation in United Nations bodies now , and I hope they will use the opportunity , arising from this disaster , that has now been presented to Taiwan to promote Taiwan 's involvement in these structures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as well as offering my condolences and support to the people of Taiwan , I would like to emphasise the timeliness of the European Union 's humanitarian effort in this disaster .
The Commission has played its part , and many Member States have sent aid or teams of experts .
The People 's Republic of China itself has helped the Taiwanese authorities , and this is a gesture that I consider to be very significant .
However , if we want to provide the Taiwanese authorities and the countries of the region with structural help to cope with threats of this kind in the future , the European Union should support Taiwan 's admission as an observer to the World Meteorological Organisation and to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
Taiwan 's admission as an observer has already yielded some good results in other international sectoral organisations such as the WTO , and , in this case , too , Taiwan 's admission could be a practical form of prevention and could in future limit the risks for the 23 million inhabitants of the island and for the region as a whole .
( FR ) Mr President , Taiwan is just now emerging from a dreadful natural disaster , unprecedented in the country over the last 50 years .
It is our duty not only to express our solidarity but also to play an active part in the reconstruction of the parts of the island that have been devastated .
Happily , after typhoon Morakot hit , the Commission and the Council indicated their willingness to help .
I urge them now to provide the concrete aid that the government and the people of that country need , because there is an enormous amount to be done .
Appropriate instruments exist at European Union level .
They should be put to full use .
This disaster once again poses the issue , as already mentioned by some of my fellow Members , of Taiwan 's participation in the various agencies of the United Nations .
In principle , the EU institutions encourage this , but it is high time for action to be taken to change things .
The Taiwanese authorities did not have access to meteorological information indicating how serious the typhoon was .
This is unacceptable .
It is absolutely vital that Taiwan accedes to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and is thus in a position to avoid the worst , since there is no doubt at all that there will be further climatic depressions in the future .
I am the chairman of the Taiwan-Luxembourg association , and I really must say that we should no longer be pressurised by the blackmailing of Communist China , with regard to our relations with Taiwan .
Crystal-clear support from the Commission and the Council on this issue is absolutely vital .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my deep sorrow about the humanitarian tragedy in Taiwan and to say that , as the European Union , we must help in any way we can .
We now know that 640 people were killed by Typhoon Morakot and over 192 people are missing .
One mudslide wiped an entire village off the map and killed hundreds .
However , none of this happened by accident .
It was preceded by a prolonged drought , which reduced the capacity of the soil to absorb the rain .
Droughts , floods and a rapid increase in extreme weather are gradually increasing due to climate change .
A typhoon is caused in sea areas with a surface temperature of 27 οC .
The increase in temperature will considerably increase both the number of typhoons and their intensity .
To date , 120 million people are living in areas affected by typhoons .
Between 1980 and 2000 , there were 250 000 typhoon victims .
For all these reasons , our heart must be in Copenhagen , where we shall decide in December if each of our countries will separately defend its own temporary , short-term interests or if we shall all fight for the planet , our home , in a fight to reverse climate change .
So will the developed and developing world stop contributing to disasters such as the disaster in Taiwan ?
If so , action is needed .
We need to pledge to making the necessary commitments for the necessary reduction , in order to prevent the temperature rising above 2 οC .
We also need to put our hand in our pocket to provide financial assistance to the developing world , so that it becomes part of the solution and helps to combat climate change .
We are the developing world that caused climate change .
We are the polluters and , according to the ' polluter pays ' principle which we ourselves adopted , we must pay .
We must pay by giving financial support to developing countries .
( NL ) Mr President , this was a disaster on an unprecedented scale for Taiwan .
There is great tragedy in the mountains .
Whole villages have disappeared and there are a thousand people thought dead or missing .
Thousands of survivors , if not more , are being put up in military camps for the time being .
This is how Menno Goedhart , the highest representative in Taiwan from my home country , the Netherlands , depicts the devastating effects of typhoon Morakot .
First and foremost , I would like to express my sympathies , from this Parliament , to the government and citizens of Taiwan .
In addition to the practical assistance that Menno Goedhart is currently offering his Taiwanese friends , and also whilst appreciating what has already been done from the European side , I would nonetheless like to ask a couple of questions of the Commission in relation to the strengthening of European-Taiwanese relations .
First of all , the Commission will be putting forward a proposal next month to relax the visa regime for Taiwanese citizens .
The United Kingdom and Ireland have already set a good example in this regard .
Secondly , a recent European report demonstrated very clearly that there would be enormous benefits for both Taiwan and the European Union in agreeing trade enhancing measures ( TEM ) .
Does the Commission agree with this urgent conclusion ?
Finally , Mr President , I would like to lend my full support to those of my fellow Members who have already argued for the ending of Taiwan 's incredible international isolation .
Such isolation is truly intolerable , certainly when it comes to people 's lives , wherever they may be .
( FI ) Mr President , Taiwan met with human disaster on a huge scale on 8 August .
The incident took a heavy toll and the economic damage was immense .
Now it is time for us to help .
It is time for us to show solidarity with the citizens of Taiwan .
We have to show compassion , but , in addition , we have to give financial support , and , as the Commissioner said here , we have to adopt crisis management tools now .
We now have to provide the Taiwanese with all the help that is humanly possible .
I also wish to express my support for the idea of longer-term assistance to Taiwan as proposed by Mr Tannock , for the best possible results , and so that we can show that they too are human beings and , above all , they are our friends .
( PL ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for this information .
However , my question is of a slightly different nature .
Taiwan has most recently been struck by tragedy .
However , we are fully aware of the fact that many disasters of this kind have occurred in the past , and that many more will occur in the future .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Commissioner the following question .
Does the European Union , and the Commission in particular , have any standard procedures in place for dealing with this kind of situation ?
Is there an emergency action package or provisions for specific countries ?
Is there also a long-term plan of action ?
I think it would be unfortunate if we reacted to these tragedies in different ways , depending on the situation in different countries .
I think that , as is the case in the military forces , we have to establish certain standard procedures in crisis situations .
That is what I wanted to ask the Commissioner .
( NL ) Mr President , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , like many groups in this House , sympathises with the population of Taiwan and we are pleased that the Commission reacted as it did .
The Commission must continue in this vein .
The big problem , however , alongside this human catastrophe , is , of course , Taiwan 's isolation .
It is quite possible to maintain a one-China policy whilst at the same time establishing good working relations with Taiwan .
Taiwan could easily play its part in the World Health Organization as an observer .
The same applies to the World Meteorological Organization and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change .
All of this is possible and is no obstacle to the one-China policy .
I agree with Mr Belder when it comes to relaxing the visa regime and I also concur with the good things he had to say about Mr Goedhart , the Dutch representative in Taipei .
I think , therefore , that there is no need for us to continue isolating Taiwan .
Working relations , that is what it is about .
Mr President , first of all I would like to express my deep condolences to the families of those who died during the Morakot typhoon .
It is regrettable that hundreds have died , others lost their loved ones , and many more were injured .
As many observers have noted , the number of victims could have been lower if the Government had reacted in a more coordinated manner to the typhoon .
The Government failed to predict the seriousness of the tropical storm approaching the island .
At the same time , we know that Taiwan has a highly developed high-tech sector and is one of the largest manufacturers of GPS systems in the world .
Part of the blame should be attributed to the fact that Taiwan is not yet a member of the World Meteorological Organisation ( WMO ) , as has already been mentioned by some colleagues .
Taiwan could have been better pre-warned if the WMO provided it with timely information .
I am therefore convinced that the time is right again to raise the issue of Taiwan 's membership in the WMO , not only for political reasons but also for humanitarian ones .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , the typhoon which struck Taiwan has affected the lives of hundreds of thousands of people and destroyed tens of thousands of dwellings .
The humanitarian aid provided by the European Union must be unconditional .
The aim is to help victims as quickly as possible .
The European Union is an active donor , working with non-governmental organisations and the United Nations ' specialist agencies to provide funds for medical treatment , logistical support and the reconstruction of devastated areas .
The Copenhagen Conference will have a great deal to discuss , and we are preparing to take some measures aimed at a future post-Kyoto agreement on reducing polluting emissions .
Therefore , we are mostly discussing measures for reducing the causes that lead to climate change .
As part of the Copenhagen Conference , I would like to call for particular attention to be focused as well on adaptation measures , as we will continually have to deal with powerful storms , flooding , prolonged drought or forest fires .
I also urge the European Union to provide humanitarian support to Taiwan , along with support for reconstruction and , in particular , for the population .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will take the questions in order .
First of all , on the assistance which the Commission is providing to Taiwan to meet the ongoing needs of its people , which was the main point of the question by Mr Mann : Taiwan has been informed of the Commission 's post-disaster needs-assessment mechanism , but we have not received any requests so far .
If such a request comes , we will take it into consideration .
Then , on the Commission position regarding the current state of cross-Strait relations , which was the question from Mr Boştinaru , the Commission welcomes the rapprochement between Taiwan and China during the last year .
This has made it possible to improve cross-Strait relations , reducing tensions between the two , and to promote bilateral issues such as direct air and sea links .
We strongly support the bilateral discussions between the two parties that may allow further progress .
We also welcome the Chinese assistance .
On the question concerning the participation of Taiwan in the World Meteorological Organisation from Mrs Lulling and Mrs Andrikienė , and also from Mr van Baalen and Mr Tannock : in line with the position expressed by the European Union in a statement issued in September 2008 and the EU 's One China policy , the European Commission supports , where appropriate , the meaningful participation of Taiwan in international organisations .
We will continue to do so .
On the questions from Mrs Lulling and Mr Mann , as to the assistance provided , the Community 's Civil Protection Mechanism provided assistance from Sweden and Poland .
This help was received with gratitude which was acknowledged by President Ma to Commission President Barroso .
On the question concerning the visit by the Dalai Lama to Taiwan in the aftermath of the typhoon , the visit by the Dalai Lama was a decision taken by the Taiwanese authorities , and the European Commission has no comment on it .
On the question raised by Mr Belder , about the Commission position on granting visa-free access to Taiwanese visiting the EU : the Commission is considering , within the framework of the revision of the appropriate legislation , the possibility of updating the list of countries and entities which may not be subject to visa requirements in respect of visits to the European Union , especially the Schengen Area , and in this context it will also consider the case of Taiwan .


Coming to the question by Mr Zemke on the issue of standard procedures in the event of disasters and how we will proceed in future in such cases , the Commission focuses on two priorities : the first is continuing work on preparedness and response , and the second is the prevention of disasters .
First , we deem it important to ensure the availability of EU assistance at all times .
With Parliament 's support , in 2008 we launched a pilot project and a preparatory action on the EU rapid-response capability .
From this initial experience , if appropriate , the Commission will present further proposals for the development of the EU rapid-response capability , funded from national resources earmarked for EU operations .
Second , we aim to have a comprehensive approach to disaster prevention at EU level .
In February 2009 the Commission published a communication on a Community approach to the prevention of natural and man-made disasters .
We would welcome Parliament 's feedback on this communication .
The debate is closed .
1 .
Murder of human rights activists in Russia
I have received six motions for a resolution concerning the murders of human rights lawyers in Russia ( Rule 122 ) .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , we really ought to spare a thought here for the human rights activists who were recently murdered in the North Caucasus and light a candle in memory of them .
We have to remember that Natalia Estemirova , Zarema Sadulayeva , Alik Dzhabrailov and many others who have suffered and lost their lives in their defence of human rights deserve the support of all of us .
Unfortunately , we were not able to support them enough while they were alive .
It is alarming that Russia has not been able to conduct criminal investigations rigorous enough to solve these murders and bring the guilty to justice .
I have noted that the European Union has communicated with Russia officially on the subject .
Quite obviously , however , our efforts are insufficient , and we will have to consider seriously how we can make the rule of law work in Russia and how we can raise this issue 's profile a lot higher when we negotiate the new partnership and cooperation agreement with that country .
We also need to think about how we might support human rights defenders in Russia better than we do now .
We should discuss whether we could offer protection to those in danger and whether the EU institutions can arrange visas for them promptly , so that they can escape from Russia , where they and their lives are at risk .
In the opinion of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , it is important that the European Parliament should have a centre which disseminates information on the situation of human rights activists whose lives are in danger and which endeavours to help them in collaboration with the other institutions .
There is much we can do .
Anna Politkovskaya once said that the West can do so much , but the West does so little .
( Applause )

Mr President , I am going to use the brief amount of time I have to clarify the position of my group , which did not sign the joint declaration and which is tabling a separate resolution .
I would like to tell you , firstly , that we are fully in agreement with the joint resolution with regard to Natalia Estemirova , Zarema Sadulayeva and Alik Dzhabrailov .
We have been shocked by these new assassinations which , in fact , are just a sample of the assassinations of human rights activists in Chechnya .
In our resolution , we have called for exactly the same thing as the joint resolution calls for : we condemn the attack , we call for an enquiry , and we express our concern over the deterioration of human rights for militants in Russia .
Where our position diverges is with regard to the additional reference in the joint resolution to all human rights defenders and to the situation in the North Caucasus region in general .
We think that there may be other places in which to make these points - and I undertake to do so - particularly in the resolution that will precede the summit between the European Union and Russia .
We would like this agenda on human rights activists and the protection of these activists to form part of that resolution , but also of all the negotiations that we have in the future with Russia .
So , the problem here , I would add , is simply one of time and of place .
This is a political issue that should be dealt with politically and not just here , when we are dealing with urgent cases .
That is why we have decided to make the distinction but , of course , on the substance of the problem , we are fully in agreement with the other groups .
author . - Mr President , allow me to present the Chamber with a few facts .
Only this year in January , Stanislav Markelov , the human rights lawyer who represented the assassinated journalist Anna Politkovskaya , was gunned down in the middle of the afternoon in downtown Moscow .
On the same occasion , Anastasia Baburova , a journalist who tried to protect him , was also shot and died .
In July , Natalia Estemirova , a well-known Russian human rights activist and journalist , was found dead in Ingushetia after being abducted by armed men in neighbouring Chechnya .
Less than a month later , another non-governmental activist , Zarema Sadulayeva , and her husband were abducted and killed .
In August , journalist Malik Akhmedilov was shot dead shortly after leaving his home in Dagestan .
Six outstanding journalists and human rights activists dead in less than eight months .
These abductions and murders are only the peak of what results from the deterioration of the human rights situation in Russia , where independent voices , including lawyers , journalists and other activists , face increasing violence , threats and unjustified prosecution .
Human rights violations in Russia , and especially in North Caucasus , can no longer be ignored .
We cannot be so naive as to believe that super-powerful Russia , with one of the strongest intelligence services in the world , is not capable of finding the perpetrators and bringing them to justice .
We all , regardless of our political colour , have to understand that impunity for attacks against human rights defenders will contribute to more violence and a growing culture of lawlessness .
The Russian authorities must ensure the physical safety and freedom of movement and expression of human rights defenders , in accordance with the United Nations Declaration on human rights defenders .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , our former Oldest Member , Otto von Habsburg , was once asked whether he regretted being an MEP rather than an emperor .
He said no , because if he was an emperor he would have to call a fool ' Your Excellency ' but as an MEP he could call a fool a fool .
I am reminded of this story when human rights issues come up .
We are not a diplomatic body ; we are a political parliamentary body .
We can speak the truth .
There is a saying that goes ' the fish stinks from the head down ' .
It is not the case - and I would like to thank Mrs Weber for giving such a clear speech - that these incidents and murders in the Caucasus are in any way random or the work of some dark force , but rather , since Mr Putin came to power , which is linked to the matter of Chechnya and the mysterious explosion of houses in Moscow , there has been a trail of blood there for years that always leads back to Chechnya and affects innocent people : civilians and , in particular , human rights activists who , like those mentioned - and many of these people were known to us personally - not only work for the human rights of Chechens but also for a democratic Russia , for an understanding between the peoples of Chechnya and Russia and for peace in the Caucasus .
These people are being murdered one after the other .
Mrs De Keyser , this is why it was necessary to hold an emergency debate .
We will make ourselves a laughing stock if a woman who received praise in this House and who visited us in Strasbourg on account of her commitment to human rights is murdered in front of our eyes and we then postpone the debate on the subject to some later date .
Russia is watching closely to see whether we are in a position to respond immediately - and we must respond immediately by saying very clearly : put an end to the murders , to the violation of human rights and grant freedom to Chechnya and Russia , but above all put an end to the systematic violation of human rights and murders in mysterious circumstances .
author . - ( PL ) Once again , the issue of human rights violations in Russia has appeared on the European Parliament 's agenda .
In addition to the systematic persecution of religious and ethnic minorities , human rights activists are regularly being murdered .
Journalists and NGO workers in Russia risk their lives every day in the course of their work .
Threats , kidnappings , torture , arbitrary detentions and murders are becoming commonplace .
The fact that the Russian authorities are not actively investigating these crimes , that no real results have been achieved and that the perpetrators remain at large , not only proves the complete ineffectiveness of the authorities ' actions , but also their tacit consent and indifference .
Respect for human rights should be a key issue in relations between the European Union and Russia .
It is our duty to demand that Russia ensures that proper and effective investigations are implemented , that the perpetrators are punished and that it puts an end to these horrific murders .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a new MEP , let me start by saying that human rights issues are also extremely important to my party , the German Left , and that we condemn any violation of human rights - irrespective of where or by whom they are committed .
That has nothing to do with interfering in national affairs .
I have for years been genuinely concerned and outraged by the fact that , time and again , human rights activists involved with the situation in Chechnya are being murdered .
Natalia Estemirova , Stanislav Markelov , Zarema Sadulayeva , these are examples of murders that are truly shocking .
It is therefore important that we in this House concern ourselves with this issue .
I am concerned that cases like the murder of Anna Politkovskaya are not investigated .
If this process is now re-opened , I most sincerely hope that the perpetrators are found and arrested , because otherwise there is a risk of more bloodshed and it will be seen as a licence to commit acts of this kind .
What we expect is simply for an immediate and full investigation to be carried out into these murders and for this matter to be dealt with ruthlessly , for Russia not to wait any longer but to take up the fight to protect human rights itself .
It must not be the case that protecting human rights somehow condemns people to death .
I also believe that the forthcoming EU-Russia summit needs to tackle these issues as a matter of urgency , and not merely as side issues , but with the prominence that they deserve .
Personally , I also expect human rights issues to be discussed honestly in this House .
I would have preferred not to debate issues such as these on Thursday afternoon and I believe this topic should also concern us even if it was about enterprise and trade .
Such issues are often given secondary priority .
That is what we want to change and that is also something I wanted to say here .
Mr President , in a country with a high crime rate , one could put forward the theory that the deaths of human rights activists are a coincidence .
They are coincidental because , generally speaking , many people fall victim to crime in these countries .
Today , on 17 September , I have to remind you all of a sad anniversary , namely the 70th anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Poland .
Following this invasion , Soviet troops shot at least 21 768 Polish citizens .
Why have I mentioned this fact ?
It is because the Russians now claim that this was an ordinary crime , in the same way that the murders of human rights activists are ' ordinary crimes ' .
The scale on which human rights activists are being murdered in Russia is such that to interpret this phenomenon as the result of ' ordinary crime ' is utterly reckless .
The theory that these murders are ' coincidental ' is not a viable one .
The systematic nature of these killings means that there has to be something in the political and social climate in Russia that has caused such frequent killings .
The moral crisis in that country , a tendency to trivialise death , dehumanisation , relativism and vanishing values are to blame for the fact that this problem is not taken seriously .
I think that our resolution is well-balanced and will help the Russians resolve this matter .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( LT ) The Social Democrat Group cannot remain indifferent to the recent murders of human rights activists in Russia .
The deaths of Anna Politkovskaya , Natalya Estemirova , Zarema Sadulayeva , Andrei Kulagin must not remain meaningless .
We condemn utterly the perpetrators of these barbarous actions and the fact that sadly in some regions of Russia there is an atmosphere of impunity and political murders are not investigated .
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has promised that the perpetrators of the murders will be found and punished .
His reaction was stronger than the previous president 's , but so far these are only words .
Time will tell if the Russian authorities are able to carry through the commitments made , so important to the country 's citizens and the international community .
In our opinion , evaluation in the proposed resolution of Russian actions in the Northern Caucasus has exceeded the resolution 's area of application , therefore the social democrats have decided to adopt their own separate document .
The social democrats are convinced that the human rights situation in Russia would really improve if EU-Russia human rights consultations were stepped up .
The European Parliament , the State Duma , civil , social and human rights organisations in the EU and Russia should make an active contribution to these consultations .
We stress that the protection of human rights must be discussed at length at the next meeting of the leaders of the EU and Russia .
This matter is becoming an inherent part of the new agreement between the EU and Russia .
( LT ) This debate and the European Parliament resolution on the murder of human rights activists in Russia is particularly important , especially now as we hear one news report after another on the murders in Russia of the human rights defenders Natalya Estemirova , Alik Jabrailov , Zarema Sadulayeva and others .
The European Union cannot remain indifferent to the brutal killing of human rights activists .
In our relations with Russia we must underline and we do underline that investigations into these murders take too long and as a rule end without establishing who was guilty .
Such an unacceptable practice is becoming the norm in Russia , especially in the case of crimes in Chechnya , where impunity is thriving .
One of our fundamental values is respect for human rights , human dignity and human life , and no pragmatic interests can be above these values .
I think that as a matter of honour Russian President Dmitry Medvedev should ensure that everything is done to fully investigate the kidnapping and murder cases involving human rights defenders , and to bring those who are guilty to justice .
Mr President , the human rights situation in Russia has changed for the worse .
We now call on the Russian authorities to do everything in their power to ensure the protection of human rights defenders .
We know that the crucial thing that is lacking is a will to do that ' everything ' .
It can be done , as the Kremlin exercises a decisive influence on Russia 's power structures and judiciary .
Because of this , the failure of the Russian judiciary to protect human rights defenders makes one assume the complicity of the regime in these crimes .
Our message today should be addressed to the EU governments and the Commission .
As long as the Kremlin assumes that worries about the fate of human rights defenders remain on the level of declarations , with no consequences on economic relations , Mr Putin and Mr Medvedev can conclude that the EU has not been able to draw lessons from the blatant murder of Anna Politkovskaya .

( PL ) We are indeed discussing human rights violations in Russia on a day of significant symbolic value .
Exactly 70 years ago , on 17 September 1939 , the Red Army - in collusion with Hitler - occupied one third of Poland , which was then fighting against the German invasion .
Stalin 's forces murdered thousands of Poles , and hundreds of thousands were taken away to Soviet labour camps .
In Katyń , thousands of Polish officers were murdered on Stalin 's orders .
To us , 17 September will forever remain a day of shame for Stalin 's Russia .
Today 's Russia is not brave enough to face this horrific truth .
Its current government is providing unconvincing justifications for their former alliance with Hitler .
To this day , Moscow is refusing to grant access to the archives on the Katyń massacre .
The histories of many countries contain horrific events .
It is a measure of the maturity of a nation when it is able to confront its past and denounce that which needs to be denounced in its history .
Today 's Germany is an example of such an attitude .
It is only then that the past will cease to be a burden for today 's Russia and will allow it to enter the community of free and democratic nations with its head held high .
Only then will Russia be able , once and for all , to drop the millstone of its Stalinist past from around its neck , and to stop fighting against its own citizens , who are currently risking their lives to defend fundamental freedoms and human rights .
We honour the victims of those murders .
We will remember you all .
( PT ) Good afternoon , ladies and gentlemen .
The murder of Natalia Estemirova prompted great sadness in all of us in this House , since we learnt of her abduction on the very day when we gathered here for the first time , and heard of her murder just a few hours later .
That is something that cannot fail to move anyone , wherever in the world they may be .
As my colleague Mrs Ernst has already said , I firmly believe that the left must defend human rights and the defenders of human rights everywhere , regardless of the country they are in .
These attacks , this onslaught against human rights activists in Russia , have had very worrying effects .
They work as intimidation and will certainly be extremely traumatic for all those who want to defend human rights in Russia .
They are therefore the first layer in an offensive that will later result in the deterioration of the whole human rights situation , not to mention the human rights of the activists themselves .
The effects of these murders are therefore unpredictable and worrying .
Without a swift and effective judicial investigation and with no guarantee that the safety of human rights activists will be respected , the situation may in fact become extremely worrying .
That is why I shall take great pleasure in voting in favour of this resolution and in following up its appeals to the Russian authorities to protect human rights activists .
I come from Portugal , from the other end of Europe , and next week I shall be going to Russia .
In fact , I am going to the Russian embassy tomorrow to get my visa .
I believe that the relations between Europe and Russia are of the greatest importance and that Europe owes much to Russia .
The first thing that Europe owes Russia is sincerity and clarity in the protection of the human rights and freedoms of our Russian fellow citizens of Europe .
( FI ) Mr President , your language is so beautiful that I decided to try to thank you in Hungarian : köszönöm .
Mr Tavares , I would like to respond to your comments .
Work on behalf of human rights is not just the concern of the left ; it also concerns us on the centre-right , and let us hope this will encourage us to cooperate .
Mrs Ernst mentioned something that is absolutely right .
We are discussing this here , while in plenary most Members are already on their way home , and we have to work together to make this a political priority .
I was once a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and when the Subcommittee on Human Rights was set up I was a member of that too .
When I tabled amendments , sometimes I submitted them to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and my colleagues would ask why I was still tabling amendments on human rights there , as we had a Subcommittee on Human Rights for that .
At the time I thought that something was wrong if our Subcommittee on Human Rights was to become a ghetto or human rights were to become the preserve of such a body .
Let us work together to prevent this from happening to human rights .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Posselt 's statement has annoyed me .
I would like to underline that Mrs De Keyser 's achievements in defending human rights cannot be brought into question in a discussion of this nature .
She has proven herself as a key person working on this issue in this House .
I will not under any circumstances allow , and do not believe it is right for us to question the commitment of the S & D Group to the protection of human rights , because we also did this when your group , Mr Posselt , was attempting to trivialise the crimes at Guantanamo and the treatment of prisoners in Iraq by US troops .
On the subject of human rights in Russia , there is indeed a serious problem , which we acknowledge , and the resolution which we are submitting is sufficiently tough and incisive .
However , we do think this Parliament needs to focus on the issues , and not simply to come up every time with a long list of problems in our relations with Russia , when these have no effect over there .
What we are doing in this respect is continuing to send a delegation from the S & D Group to talks in Moscow next week , where this particular issue will be raised .
Do not use human rights emergencies like this one to produce a long list of issues .
This is not the purpose of today 's debate .
( SK ) I would like to express my sadness and profound disquiet over the events which took place in June this year in the Russian Federation .
I feel shaken by the brutal murders of Russian activists such as Natalia Estemirova and Andrei Kulagin and others who were involved in supporting human rights and who advocated truth and justice .
Every effort must be made to detain and punish the murderers .
I welcome and support measures which must be taken in order to solve these murders .
There was also a breach of international agreements in August 2008 when , during the conflict between Russia and Georgia , Russian armed forces attacked inhabited areas and failed to protect the civilian population from a violation of their rights by armed fighters from South Ossetia on territory which de facto came under Russian control .
The Russian Government must state unequivocally that human rights violations will not be tolerated .
Mr President , a culture of criminal impunity is developing in Russia with regard to the abuse of human rights activists .
Journalists who dare to challenge the official view of things are harassed ; ethnic minorities suffer disproportionately from violent crime , which seems to go unsolved ; campaigners for greater freedoms are at best marginalised and at worst forcibly silenced .
It is hard to see precisely where the threat to human rights defenders in Russia comes from , but time and again we see wanton abuses going unpunished and a lackadaisical approach from the judicial authorities .
Russia has got used to the equivocation of the EU .
This is clear from the way the Union has reacted to Russia 's bullying of Ukraine or Russia 's invasion and occupation of sovereign Georgian territory last summer .
Clearly there are vital strategic questions at stake in the EU having good relations with Russia , but we cannot allow these questions to erase our obligation to speak out for our fundamental freedoms and shared European common values , freedoms and values the Russian people themselves should be enabled to share fully in peace and security .
( HU ) I have been involved professionally for 25 years in protecting human rights .
This is why , in particular as a lawyer , I feel a deep sense of sympathy when I think of my colleagues who have lost their lives in connection with this quite wonderful profession .
I would also like , on this note , to express my sincere sympathy to their families and loved ones .
What would be the right course of action at a time like this ?
To call for an immediate , thorough investigation carried out by the relevant state agencies .
I would like this Parliament to have the confidence and moral authority to do this .
However , I am afraid this is not the case .
Why ?
Because such demands are only made of states outside the European Union .
However , things are different when it comes to human rights being grossly violated in a European Union Member State , as happened in my country , Hungary , where people were shot in the eye at a mass gathering of several thousand people staged by the party of the man currently presiding this session , Vice-President Pál Schmitt , to commemorate the anniversary of the 1956 revolution and fight for freedom .
This Parliament has not had any investigation conducted into this case and the crisis situation which has continued since then .
I am afraid that as long as this does not happen and as long as someone who was a member of the government which sanctioned shooting at people can be Vice-Chairwoman of Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , , we cannot have any real confidence and the moral authority in another country , to ask for this kind of investigation to be carried out in a country outside the European Union .
I would therefore ask you to propose and demand an immediate investigation into human rights violations in Hungary . Thank you .
( RO ) I wanted to say , first of all , that I am disappointed that , when the dairy crisis was being discussed , the chamber was full , and now , when human rights are being discussed , I do not think that there are any more than 40 of us left in the chamber .
It is a pity that this is how things are .
I am not saying that the dairy crisis is not important , but a problem such as human rights is of paramount political importance to each one of us .
I would also like to say that I find unacceptable the whole idea that this year when , as is well known , many countries in Central and Eastern Europe are celebrating the 20th anniversary of the collapse of Communism , a power right on our doorstep , which was the originator of these Communist regimes , demonstrates such indifference to crimes perpetrated against human rights activists .
I believe that the break with totalitarianism must be clearly affirmed by every one of us .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's debate on the situation of human rights defenders in Russia is timely and very appropriate .
The recent wave of violence against human rights defenders has put the spotlight on the grave dangers they run in the course of their work .
Many have paid the ultimate price for bringing to light violations of human rights .
We pay tribute to all those who have lost their lives and to those who continue their work in such an environment .
Much of the violence against human rights defenders has taken place in the North Caucasus , against the background of growing instability .
The Commission knows many of them .
They are highly respected partners in the implementation of human rights projects .
Innocent civilians , law enforcement personnel and government officials have lost their lives in the ongoing struggle in the region .
Violence against human rights defenders is not restricted to the North Caucasus .
There are reports of activists , lawyers and independent journalists across the Russian Federation facing violence , harassment and intimidation .
The EU must continue to speak out against this violence and insist that Russia uphold the commitments it has entered into as a member of the United Nations , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
It is crucial that the attacks and violent deaths of civil society activists are properly investigated and that the perpetrators are promptly identified and punished .
It is only through the effective and lawful prosecution of these killings that the climate of fear and impunity can be dissipated .
President Medvedev has spoken out against what he has termed the ' legal nihilism ' prevailing in Russia .
The EU stands ready to support Russia in its continuing reform of the judicial system .
The EU highly values the opportunity it has to discuss its concerns on human rights with the Russian authorities .
We welcome the more open attitude President Medvedev has taken to discussions with the EU on these issues .
The next EU-Russia summit is another opportunity to continue these discussions .
This must be complemented by exchanges among experts .
The regular EU-Russia human rights consultations offer an opportunity to broaden the scope of these discussions and the range of interlocutors with whom we discuss human rights issues .
The safety of human rights defenders must be the first concern .
We urge the Russian authorities to make every possible effort to ensure that those who work on shedding light on violations of human rights are able to do so without fear of violence or intimidation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Kazakhstan : the case of Yevgeny Zhovtis
I have received five motions for a resolution concerning Kazakhstan : the Yevgeny Zhovtis case ( Rule 122 ) .

author . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like to make a final comment on the debate we have just had and say that , as Chairman of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , I recently sent a letter to the Conference of Committee Chairs , asking it to consider bringing these discussions forward , so that Parliament may be fully attended and also so that the Council can have a more prominent role here in the discussion .
I hope that my fellow Members in the various groups will discuss this matter with their groups ' chairmen , as Parliament 's authority is continually being gnawed away at because there are so few of us here at any one time .
Now let us turn to the Zhovtis case .
Kazakhstan is an important Central Asian country , and it will assume the Chairmanship of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe next year .
It is therefore not a matter of indifference how crimes are judged in a country that will be at the head of the democratic aspirations of all countries over a vast area of Europe .
Accordingly , we should focus attention on the case of human rights defender Yevgeny Zhovtis .
He was found guilty of manslaughter in very suspicious circumstances and sentenced to four years in an open prison for running over a pedestrian in July this year .
We have to take into account the fact that the OSCE has been wondering whether the procedure to which Zhovtis was subjected was possibly in violation of the principle of a fair trial , which is guaranteed in Kazakhstan 's constitution .
The European Parliament also needs to keep this debate going with the Council and the Commission , so that they might raise the issue of this case and demand a fair trial .
Mr President , the European Parliament can have a powerful influence on the extent to which the countries of Central Asia endorse the principle of the rule of law by keeping a record of these individual cases , and the case of Yevgeny Zhovtis is without a doubt one of these .
author . - ( LT ) As the time approaches when it will chair the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , sadly Kazakhstan is distancing itself from commitments on alignment with European standards .
Unjustifiably underlining its unique and special nature , the country shows no regard for the OSCE 's recommendations on electoral laws and freedom of the press .
Repeated violations of human rights and the direct persecution of human rights defenders increasingly raise doubts as to whether this state is suitable to head an organisation which fights for the implementation of democratic principles .
We urge Astana to make concrete progress in the areas of democratisation , the protection of human rights , the rule of law and freedom of the press .
Kazakh laws which are based on international law must be applied appropriately and transparently in legal proceedings against the human rights activists Yevgeny Zhovtis , Yesingepov and Dubanov .
We must hope and demand that judgments are impartial and that the prisoners ' involvement in the human rights movement does not influence the verdict .
We urge the Council to raise the matter of these human rights defenders ' cases at the next EU-Kazakhstan Human Rights Dialogue Meeting in October .
We call on the European Commission to offer intensive assistance to Kazakhstan as it prepares to chair the OSCE , to ensure that this important international organisation is not compromised .
author . - Mr President , first of all I would like to express my sympathy to the family of the victims of the car accident in which Mr Yevgeny Zhovtis was involved .
A human tragedy which unfortunately occurred where a man lost his life .
At the same time , please allow me to express my concern in relation to the current situation of Mr Yevgeny Zhovtis .
Indisputably every person who commits a criminal offence must accept that legal sanctions will be applied undiscriminatingly and Mr Zhovtis , as an outstanding human rights lawyer , knows this better than anybody .
But at the same time we want to make sure that the Kazakh authorities do not use this unfortunate situation to punish Mr Zhovtis for anything else other than the car accident in which he was involved .
Mr Zhovtis must not be punished for his human rights activity and for being a very critical voice of the Kazakh Government .
Therefore , I think it is of the utmost importance that the Kazakh judicial authorities carry out immediately , and with full respect for transparency and the rule of law , a second full and fair investigation into the circumstances related to the incident and to a review of Mr Zhovtis ' conviction and sentence .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying that my group was somewhat surprised to see the judicial evaluation of a dramatic car accident on the agenda as an urgent resolution on human rights issues .
For the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) it is therefore important to establish that we do not in principle wish to question the judgments made by an independent court , unless we are talking about an obvious show trial that does not comply with any principles of law .
We have already seen this in Iran .
There must be a clear line drawn here .
As far as we are concerned , an independent judicial system is the key element of any democratic order .
That being the case , we must first take account of the judgment handed down .
We must also acknowledge the fact that a person has been killed in a car accident - and we should be saddened by that , indeed we are saddened by that - but also that a judicial review has been carried out .
The fact that Yevgeny Zhovtis , a well-known civil rights activist , is involved in this case has brought it to the attention of the world and has prompted the response , as a result of which we are discussing this here today .
The PPE Group acknowledges Kazakhstan 's efforts and progress towards democracy and the rule of law .
We would like to assure Kazakhstan of our explicit support and encourage this country to continue resolutely along this path .
With regard to this particular case , we urge the Kazakh authorities , in their own interests , to provide the public with as much information as possible and to present their view on these events , and to enable a fair appeal or review procedure to be carried out for Mr Zhovtis under the rule of law .
Kazakhstan is to chair the OSCE .
That will be quite a challenge !
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I have to agree with Mrs Jeggle .
I am utterly astonished that , in front of the whole Parliament here in Strasbourg , we are having an urgent debate on a traffic accident in Kazakhstan , albeit an accident where somebody was tragically killed and where the driver of the car happens to a human rights activist who has been duly sentenced in a court of law to four years in prison - but even in a low-security prison , which has suddenly become , in the terms of the resolution , ' a labour camp ' .
I am afraid that bringing this kind of matter before this House really brings the reputation of this House into disrepute and it means that the good work that we try to do in human rights is devalued , when we start talking about traffic accidents .
Are we seriously suggesting the Kazakh Government threw a civilian under the car wheels of a human rights activist ?
Are we seriously suggesting that the sentence is too harsh for somebody who was convicted of manslaughter ?
We cannot go on traducing a country like Kazakhstan , simply because of political motivation , to try and bring down their reputation before they chair the OSCE next year .
This is politically motivated , and it is a disgrace that it is on the agenda .
I hope the House will throw out these resolutions and support the amendments .
( PL ) Mr President , I have similar doubts to the previous speaker , Mr Stevenson .
Kazakhstan is an important country .
It is making a lot of effort in terms of its progress towards democracy .
Of course , at the moment , it is not a model of democratic freedoms , but the civil rights situation in that country - and I know Kazakhstan a little , as I have visited it on a number of occasions - is considerably better than in most of the neighbouring countries in the region , and it fortunately does not have the sort of problems that exist in Russia , for example , and which we have just been discussing .
I share Mr Stevenson 's view that the European Parliament should not use all its authority to state its position on a single , dramatic court case .
It may be the case that some clarification is needed in this instance , but certainly not a European Parliament resolution .
This would undermine the value of the resolution , and people will stop listening to the voice of the European Parliament if it becomes distracted by issues that do not deserve a general debate or a parliamentary resolution .
( FI ) Mr President , Kazakhstan has an important role to play in Central Asia both economically and in terms of security policy , and the country 's cooperation with the European Union has grown .
It was pleasing to hear Kazakhstan 's Foreign Minister Marat Tashin promise last year in anticipation of the Chairmanship of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , and again in May this year , improvements to the country 's human rights situation .
Despite the international attention , however , there has been tighter control of the media and there are poor standards of freedom of religion .
In addition , we have heard of several cases of the arbitrary arrest of human rights activists .
The sentence handed down to the human rights activist Yevgeny Zhovtis also makes one wonder , and it is in the Government of Kazakhstan 's own interests to lay these doubts to rest in every respect , and that is unquestionably the case in view of its forthcoming term of office chairing the OSCE .
We hope for the best and look forward to seeing these matters cleared up .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all I would like to say that I am pleased to see Mrs Hautala back here .
However , she has not been here for a few years and during this time we have had the Council on Thursday afternoons .
The Czech and the German Presidencies were here on Thursdays .
I do not think that we should move the debate , as we cannot get through everything on Wednesday , so we need to be here and we need to force the Council to be here on Thursday afternoons as well .
That is the solution , not condensing the whole agenda into Wednesday .
This is actually a very difficult case .
However , precisely because we cannot yet fully trust the Government of Kazakhstan in respect of the rule of law , we must insist that the case is investigated in an objective manner .
In this regard , I fully support Mrs Jeggle .
We have therefore signed the resolution .
This matter must be investigated objectively and nothing must be covered up or glossed over .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission has noted with concern reports of procedural violations during the trial of Kazakh human rights defender Mr Yevgeny Zhovtis , who has been convicted of manslaughter following a fatal road accident .
As you are aware , the Kazakh authorities have rejected claims that the judgment against Mr Zhovtis was politically motivated .
The Commission fully supports the EU Presidency statement on this case at the OSCE Permanent Council of 10 September .
Given the seriousness of the alleged flaws in the investigations and the court trial , we call on Kazakhstan , which is the incoming chair of the OSCE , to ensure that the appeal is handled with full respect for national law and international standards .
The Commission will continue to follow this case closely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Syria : the case of Muhannad Al Hassani
I have received six motions for a resolution concerning Syria : the Muhannad Al Hassani case ( Rule 122 ) .
author . - Mr President , I would like to present the case of Mr Muhannad Al Hassani .
He has been imprisoned because he defends the human rights of his compatriots in Syria .
He played a very important role because he observed all trials before the Supreme State Security Court and made regular evaluations of detention conditions in Syria .
He is now himself detained and imprisoned .
With regard to Syria , we ask that it fulfil its obligations and therefore comply with the international covenant on civil and political rights and with the UN Convention against torture , to which Syria is actually a party ; that Syria reverse its policy of repression against human rights defenders and their families ; and that it release the human rights defenders , prisoners of conscience and peace activists who are in prison .

We also have a request with regard to the EU .
With respect to the signature of an association agreement we , the Greens and EFA , have proposed the adoption of a road map prior to the signature of the Association Agreement which would articulate our objectives in terms of improvements to be made in the human rights field .
International law sets a series of obligations that states have to respect , and it is also our responsibility , and in particular of the entire EU , to ensure that respect thereof enters the association agreement as a way to enforce that further .
We will work in that direction .
Thank you for your support for the resolution .
Mr President , I admit that I am both confused and also quite sad and disappointed .
I am confused because , undoubtedly , in terms of international relations , Syria has made great progress over the past two years .
It has joined the Union for the Mediterranean .
It has , on various occasions , acted as a mediator in difficult international situations , including very recently when a young French woman was arrested in Iran .
I would say that the fact that the association agreement - which is not yet signed , Mrs Brantner , but which could be fairly soon - the fact that this association agreement has been relaunched is , at the same time , a very positive sign .
On the domestic front , it is true that there are also some very positive developments in Syria .
Syrians have taken in 1.5 million Iraqi refugees , and they are looking after them , they have a high level of education , and they have freedom of religion , which is important .
However , in terms of political freedom and political plurality , there has been absolutely no progress .
To my enormous regret , we continue to see instances of repression and imprisonment of human rights activists and defenders , and we have intervened on several occasions over the last few years to request the release of political prisoners .
On two occasions , we have succeeded in obtaining a release .
Syrian prisons still contain , however , people such as Dr Al Labwani , Dr Al Bunni and , now , Mr Al Hassani .
I would therefore like to address a message to Syria : we are here and we would like to help Syria to escape the isolation in which it has been placed at some point .
We think that it is an important figure on the international stage , and particularly for peace in the Middle East .
Please , though , for your own image - and I think that you are strong enough to allow political plurality and human rights defenders in your country - please , release the political prisoners , and , as we have said , please abide by the convention against torture and degrading treatment !
This is in Syria 's own interests and in the interests of peace throughout the world , and particularly of peace in the Middle East .
author . - Mr President , Muhannad Al Hassani is another human rights defender arbitrarily detained by the Syrian authorities .
He is another Syrian political prisoner whose only guilt was his wish to protect the right of the people to freely express themselves , their right to engage in political activities and their right to a fair trial .
For more than five years he was forbidden to travel .
His office telephone communications and e-mails were under constant surveillance by Syrian security forces .
After weeks of increasing harassment over his role in monitoring the practices of Syria 's Supreme State Security Court , he was in the end arrested by the Syrian state security and later charged with several criminal offences , all referring to his right to free speech .
On the topic of arbitrary detention , let us not forget Mr al-Labwani , the outstanding human rights defender , who was sentenced to 12 years in prison for what the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention considered to be ' the peaceful expression of his political views ' .
The Syrian Government must free Mr Al Hassani , Mr al-Labwani and the other political prisoners immediately and unconditionally and guarantee their physical and psychological integrity in all circumstances .
The Syrian authorities must put an end to all forms of harassment against Syrian human rights defenders and civil society activists , in accordance with the provisions of the 1998 UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders .
author . - Mr President , Syria is an important country in the Middle East and has a vital role to play in reducing the ability of Iran to support terrorist actions , via its proxies Hezbollah and Hamas , against Israel .
Syria also has a habit of fomenting unrest in Lebanon , which Syria still regards as barely sovereign and within its sphere of influence .
Syria is also a secular regime .
In fact , it remains the only vestige now of the once powerful Ba 'athist Party which ruled Iraq as well , so things like women 's rights are advanced .
However , overall it remains a brutal one-party dictatorship .
The detention of Muhannad Al Hassani as a leading human rights defender is alarming .
If Syria really wants us to support an EU association agreement , it should please release Mr Al Hassani immediately and end the persecution of human rights defenders such as Mr Al Hassani .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , I am pleased that we have had the courage to put the spotlight on the human rights situation in Syria at this point in time .
The finishing touches are being put to an EU-Syria association agreement within the framework of Mediterranean cooperation , and because one of the fundamental pillars of cooperation consists specifically of the promotion of human rights and democracy , I think that the EU should call more loudly for improvements in this area .
It is not enough just to focus cooperation on improving the economic situation .
As we have heard , the leading Syrian human rights lawyer , Muhannad Al Hassani , was imprisoned at the end of July without any proper trial .
He was charged with weakening national sentiments and spreading false news .
The case is not the first of its kind .
We in Parliament last intervened in a similar one in 2007 .
Kamal Abwani , whose cause we were pleading then , is still in jail , although in March the UN investigation team reached the conclusion that it had been an arbitrary arrest .
Syria has a very long way to go when it comes to freedom of speech and of association .
Th