Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 11 March 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up on 11 March 2010 by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
By agreement with the political groups , I would like to propose the following changes :
( IT ) I just wanted to inform the President - as I have already done by letter - that the extraordinary committee on the financial crisis has wrongfully excluded the expert , the renowned demographer Professor Bourcier de Carbon , for no reason , describing him as an unsuitable person .
I think that we are dealing with an extremely serious case of someone being excluded on ideological grounds from the position of expert in one of the European Parliament 's committees ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Borghezio , this is not a point of order , since we are talking about a plenary sitting .
Please raise such issues during Committee meetings , when this matter can be considered , but in a plenary sitting , points of order have to be about our work in plenary , and not about work in the Committees .
Mr President , on 11 March , at the debate on Arctic policy , with a quarter of my allocated time still left , my microphone was switched off by the ALDE / Liberal Democrat Member in the Chair .
This is almost without precedent .
Mr President , I have already sent you a letter - to which I have not received an answer - and I would like to ask you under which rule the microphone was switched off and why it was relevant to apply this rule .
I was simply making legitimate - and indeed valid - political comments with which the ALDE Chair disagreed .
This is why the microphone was switched off .
If the European Parliament censors political comment , it ceases to be a Parliament .
The Vice-President of Parliament who was leading the proceedings at the time correctly applied the procedure related to Rule 20 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
I will reply in writing to the letter you sent me .
Thursday
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested postponement to the next session of the vote on the motion for a resolution by the Conference of Presidents on transition to the Treaty of Lisbon for pending interinstitutional legislative procedures .
So this is about postponement of the vote .
Mr President , we have asked for the postponement of the vote on this motion , in the interests of the House .
We had originally agreed to put it on the agenda on the assumption that everything was in order .
However , it was a quick procedure , and we have learned in the meantime that not all of the committees had been properly consulted on this issue .
It is a motion by the PPE Group , but some of the committees want more time on this very important and complicated matter , however urgent it may be .
We therefore ask for the vote on this issue to be postponed .
Welcome
I have some special information for you .
I would like to extend a warm welcome to the delegation from the Pan-African Parliament , led by its Vice-President , Mrs Mugyenyi .
They are with us at our sitting .
Please welcome them .
( Applause )
The second Vice-President of the Pan-African Parliament and Chair of the Delegation for relations with the European Parliament .
Our Parliaments work closely together , and your presence with us today gives us great pleasure .
I would like to take the opportunity to thank you for the invitation for me to address the sitting of the Pan-African Parliament which will be held in three weeks ' time .
Unfortunately , I will not be able to be there , but I will send you a letter on that occasion .
I am sure we will have the opportunity to meet again .
Once again , I warmly welcome you all .
Preparation for the European Council meeting ( 25-26 March 2010 ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Council and the Commission on preparation for the European Council meeting ( 25-26 March 2010 ) .
Mr President , we are , in these first few months of 2010 , witnessing an extraordinarily strong dynamic in the European Union , in the midst of the most serious economic crisis we have known for eighty years .
At the same time , we are implementing a new treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon , getting new institutions off the ground , and carrying out a very broad reordering of the regulation of our economic systems .
This is happening in a sometimes disorderly fashion , responding to big challenges as we go ; currently , for example , the situation of the Greek financial system .
However , Europe is meeting this situation by creating new economic policy tools in all areas .
Sometimes , therefore , one cannot see the wood for the trees , but an entirely new way of tackling the extremely complex economy of the 21st century is being created and it is being done through a European approach .
It was done in this way when responding to the very serious crisis and there was an immediate reaction in terms of injecting public money into Europe 's economies , which led to large deficits .
It was done in this way by undertaking - and we are here in Parliament to approve it - a complete reform of the supervision of the financial system .
It is being done in this way , by coordinating economic policies .
The Commission has indicated that it will submit a proposal to this effect , for the coordination of economic policies , essentially within the euro area .
Furthermore , we are also , specifically , experiencing very determined and clear action by the European Union to support financial stability in the euro area .
This political commitment was adopted on 11 February in order to consolidate and sustain the financial stability of the euro area .
There is another initiative that is undoubtedly part of that set : the commitment to a new strategy for growth and the creation of high quality jobs .
This is the main topic of work for the European Council this weekend ; a strategy which was articulated and expanded upon by the European Commission in the document of 3 March and which will essentially be studied by the Heads of State or Government in the spring Council , basically from the viewpoint of the so-called ' strategic objectives ' .
These are the strategic objectives that the European Commission stated in its document , such as the issues of employment , investment in research and development , climate change and energy , leaving school early , education in general and poverty .
In addition , the European Council will also tackle the issue of governance , which we consider one of the inadequacies of the so-called Lisbon Strategy .
The Council wants this governance to revolve around its own political leadership and the action of the Commission in supervising the Member States ' fulfilment of the commitments they have adopted .
This will be , of course , with the close collaboration and monitoring of everything by Parliament and , of course , the Union 's institutions as a whole .
That will basically be the aim of the European Council 's meetings this weekend , including the equally important area of the fight against climate change , in which the EU continues to be a leader .
The European Union retains its world leadership in the fight against climate change ; it must do so , it must continue holding onto this leadership .
There is , moreover , a quantified commitment to the so-called ' fast start ' .
Let us hope , therefore , that the European Council will quantify and reaffirm that commitment to help developing countries combat climate change over these next few years as well .
A commitment by developed countries generally to collaborate with those that are still not developed so that we all arrive at the very important Cancún conference in the best possible condition .
At this conference , the European Union must - I repeat - hold on to the leadership it has now , without which the Copenhagen Accords , which we feel are inadequate , would surely not have been reached .
The Member States have unanimously reaffirmed their full agreement with these objectives and that they want to move unequivocally towards legally binding commitments at the Cancún conference in Mexico .
The Heads of State or Government will largely be dealing with those matters .
It is also possible - depending on what happens right now , while the European institutions as a whole are sorting out how to cope with the crisis relating to the so-called Greek case - that they will deal with the issue of the financial situation in Greece and the refinancing of the country 's public debt .
That issue will also arise there , no doubt , because it forms part of a political commitment adopted by the European Union on 11 February at Heads of State or Government level .
This was a political commitment to support the financial stability of the euro area , in the sense that if it is necessary to adopt specific measures to maintain that financial stability , such measures will be adopted .
That is , at any event , the principle that will be very much in mind at this weekend 's meeting of the European Council .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , it is indeed a very good and timely opportunity for us to meet today - one day before the important Spring European Council .
We have challenging tasks ahead of us .
For those tasks , the fresh and forceful backing of the European Parliament is of great importance .
Having said this , I want to thank and congratulate Parliament for its resolution on Europe 2020 , which it adopted in Strasbourg two weeks ago with broad party support .
I also want to take the opportunity to thank the Spanish Presidency of the Council for its support for the Europe 2020 strategy .
That support was clearly expressed at different formations of the Council of Ministers .
But now to the European Council : I believe every European Council must do two things .
It must show that it is responding to the needs of the moment , and it must work on Europe 's long-term strategic framework and long-term strategic objectives .
The crisis entails several pressing concerns for communities , workers and businesses across Europe .
And , as we know , public finances at national level are under unprecedented strain .
The European Union must of course tackle these issues , including financial stability .
I will come back to this again later .
Europe must not make the mistake of neglecting the imperative of working now to bring about long-term change .
That is why the European Council will deal with two of our most obvious long-term challenges : our economic future , and climate change .
We have already debated the Europe 2020 strategy together in this Parliament .
Your contribution and your commitment will be indispensable in carrying through our ambitions for smart , sustainable , inclusive growth .
So , too , will be the contribution of the European Council .
Our level of ambition must be set by the scale of the tasks ahead .
We need to show that we have the vision and the coherence to act .
And we must be able to communicate this , to show people that our actions will make a difference where it matters .
This is why I believe it is so important that the European Council agrees clear targets this week .
The targets which the Commission has put on the table were carefully chosen .
They address the need to increase the level of employment , to invest more in research and innovation , to meet our 2020 climate and energy targets , to improve our educational performance and to combat poverty .
These five headline targets pinpoint objectives which people can relate to , and show that the European Union is leveraging reform in areas that everybody knows are important .
This is also about the political will to tackle tough problems .
Of course , the targets must be achievable .
They should also require an extra effort compared to the status quo , a recognition by our Member States that change is needed , and I will try to convey to the European Council this sense of urgency for the economic situation of Europe now and for the need of reforms for a more sustainable , more inclusive economy and society in Europe .
What is really important is the measures which each Member State will take to boost its growth rate and address the shortcomings we all know are there .
We need national measures to address national problems defined according to national circumstances and in full respect of subsidiarity , but set within a common European framework .
If there is a lesson from the financial crisis , it is that we are all interdependent in the world .
So we cannot accept the principles of interdependence globally and reject them when discussed at European level .
A common framework , too , which is supported and should be stimulated by particular European Union measures , what we call in our document ' flagship initiatives ' .
These flagship proposals will show the European Union level acting in critically important areas such as the digital agenda , innovation , resource efficiency and industrial policy - and , of course , in some cases , will also help targets to be achieved at a national level .
What we are proposing here is a new departure .
Thanks to the Lisbon Treaty , we can go for a new approach to economic coordination , a reinforced economic governance of Europe - one which gives the freedom necessary to target at the national level , but which brings a strong European dimension , and using all the instruments at European level to kick-start the economy .
Accepting this approach will be the real test for the European Council .
I am encouraged by the results of the informal European Council .
I hope that the European leaders will be present and say ' yes ' when it comes to responding to these challenges in a collective spirit .
Regarding climate change , I know that this Parliament shares my conviction that climate change is not a subject that can be put on the back burner .
We need to keep this top of our agenda .
The European Union has been in the lead , and we still are - we alone have the reduction commitments clearly backed up with the mechanisms to deliver ; we are the number one donors of aid to developing countries on climate issues .
So let us move on from soul-searching about Copenhagen and take the initiative once again .
We need a clear , unified and ambitious position .
That is why the Commission has put forward a communication setting out the steps needed to reinvigorate international negotiations .
At the same time , Commissioner Hedegaard has started a set of consultations with our key partners .
So we should make a serious effort to advance at Cancún - building on the very real substance of the Copenhagen Accord .
We should keep Kyoto on the agenda , but make clear that it can only be assessed in the light of a global agreement and not before .
We should step up outreach activities and build trust , most obviously with developing countries - which is why respecting our pledges on fast-start finance is so important .
And of course , at the same time , we will continue to implement our 20-20-20 package , showing , in particular , how it is compatible with the work of economic modernisation and reform set out in the 2020 strategy .
These two areas show vividly how Europeans are looking to the European Union 's political leadership for action .
I am convinced that , if we have the will to be bold , we can show Europe as the decisive influence in building the right future for our citizens .
It is in the same spirit that I will present to the European Council some of the major challenges for the G20 that will take place in June in Canada .
In fact , we should never forget that some of those issues are European but they should also be addressed at global level .
Financial stability and the economic and financial situation in Greece are not on the formal agenda of this European Council .
However , frankly speaking , I cannot see how it is possible for Heads of State or Government , notably those in the euro area , not to discuss this issue .
Let me therefore state our position on this .
Greece is currently in the process of correcting its excessive government deficit .
Bringing the deficit down vigorously is crucial and Greece has been taking measures to that effect .
In particular , Greece is taking measures leading to a reduction of its deficit this year by 4 % of GDP .
Such fiscal effort is in line with the course of action recommended by the Commission and the Council , as acknowledged by the Council on 16 March .
Naturally , Greece 's fiscal effort must be continued ; it is the only way to secure a lasting reduction in the cost of debt financing .
In response to the economic and financial situation in Greece , the informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government on 11 February stated that , and I quote , ' euro area Member States will take determined and coordinated action , if needed , to safeguard financial stability in the euro area as a whole ' .
The Commission believes it is now appropriate to create , within the euro area , an instrument for coordinated action which could be used to provide assistance to Greece in case of need .
It should be clear that the creation of such a mechanism will not imply its automatic activation .
Creating such a mechanism is also a question of responsibility and solidarity .
Solidarity is a two-way street .
Greece is making an economic effort at this point and by supporting this effort , we not only help Greece , but the stability of the eurozone as a whole .
The framework for coordinated action should be understood as a safety net to be used only when all other means to avoid a crisis have been exhausted , including , first and foremost , exhausting the scope for policy action at domestic level .
Beyond technical aspects , any possible solution must reinforce and strengthen the unity and the coherence of the eurozone and its governance .
The world economy needs stability .
The eurozone is a pole of stability , and it is important that its capacity to provide stability is further enhanced .
We may need to resort to intergovernmental instruments for some issues , but they need to be embedded into a joint European framework .
It is my firm conviction that the response to the specific challenges will also be a test to European leaders and to their commitment to the European - and monetary - Union .
What is at stake is the essential principle of financial stability that is central to the euro ; and the euro is one of the most important creations of the European project and the European construction process so far .
I hope this issue will be solved in a spirit of responsibility and solidarity .
That is the European way to do it .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) expects the European Council to reaffirm European solidarity unequivocally while , at the same time , making everyone face up to his or her responsibilities .
The PPE Group also expects the Heads of State or Government to define their roadmap so as to bring Europe out of the crisis .
To what extent are they willing to cooperate , and what are the lines they are unwilling to cross ?
Do they believe that the recovery of growth and employment depends on true common action , with the resources that that requires , or do they prefer to act on their own as regards innovation , education , training , support for SMEs , and the fight against unemployment and poverty , with all too familiar consequences ?
I would remind you that our Member States all subscribed , in 2000 , to the priorities of the Lisbon Strategy .
However , because they did not equip themselves with the resources , because they did not take the objectives seriously , we are now many years behind , and everything that we said would happen has happened , but outside Europe .
My group therefore expects the European Council to go beyond words and to give serious consideration to our common economic objectives on the basis of the Commission 's 2020 proposals , an amended version of which Parliament will propose in June .
I come back to solidarity , solidarity of which a great deal has been said for some weeks now and which is actually the be-all and end-all of European integration , from the creation of the single market to common defence , via the euro .
This solidarity has been shown since the start of the financial crisis and it must not be denied our Greek friends , or any other EU country that encounters the same difficulties .
This week , it is imperative that a European solution is found to this crisis , and it must be a Community-based solution - I repeat , a Community-based solution - which must be envisaged in accordance with European rules and within the framework of European financial aid mechanisms .
Moreover , if we wish , we can even include the International Monetary Fund in this framework , but always in accordance with European rules .
It is in everyone 's interests that we guarantee the stability of Europe and of the European Monetary System .
Ladies and gentlemen , on the reverse side of Europe there is solidarity , and , on the front side , responsibility .
This responsibility is that of each Member State to guarantee accurate and reliable public accounts .
It is also that of the citizens of States that are facing temporary payment problems to make sacrifices , to participate in the collective effort to get public finances back on track and to accept the reforms that are necessary to achieve this , however harsh they may be .
In other words , yes , Europe must show solidarity with Greece .
It must ensure that Greece comes through this difficult period .
However , Greece , too , must carry out those internal reforms that are required in the short and medium terms and in order to warrant this solidarity , and it proposed them to Parliament yesterday in fact .
It now remains for Greece to implement them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis is forcing us to change .
The first change concerns the Commission , which I call on to exercise fully and , above all , authoritatively , its role as guardian of the treaties .
The criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact must be applied , and the Commission must ensure this .
This House will support it in this difficult task .
The second change concerns the governance of our public finances .
In a period of growth , it is generally felt that one has the right to conduct one 's own budgetary , fiscal and social policy without really worrying about anyone else .
However , in a period of crisis , those who have spent the most call for solidarity from those who have been , let us say , more sensible .
Can this continue ?
I do not think so .
It is time for the Member States to coordinate their budgetary , fiscal and social policies better , and let us not be afraid to say it : we want more European governance !
Such coordination will only make implementing solidarity-based principles easier , fairer and more natural .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I invite you to take initiatives along these lines .
As you know , I have a certain amount of experience : it is always in times of crisis that the machine is given a boost .
We are in the midst of a real crisis as far as our citizens and the situation on the ground are concerned , and we need political courage .
( Applause )
Mr President , the European summit must and will deal with the crisis in Greece ; that much is obvious .
The International Herald Tribune writes something interesting in its leading article today : ' Greece has promised to do its homework and to balance its budget ' .
The Member States belonging to the euro area made their solidarity conditional upon Greece 's compliance with their demands in this respect .
Greece has delivered , writes the International Herald Tribune .
It is the Member States of the euro area that have not delivered - and particularly the Federal Republic of Germany , which is refusing to keep its promise .
That is the first point .
( Applause )
The President of the Commission has quite rightly spoken of a safety net .
It is not about transferring money from taxpayers in Germany , France , Italy or any other country into Greece 's coffers .
That is not the objective .
It is about enabling Greece to borrow money on the international markets at the same interest rates as are available to the other countries .
Interest rates are usually 2.5 to 3 % .
As a result of the speculation caused by the failure to demonstrate solidarity with Greece , that country is paying 6 % .
To put it plainly , Greece 's attempts to balance its budget are lining the pockets of speculators on the international financial markets .
( Applause )
This means the people there are being robbed .
It is foolish , because if this sets a precedent - if the failure to demonstrate solidarity enables people to speculate against a euro area country that is in deficit to the extent that eventually , internal solidarity is unsustainable and the International Monetary Fund has to step in , then Greece will be merely a prologue .
The speculators will then turn their attention to Italy , to the UK and to Spain .
If we do not want to see a large-scale conflagration , we need now to demonstrate solidarity with Greece .
Solidarity with Greece - and this is a message that we need to get through to the German Chancellor in particular - therefore makes economic sense .
It is not a matter of giving aid for the sake of it .
( Applause )
Consequently , we cannot release Mr Barroso from this obligation by saying the International Monetary Fund should now sort it out .
It is the Commission that must propose how we can achieve a sensible stabilisation within the euro area .
The Commission has made good proposals and I believe that the Council should go along with them .
These do not include calling on the International Monetary Fund .
Why not ?
We are in a position to resolve the problem within the euro area ourselves .
Moreover , I am astonished that Chancellor Merkel is bringing the International Monetary Fund into play .
The German Bundesbank - which to German conservatives is as the Vatican is to Catholics - writes in its monthly report for March : ' However , financial contributions from the International Monetary Fund to resolve structural problems - such as to directly finance a budget deficit or to finance a bank recapitalisation - are incompatible with its monetary mandate ' .
That is a quote from the German Bundesbank .
Contrary to the statements of her Minister for Finance , the German Chancellor says that the International Monetary Fund should solve the problem .
That is not the right way to go .
What we need now is to send a signal to the international markets : you can speculate all you like , but you will not drive the euro area apart . The speculation will not cease until such a signal has been given .
To make it clear what kind of speculation we are talking about , we need to draw attention once again to Credit Default Swaps , or CDSs .
This is nothing more than a game : I will insure myself against my neighbour 's house burning down .
Should my neighbour 's house burn down , I get the insurance money .
If I were to do that , then I would have a vested interest in seeing his house burn down .
We cannot apply the Florian principle - ' Holy Saint Florian , spare my house , burn the others ' - in the European Union .
That is why solidarity with Greece is an act to stabilise the euro in the euro area .
In the end , you have to decide whether you want to have European solidarity or whether you want to give in to armchair politics .
I do not want to make it my own , but I would urge you all to listen carefully to the following quote from Wolfgang Münchau in the Financial Times Deutschland - which is not a Socialist journal , and this man is not a Social Democrat : ' In a situation in which European necessities come up against German populism , let us choose European necessities ' .
( Applause )
Mr President , I believe that the conclusion that all of us - the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the Greens , Socialists , Liberals and all the other groups , except the Euro-sceptic groups , which are perhaps pleased with what is happening right now in Europe - can draw is that greater clarity is required within the European Council .
The battle has been raging for weeks now outside the European institutions on the question of what should be done to help Greece and the euro area .
We have never seen this before : for weeks now , instead of decisions being taken , there has been quarrelling over the measures that should be taken , and anything and everything is being said .
I shall go further , Mr President .
I have a feeling that , in four days , certain Members of the Council have done more damage to the European project than all the Euro-sceptics put together have done in four years .
That is my feeling today .
( Applause )
The only way to change and to stop that is to take a firm decision on the basis of a Commission proposal .
I am pleased that Mr Barroso has announced today that he is going to propose a solution to the Council , a solution - and I echo what Mr Daul said - which must be European and Community-based , and which is not about requesting what has already been requested for months now , namely that money be taken from taxpayers ' pockets and given to Greece .
It is not about that .
It is , in fact , about the need to have a European instrument that will enable the interest rates on Greece 's government bonds to be reduced .
The best way of doing this is not to make just one country - Greece - issue these government bonds , but to issue them at European level , since Europe has liquidity and credibility .
There are two elements that count in terms of knowing what the interest rate is : liquidity and credibility .
Europe has the necessary credibility and liquidity , and it is on this basis that it will be possible to bring down Greece 's interest rates without a single euro of taxpayers ' money going to Greece .
That is absolutely necessary , Mr President , because today the spread - that is the gap between the German rate , which today stands at 3.05 % , and the Greek rate , which is 6.5 % at present - is 350 basis points .
The only way of resolving that is really to take the necessary step of introducing this European instrument .
A second reason to explain this requirement is that the efforts that the Greeks are going to make - must make , are obliged to make - must serve a purpose .
For , if a European solution is not chosen , if these interest rates cannot be reduced , all the efforts that the Greeks are going to make will ultimately go to the capital markets .
That is what will happen if a firm decision is not taken during this Council .
The Greeks are going to make efforts , are going to make savings , and who is going to benefit ?
The speculators , the capital markets and so on , as they are going to have much higher interest rates .
( Applause )
That is why Europe must intervene .
Europe must intervene to ensure that Greece 's consolidation measures are worthwhile .
They are necessary , but they must also be worthwhile .
That is why we support , and why the whole of Parliament must now support , the proposal that the Commission is going to make , and we must hope that the Members of the Council will keep quiet and approve .
That is what we must hope for .
Mr President , I would like to remind everyone briefly once again of how quickly - sometimes practically overnight - we decided to bail out Europe 's banks when they were in trouble .
Yet it is only now that we are debating the terms on which this assistance is being granted .
We still have not clarified the terms of the repayments and responsibilities , nor have we set out how the banks will be supervised .
Bearing this in mind , I must also point out that this Greek crisis - this crisis facing the euro - is actually a European crisis and that discussions have been going on for weeks and months without Europeans being able to garner themselves to make the necessary decisions ; as far as I am concerned , it is simply shameful .
As a German MEP - I hope you are listening , Mr Langen - I am ashamed of my national government .
We read today that a special summit is taking place in Brussels at which decisions will be made on Greece according to Chancellor Merkel 's will - what she wants and what will enable her to return to Berlin from Brussels as the victor - without actually discussing satisfactory solutions with the others .
I think it is disgraceful .
It means that the tabloids and armchair politics have won , and I believe we should think very carefully - you too , Mr Langen , in your German delegation - as to whether the ' to be or not to be ' of solidarity in the European Union should hinge on the results of opinion polls currently being obtained by a German party of which the German Chancellor is a member relating to the prospects of electoral success in a Federal German state .
I think it smacks far too much of populism , and it is intolerable that it has not yet been established that the Heads of State or Government will agree during the regular Thursday and Friday Council sessions on how the euro area is to deal with the crisis in Greece .
( Applause )
I have been following the discussions in Germany carefully and last week I was also in Greece , and I would like to make it clear once more to the citizens of my own country , of Greece and of the EU , that this is a time for solidarity ; but that henceforth , Greece will only be able to obtain credit on favourable terms if this is not a one-way street .
The days I spent in Greece showed me that the people of Greece now have an opportunity to create a better state .
The state of Greece must utilise the crisis to bring about real reforms .
We will be doing no one any favours if we now show solidarity without calling on Mr Papandreou to make even more far-reaching reforms than have been announced to date .
As I have said , the Greek people deserve much better .
Since I find this populism so prevalent in Germany and because I consider it so dangerous , I would also like to argue this from another perspective : in our analysis , the continued existence of the euro - of a single currency - in the long term can only be secured if Europeans pull together and integrate their economic policy .
Otherwise , competition for so-called hard interests will , in cases of doubt , always lead us into the difficulties that we are currently facing .
We will then have a lot to do , and once again things will turn bitter , Mr Langen .
We need to explain the necessity of integration to our citizens .
We have made as heavy weather of this as when discussing the constitution .
We are so pleased that the Treaty of Lisbon is finally in force , yet when faced with our first challenge after Lisbon , we let the tabloid press and armchair politics win out over reason .
Chancellor Merkel would be well advised - and that means also by you , my fellow Germans in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - to apply the brakes .
The necessity of integrating economic policy is what needs to be discussed henceforth .
We must be led by transparency , reason and arguments that we can put to our citizens , not by the tabloid press such as BILD-Zeitung .
Otherwise , as Mr Münchau wrote today , before long , Chancellor Merkel will be returning defeated from Brussels .
Then BILD-Zeitung will write : the euro must be abolished - we must bring back the Deutsche mark .
What will we do then ?
It is not yet too late .
Germany is in a decisive position .
I hope that Mr Sarkozy will not give in and is instead more sensible than Chancellor Merkel .
Mr President , it is not without reason that we are talking in this Chamber , today , about Greece , despite the fact that , unfortunately , Greece is not on the agenda for the meeting .
I would like , in this Chamber , to express approval for the Greek Government .
It is a government which , today , is facing protests on its streets .
It may be that the protests are coming from the government 's own socialist electorate , but it is a government which , in the name of a rational economy and European solidarity , is taking tough decisions , and is not bowing to populism .
I regret to have to say that not all European leaders , today , are able to resist bowing to this kind of populism .
It seems to me that Greece does need our solidarity , because Europe is built on the principle of solidarity , but , of course , we must not allow any politician in any country to treat economic policy like going shopping with a credit card with no limit , because things will end up as they have done in Greece .
In future , we should very firmly set conditions for Member States , to ensure they follow a rational economic policy , because a policy which is not based on rational foundations ends up as it has done .
Unfortunately , I have to say that , today , we are also facing a problem which is seen so often in Europe , namely that ideology and politics are more important than the economy .
This , unfortunately , is how it ends , and we had an example of this with the introduction of the euro .
We can say , today , that Greece probably adopted the euro too early , but because politics was put before the economy , we have the crisis which we have today .
I would like to say that I hope the European Commission , under Mr Barroso 's leadership , will be the guardian of European solidarity and European economic sense , because we need that sense and solidarity .
I would also like to point out that , in response to the crisis in which we find ourselves , we should not look for medicines which will only make the situation worse .
I do not think that greater bureaucracy , integration and regulation in Europe could help what is , and should be , our greatest objective - increasing competitiveness .
We should not count on officials being able to decide about how to make our continent better , instead of allowing a free economy to do this .
We should also respect the differences in economic and social policy which divide European countries and which result from their different history , culture and other factors .
We can , and we should , appeal for European solidarity for Greece , and I hope that I will hear , in this Chamber , expressions of approval for the Greek Government .
Mr President , it is rare for me to agree with the President of Parliament and the President of the Commission .
However , when they both call for solidarity with Greece and warn of renationalisation , then I can only agree with them , because what they say is correct .
Moreover , recently in Strasbourg , we heard Mr Barroso thinking aloud as to whether the worst of the speculation on the financial markets should be banned outright .
The increasing social chasm in the European Union and within the Member States can no longer be overlooked by anyone , yet the pressing issues associated with this are not on the agenda of the Heads of State at their first summit following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The debate on the EU 2020 economic strategy is naturally already on the agenda .
As you are aware , my group is not at all keen on this strategy as it has been drafted by the Commission , because it is based on the failed ideology of competition which led to the crisis .
We want a strategy for Europe that gives social and ecological needs priority over competitive interests .
EU 2020 is miles away from this .
It is quite something , however , when individual members of the Federal German Government turn up and thunder against the few binding goals of the EU 2020 strategy , such as for the employment quota , for research and education and for combating poverty - and that in the European Year for Combating Poverty !
I hope that this attitude will not prevail among the majority of the Heads of Government .
Mr President , my country , Greece , has many things in common with California .
We have a wonderful climate , our land is our asset , our forests burned as have the forests in California , they have held Olympic Games , as have we , and we have ended up with the same problems as California .
I wonder , if California had lending problems , would the central administration of the USA leave it at the mercy of speculators ...
( The speaker was interrupted by a heckler )
It is the economy - yes , it is .
I realise that .
That is why I said what I said before .
( EL ) ... or would the central administration of the USA resolve its problem ?
Do we or do we not have a central administration in the European Union ?
Are we certain that Greece , which accounts for 2 % of the European economy , has caused such a massive problem with the euro ?
Has it sawed through the cohesion of the euro and is it threatening the unity of the Union ?
It is clear , therefore , that we face a crash test of the strength of the European currency and , more importantly , of the intentions of the leaders of the European Union to defend it .
If we look back , we can see what we have achieved ( 30 years ago , I was a young employee at the Ministry of Labour and was trained here , in Brussels , in the single European market ) .
We have achieved the single European market .
We have achieved the euro .
I do not think that we have achieved anything else in common .
That is why you also see me with the euro-sceptics .
I trust that tomorrow , we shall prove that we really have achieved harmony and something in common .
( HU ) Those who spoke before me all mentioned the solution to the Greek crisis .
Meanwhile , Mr Barroso , the summit did not even place it on its agenda .
Do you not see this as a contradiction , as hypocrisy ?
Because it does not appear on the official agenda .
Of course , it is not just Greece that found itself in a difficult situation in 2008-2009 .
Hungary was the country that came close to bankruptcy , partly due to the serious errors made by the government .
An IMF loan was accepted there , a move that has extremely serious consequences for the population .
We need to face the question of what the lessons of the financial crisis are .
Is it that everything is connected to everything else ?
No .
The true lesson was formulated by Prime Minister George Papandreou , who said that over the past twenty years , the Berlin Wall fell , and Wall Street fell .
The ' Wall ' street fell .
Yes , this global financial system , which had become disconnected from the economy , is the fundamental reason why countries find themselves in this situation .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are more aware than anyone of how my party wanted to help make the Spanish Presidency a success .
We want to continue doing so , but for that you need to make some adjustments and you need to get on with leading the Union right away .
Leading the Union means seeking a solution for Greece .
Everyone has said so and I am not going to repeat it .
Leading the Union means approving the Directive on alternative investment fund managers as soon as possible and not delaying it , which is what the Spanish Presidency has done .
Leading the Union means approving the financial surveillance package as soon as possible , not upholding at all costs a Council agreement that is much more conservative than the Commission 's proposal and even more so than the de Larosière report from which it derives .
Parliament will provide the Spanish Presidency with a supervision agreement that can be summarised in two words : more supervision and more Europe .
I am sure that the Spanish Government , which has always preached these ideas , will support Parliament and not the other positions that originate from the other side of the Channel .
Leading the Union means strengthening budgetary discipline , and strengthening budgetary discipline means coming up with new ideas to strengthen the preventive aspect .
The Spanish Prime Minister knows that the review of the fourteen stability plans that have just been referred to was a purely bureaucratic procedure in the absence of a better idea .
The preventive arm would have to take into account the competitiveness of the economies - because without wealth , there is no way of balancing the public accounts - and it would have to take the foreign account situation into consideration .
Tougher sanctions would also have to be implemented so that the agreement really appears binding .
Leading the Union means bringing in a new idea on the issue of governance , on which you have just written in a newspaper .
The Spanish Prime Minister told us here how he wanted more governance when Articles 121 and 136 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which are the ones to which the Spanish Presidency now refers , are already in force .
What else does it involve ?
Tell us what it involves and we will help you .
In order to help you , however , we need to know what it is you expect and want , because in this House , vague , vacuous and empty ideas get very short shrift .
Madam President , we feel that the draft Council conclusions that we have all seen leaked this week could spell a very real danger for the European Union .
The conclusions talk about a timely exit from exceptional support measures .
What does that mean in practice ?
We saw from the Ecofin conclusions last week that they want to see a withdrawal of labour market support measures from the end of 2010 .
In December , Council talked about the need for all Member States to return to the Stability Pact criteria by the end of 2013 .
We feel that timetable is hopelessly optimistic .
If we follow that prescription of a rigid return to the Stability Pact criteria by the end of 2013 , it will be a recipe for huge cuts in public spending and public provision , unemployment will rise , tax takes will be reduced , and we will enter a period of sluggish growth that could lead to a real reduction in the economic potential of the European Union for many years to come .
It is a recipe for disaster .
What we need instead is a smart balance between responsible fiscal policy on the one hand and continued labour market support on the other .
We need a sustained social and sustainable exit strategy .
The Danish Labour Institute has produced figures today .
They say that , if the emergency exit strategies agreed by 20 Member States with the Commission are followed , an additional 4.5 million European citizens will needlessly be in the unemployment queues by the end of 2013 .
That can be avoided .
We have to avoid it .
One of the calls we are making , therefore , is for a two-year moratorium on withdrawal of support measures .
Incidentally , this week , we are also proposing a new European mechanism for financial stability .
I hoped President Barroso would still be here because I wanted to say that we would not mind at all if he stole our ideas and presented them as a recommendation to Council tomorrow .
Madam President , the Council will meet tomorrow to discuss the future of a Europe that is faced with enormous challenges .
At the present time , we are dealing with a financial crisis , leading to a jobs crisis , in combination with a climate crisis .
An economic growth based on social and environmental grounds is crucial to kick-start Europe , but I am afraid that the Council and Commission 's proposals for governance - however welcome - will be too vague and will not help to achieve the set targets .
If implemented as it stands , Europe 2020 will be another Lisbon Strategy - a failure .
Europe should instead dare to attack these challenges head on with bold governance proposals .
Firstly , the open coordination method is not working and must be abandoned .
Instead , binding targets should be established and followed up by the Commission , in accordance with the articles available in the Lisbon Treaty .
Secondly , if funding should be conditional on how well a Member State lives up to its obligations according to the 2020 strategy , we cannot keep spending taxpayers ' money on governments that lie and cheat with statistics - solidarity , yes , but based on transparency .
Thirdly , the Commission should publish its annual reports with policy recommendations in Parliament before they are discussed in Council .
An open process would create transparency and permit citizen involvement .
As European politicians , we should always strive to put the citizens at the centre of our policy .
So let us make that promise a reality and upgrade the Commission 's kitten to a tiger - and a tiger with teeth .
( LV ) Thank you , Madam President .
We must address the question of solidarity not only in the case of Greece , but also in shaping the long-term policies of the European Union , and I say this in the context of the agreement that we expect in the Council on the goals of the 2020 strategy .
What worries me in the Commission 's plan is that there are no accents on economic cohesion in this strategy alongside the accent on social cohesion .
If we consider this in context with the emphasis on the financial forecast for the period 2014-2020 , then in reality , these economic cohesion concepts become significantly weaker in monetary terms .
In other words , this means that until 2020 , the equalisation of economic disparities will be less dynamic .
Indeed , it could come to pass to the contrary that in 2020 , economic disparities in the European Union could be greater than they are in 2010 .
Is that what we wish to see , and is that the true understanding of solidarity within the European Union ?
I should invite the Council to pay very serious attention to achieving this political agreement , but nevertheless also to stress the goal of economic cohesion . Thank you .
( EL ) Madam President , I think we have dealt sufficiently and fairly with the issue of Greece .
I should like to touch on an issue that also concerns other countries .
Mr Schulz said that interest rates currently stand at 2-3 % in Europe .
I should like to tell you that in Cyprus , the interest rate currently stands at 6 % .
Anything above this level and the banks are on their knees and nothing can change this picture .
We consider that the Council should also work in this direction in future , so that we do not see other countries getting into the same mess as Greece .
I should like to make two proposals :
We gave billions to the banks in a bid to get the banks rolling .
Would it not have been better for the state to give this money as the interest rate on a mortgage for a primary residence , given that consumers were going to the bank to pay their instalment ?
My second proposal is this : could we not have considered imposing a tax on major cross-border transactions between States ?
I have one thing to say about one-minute speeches , Madam President .
I am sorry but I wish to say that one minute is not long enough to present a view .
In the final analysis , it is humiliating to have to resort to slogans .
I understand that in one minute , you cannot say very much ; however , I will now give the floor to Mr Borghezio for another minute .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear for all to see that the euro area is becoming increasingly difficult to govern with every passing day .
The risk of state bankruptcy has not been eliminated , but despite the weekly meetings and summits of leaders and finance ministers , a clear solution has not yet been put in place .
I hope that we do not have a mission impossible on our hands .
The bailout of a Member State may not survive a probable constitutional appeal in Germany .
These are all points that we should bear in mind and which I do not think have come out during this debate .
I would , however , like to take the opportunity to mention that through its financial measures , the European Union should place solid , practical emphasis on the effective recovery of the small and medium-sized enterprises sector , which has been abandoned .
What proportion of the huge sums given to the banks really ends up in the small enterprises sector , in my country - Italy - for example ?
How much of the Structural Funds ?
Only between 1-2 % is used in the SME sector in some regions , according to bodies representing SMEs .
These are real problems , affecting the real economy , which Europe should address very seriously and urgently .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to start with some praise for Greece .
The solution to the Greek crisis must entail tough reform measures in Greece .
That is the right path to take .
Everything else that has been proposed here runs counter to the European treaties , and I expect both the President of the Commission and Parliament to abide by the treaties and not to make proposals that run counter to the treaties .
To Mr Schulz I would say : turning up the volume is no substitute for knowing the facts .
It is not speculators that have resulted in Greece 's problems . It is the internal rules - the fact that the Member States have not been prepared to comply with the Stability and Growth Pact .
Germany and France - not Greece - were the culprits , setting all the other Member States a bad example back in 2003 and 2004 .
Not the others .
This is not meant as a criticism of Greece , but if we do not change the rules and the Member States are not prepared to abide by their own rules , then the euro area is going to have problems .
Now it is being asserted that the blame lies with speculators .
Less than a third of the Greek national debt is secured by Credit Default Swaps .
Less than one thousandth of global CDS derivatives relate to Greece .
That is just an excuse .
For so long as we are unable to implement the rules and stick to them - and the finance ministers are the culprits here - we will repeatedly find ourselves in difficulties .
That is the key ; not reproaching any particular Head of Government who is abiding by the European treaties and her own constitution .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite clear - and it has already been stated , Mr Langen - that Greece must do its own homework .
From my point of view , however , it has also been stated quite clearly that there must be solidarity .
Solidarity that helps Greece to accomplish what it has to do .
Whatever the percentages , speculation may not be responsible for the crisis in Greece , but it is to blame for the huge burden that Greece now has to shoulder beyond what is necessary . That is the crucial thing .
Also , Mr Langen , the Financial Times - a newspaper that is closer politically to your views than to my own - has put it quite plainly : that is the difference between Chancellor Kohl and Chancellor Merkel .
Chancellor Kohl would have said ' Let 's solve this problem together with Greece ' .
Chancellor Merkel takes flight and says : ' Well , what does the treaty say ?
What do the Court of Justice and the German constitution say ? ' That is the difference - whether you are politically in favour of the integration of Europe or whether you are always looking back home , or have a foreign minister who says ' We are not going to put the money on the table just yet ' .
Nobody has asked for money to be put on the table .
If you always take the populist path and fail to think of the common future of Europe , then you end up with this cacophony .
Or , as another newspaper that is closer to you , the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , says : another day , another proposal .
That applies not just to Germany , but to the European Union as a whole .
The answer , or lack of an answer , that we have given so far is not acceptable .
We need a carrot and stick approach .
Measures are needed in Greece - there is no question about that - and they will be tough , very tough .
However , we also need cooperation at European level , in particular , to prevent such problems arising .
That can only happen - whether in the context of a European Monetary Fund as proposed by Mr Schäuble , or by another means - if we also have European solidarity .
I therefore expect the summit to demonstrate European solidarity in order to create a better future .
Madam President , the Spring Summit is supposed to be the energy summit .
Had the Copenhagen conference ended with a global agreement , we would already be discussing the technical details of moving to a 30 % emissions reduction , and we must still do so .
Firstly , because the level of ambition agreed at the 2007 Spring Summit translates to a much higher than 20 % reduction in today 's economic circumstances .
Just last week , Nobuo Tanaka , the executive director of the deeply cautious International Energy Agency ( IEA ) , told MEPs that the IEA 's 2009 World Energy Outlook predicts a 23 % reduction in EU emissions and that 30 % would represent a good target .
Secondly , if we are serious about achieving up to a 95 % target by 2050 , then the roadmap requires a cut of at least 30 % by 2020 .
And , last but not least , it is only the transformation of the EU into a sustainable low carbon and resource efficient economy which will ensure European economic recovery and job creation .
Green jobs lie at the heart of the EU 2020 strategy .
Therefore , the Council should back Commissioner Hedegaard and recognise that the conditions are now right to move to a 30 % target , and the Council should recognise that the cheapest and easiest way to make that further cut is through energy efficiency and , specifically , a binding energy efficiency target .
EU leaders need to deliver as clear a message at this 2010 Spring Summit as they did in spring 2007 .
( PL ) Instead of having a discussion about implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , I suggest we concentrate on areas where we do , really , have an influence .
We are , certainly , able to help safeguard the common market from protectionism .
We are , certainly , able to make European law easier for businesspeople , so that it does not limit the competitiveness of the European economy .
Better legislation is , of course , a particular responsibility of this very House , of this Parliament .
Member States will reform if they are exposed to pressure from the world economy .
This is why it is so important to give the Member States maximum freedom in the area of competitiveness of systems of taxation , social systems and economic law .
By bringing in harmonisation in these areas , we are only maintaining the ills of the European social model .
It is freedom , and not successive strategies , which is the correct response to the crisis .
( NL ) Madam President , no emergency solution is in place for Greece as yet , and in fact this is not a problem at the moment , as even the Greek Prime Minister said here in Parliament that the country wishes to put its own house in order .
Indeed , this is the correct procedure according to the ground rules of the Stability and Growth Pact , and is itself a type of solidarity .
Nevertheless , we have a problem .
The euro is toppling , but this can be attributed mainly to the public debate among capital cities , which is giving the impression that we cannot reach a solution .
We must put an end to this now , and hopefully we shall do so tomorrow .
In my opinion , we need an emergency measure for this case of urgent need , which should unite the European Commission , the Member States and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
There should be emergency loans and nothing more .
Madam President , I hope that tomorrow , we shall look beyond the debate on this crisis .
I hope we shall also look at medium- and long-term solutions .
We must strengthen the preventive force of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Moreover , as others have also said , the new EU 2020 strategy can be successful only if we really achieve sound European economic governance .
This will entail not only Member States appearing together at the summit but also the European Commission deploying all the powers conferred on it by the Treaty of Lisbon ; all the powers to really act and enforce things .
After all , as Mrs Ek also said , a free-for-all is not the way to success .
I very much hope that the emergency measure has been agreed by the time the summit starts tomorrow , so that we can focus on how to lift the Netherlands out of the crisis with a solid 2020 strategy , and also on achieving a solution regarding the way ahead after Copenhagen .
( EL ) Madam President , according to recent statements by officials and articles in the press , it would appear that the most likely ' rescue ' scenario for the Greek economy will be a joint effort between the Member States of the European Union and the International Monetary Fund .
Mrs Merkel also appears to be pushing things in that direction .
May I say that this is the worst , the most anti-social scenario both for Greece and for the euro area .
For the European Union , any such possibility violates Community legality - and I say that for those who defend it , given that no treaty , no legal text makes any reference to any such intervention by the International Monetary Fund or other international organisation in these procedures .
At the same time , it creates a political and legal precedent by making the Stability Pact even more austere and lets the United States of America into the euro area through the back door .
As far as Greece is concerned , any such choice would seriously intensify the anti-labour and anti-social measures taken by the government , measures which you call bold and which have increased poverty , increased unemployment , cut off any prospects for growth and cut off any hope of Greece 's emerging from the crisis .
This is the prospect that awaits other countries which may apply such measures under such pressure .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , is it normal that it should take two European Councils to resolve the issue of euro area countries showing solidarity with Greece ?
I heard Mr Langen interpret the treaty .
Yes , there is the treaty , the letter and the spirit .
Moreover , when one reads Articles 143 and 122 , none of the authors of the treaty bore in mind the fact that , after the changeover to the euro , we could be faced with a problem of the kind with which we are faced today .
That is why we have to be creative ; that is why we have to show solidarity .
The idea of referring Greece to the International Monetary Fund seems to us - for those us who aspire to be responsible and consistent Europeans on the international stage - to be a complete nonsense .
There is one thing that we must do , and that we must hope the European Council will do , namely , to send out a message of solidarity with Greece and a message of responsibility regarding the issue of economic governance .
That issue is now on the table ; it is serious , it is unresolved .
We must address it calmly , we must reduce the pressure and we must not start with the assumption that we have to , in principle , strengthen the tool - an ineffective one so far - that is the Stability and Growth Pact , because it was repressive before it was cooperative .
We need to pursue objectives in terms of public deficit , in terms of debt , but we also need to invent terms of cooperation , of good added value between members of the euro area .
This is the challenge facing the European Council , and I hope that it will rise to it with a sense of responsibility .
( PL ) Madam President , on the eve of the European Council meeting which will define the Union 's new economic strategy , we should learn the lessons of the fiasco of the Lisbon Strategy and , working together , take a fair look at all Member States .
In order to be competitive in world markets , we have to be innovative , but the redistribution of the main part of our budgetary resources exclusively to that end will de facto discriminate against many countries in Central and Eastern Europe , including Poland .
There is a great expectation that thanks to EU funds - as was the case earlier in Spain , Portugal and other countries of the European Union - the air , road and rail transport infrastructure , and also the Internet , will expand .
A particular priority should be to help the eastern border regions of the European Union , such as the region around Lublin in Poland , for which a special budget line should be established as part of the 2020 strategy .
The European Council meeting must not send out a signal that poor regions of the Union are going to finance ideas which will bring maximum benefits only to the old Member States .
( EL ) Madam President , the EU 2020 strategy to be discussed at the summit , which follows on from the Lisbon Strategy , proves that the anti-grassroots shotgun measures being promoted by the PASOK government in our country , with the fundamental agreement of all the political forces of capital and the parties of the European one-way street , are not unique to Greece .
They are decided in advance by the political elite and governments of the Member States of the European Union .
They form part of the overall strategic plan of capital and are being promoted uniformly throughout the European Union by stepping up ideological terrorism and misleading the working and grassroots movement .
The lies and demagogic statements by the representatives of the bourgeois governments , the forces of the European one-way street , that the European Union and EMU will act as a shield against crisis , the fairy tales about the European market of 480 million , the big European family , Community solidarity and other such idealistic talk have failed .
The European Union is an imperialist , transnational union between capital and the monopolies which , with a single strategy , is attacking the people and crossing swords for a share of the spoils .
The economic and political problems in Greece , in the Member States of the European Union , will be solved through the fight of the working and grassroots movement , the fight and solidarity of the peoples .
It is obvious that what is happening in Greece is directly connected to the acute competition between the imperialist states and between the European Union , the USA , China and other developing countries .
Thus , in the face of the strategy of capital , the working class and the grassroots classes must set up their own strategic fight to overturn this anti-grassroots policy , in order to satisfy the modern needs of the working-class and grassroots family .
Madam President , two things .
The first concerns public finances , and the second competitiveness .
Last year at this time , we were discussing in this Parliament how to face the crisis .
There were those who said ' let us meet the crisis by spending more and accepting bigger deficits ' , and those of us who said ' now we need to be in control of public spending in order to secure stability for the future ' .
Now we see the results .
Some Member States followed the policy of spending and accepting bigger deficits , and we can all see the consequences : increased public debt and increased costs for servicing the public debt by increased interest rates .
That is the reality which is squeezing out welfare spending and investments in a lot of the Member States .
I think we need to learn from this : we need to abide by the rules we already have and we need to develop and improve the Stability and Growth Pact and make it more able to meet crises in the future .
But we have the same debate now , because some now say that we should delay the exit strategies and the exit from public deficits .
That is wrong , because then we will undermine our ability to recover and will increase the cost for interest rates in the Member States .
The second thing is that competitiveness goes hand in hand with our ability to have stable public finances and to make the real changes we have talked about for decades .
That is up to the Heads of Governments to do this week .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Hökmark , I think we have been in different parliaments in recent years , because the parliament I have experienced is different to yours !
I have experienced a parliament in which some say we must look more closely into ratings agencies , hedge funds and private equity corporations .
We must regulate them , we must carry out checks on the critical players in the financial markets and the critical products to ensure that we are not veering towards an international fiasco .
I have also heard others saying ' hands off ' : the market will regulate itself , we do not need all that .
Or as Mr McCreevy said - whenever politics interferes , the result is always worse .
We have seen the results .
The international fiasco is the cause of the overindebtedness of the Member States of the European Union .
However , we cannot stand here today and say that it was wrong to focus our growth policy on employment and economic activity .
It is irrelevant to the debate , just as it is irrelevant to the debate when Mr Langen says that Chancellor Merkel understood the European Treaty .
No , she did not understand it at all .
What is worse , she is probably in a position to subordinate the European Treaty and its aims for Europe to her fear of losing an important regional election in North Rhine-Westphalia .
These are not the leadership skills that we need in the European Union .
We have told the Commission here that EU 2020 is too watered down .
There is no meat in it .
Please provide some evidence that you are able to acquire new funds .
Please fight for a financial transactions tax .
Please fight for more economic activity and greater growth prospects in the European Union , to give small and medium-sized enterprises and the workers a chance .
Right now , however , we almost sympathise with you for having to save the European Union with governments such as we have at present - governments such as that represented by Chancellor Merkel .
Stay strong and create European instruments !
That is our main message for the summit , because only then can people hope that we will provide the right answers .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schulz said that Greece has delivered and that it is now Europe 's turn .
I wonder whether Europe actually needs to say ' thank you ' , nowadays , if Member States in the euro area simply keep to the rules , in other words , if they manage to get back to the 3 % criterion .
I also wonder what the difference was last year when Ireland faced the same situation and instituted hard cuts .
Nobody came forward at that time with the idea of calling on a European Monetary Fund .
Mr Verhofstadt says that speculators are at work .
Clearly there is pressure in that regard at the moment , but the fact is that Greece enjoyed major rate advantages thanks to being in the euro area .
Our Italian colleagues used the rate advantage they gained from their accession to the euro area to consolidate .
Greece consumed it .
We can indeed therefore say that the good European today is not the one who is putting his or her money on the table ; the good European is the one who actually implements the rules that everyone has signed up to and accepted , so that they are actually complied with in the European Union .
As a second point , I would like to give my backing to the Commission because the proposals that are on the table for the long-term future represent a move in the right direction .
We have agreed the 3 % and we therefore need a strong Commission that will , in future , monitor and also enforce that 3 % limit .
We have seen how the Member States in the euro area are unable to police each other and to observe the 3 % limit on their own .
That is why I am in favour of a strong Commission that will be able , in future , to see that the criteria are met .
I have one more thought .
We should talk positively about the euro .
It is not a currency crisis that we have ; it is an economic crisis .
The euro is a major benefit for everyone .
If our leaders in the European Union no longer say that , if that point is no longer made in the Council , people will not know it .
That is why I am in favour of this major , strong currency .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greek crisis is a current problem , while the growth crisis and the environmental crisis are long-term problems , and both need to be tackled dynamically with decisions taken by the European Council .
The Europe 2020 strategy rightly states that growth should be intelligent , sustainable and inclusive .
When I look at the Council 's conclusions , however , I see that they are much more narrowly focused and reduced to the classical growth strategy - a strategy that has failed and that did not get us very far .
Growth cannot be intelligent if it is not sustainable and it is also not intelligent if it is not inclusive .
That is why I would like to ask the Council and the Presidency of the Council to ensure that this triad , these three pillars , are retained .
This is the new development that really should be implemented now .
I am very pleased that growth that saves on resources and on energy is to be a flagship of the European Union .
Of course , we have been talking about this for a long time .
This will actually help us to save costs , reduce dependencies and solve a series of problems .
I expect the Commission to provide us with a roadmap in the course of 2010 , as it is a shared responsibility of the EU itself but also of the Member States , and many areas are therefore on very soft ground and very vague .
Above all , we must make the target of 20 % energy savings binding .
This efficiency target must thus be made legally binding so that everyone knows where things are headed and industry can also realise the relevant investment .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if I were to ask myself the question frequently being asked in half the bars in Italy , I would ask what the point of Europe is , and I would make a snap reply , from the bottom of my heart .
What is the point of Europe if not to help Greece at this time ?
I do not think that this idea is crazy because it is in our DNA , in the nature of our political project : in the nature of our political project because it embraces solidarity .
At the same time , however , I am struck that those who say they want to combat financial speculation intend to replace financial speculation with political speculation .
Indeed , how can they think of waging this battle against Chancellor Merkel ?
In other words , how can they think that the aim of trying to show solidarity with Greece is to attack another Member State , because it is simply reminding us that the policy of solidarity must go hand in hand with a policy of responsibility ?
This is something of which we have often reminded ourselves , with one voice , because we are aware that solidarity and responsibility will enable us to make the European political project practicable for everyone .
We must be certain that what unites us is stronger than what divides us , and in light of this , we must ask the Commission , as from tomorrow , to be ambitious and demand the necessary rigour from the Member States to ensure that they are capable of providing solidarity by means of a project which , in the long term , will be capable of giving tangible form to our European project .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greek crisis is clearly the most serious problem that Europe is facing , and it is undoubtedly caused by a lack of rigour in the management of public expenditure .
However , the European Institutions ' delay in taking steps to address this Member State 's moment of difficulty is incomprehensible and unacceptable .
Moreover , this delay has already had a negative impact : indeed , it has opened the door to speculation ; it has created , within the Union , doubts over certain countries ' intentions with regard to the future of Europe ( I do not want us to forget that this is the first major issue that we have had to deal with following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ) ; it has accentuated the difficulties of the Greek Government , which has had to implement anti-popular measures - not trivial or minor decisions - affecting millions of people , and it has done so without being sure that help was on its way .
Furthermore , it has clearly damaged the founding value of solidarity , which is the cornerstone and the binding force of the idea that we all share of the European Union .
Our intervention therefore needs to be free of any speculation . I would like to remind Mr Mauro that Germany is , without doubt , one of the countries to have benefited most from the entry into force of the euro and its effect on interest rates .
We must act swiftly to help Greece .
Europe must do so in the interests of Europe .
( RO ) The Council of the European Union enthusiastically welcomed the Commission 's Europe 2020 Communication .
This document is , admittedly , an absolute necessity , which is precisely why we must scrutinise its content closely .
I think that it lacks financial consistency .
It is the Council 's duty to ask the Commission to clarify the budget resources and their allocation to the key items in the budget .
In my view , the budget cannot be drawn up before the common agricultural policy and cohesion policy have been reformed .
One of the major areas supporting the EU 's development and stability is completely missing , namely , the infrastructure for both transport and energy .
The development of transport and energy infrastructures in the European Union , along with their harmonisation with those existing in neighbouring countries , can provide a powerful driving force promoting sustainable growth and ensuring stable jobs .
They can also provide the European Union with much sought-after security in both the energy and transport sectors .
For this reason , I call on the Council to ask the Commission to include these key areas in the EU 2020 strategy for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
( EL ) Madam President , the European summit on 11 February , which was to send a message of support to Greece so that the markets would calm down , has basically been annulled due to the dissonance and uncertainty prevailing within the European Union .
The European Council , which starts work tomorrow , cannot afford the luxury of maintaining the current climate of uncertainty and dissonance .
Everyone now acknowledges that the Greek Government has taken very harsh measures , most of which have already started to be applied at the expense of and with sacrifices by the Greek people .
However , at the same time , it continues to borrow at exceptionally high interest rates , the most recent example being on 5 March , because there are speculators on the markets making a fortune by betting on the odds of a country going bankrupt and ultimately creating the conditions and preconditions for that to happen .
Today , the debate revolves around Greece ; tomorrow it will probably concern another Member State .
Will the European Council stop it by creating an effective European preventive mechanism which will safeguard the national economies and the stability of the euro area ?
The President of the European Commission spoke about responsibility and solidarity .
He was right .
Both are needed when you belong to a family such as a euro area .
I do not think that anyone can doubt that Greece has fully assumed its responsibilities .
However , it cannot face the fury of the market alone at this difficult stage .
Eighteen months ago , the markets were threatening to bring down the global economy .
Surely Greece will be threatened today .
That is where the concept of solidarity comes in , a concept which should be obvious and which should go hand in glove with membership of the euro .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , enough has been said about Greece - I want to turn to the future now .
With the Europe 2020 strategy , the Commission has brought an important document into the discussion , one that is intended to lay down quite broad guidelines for how the European Union should be led in future .
I believe that , in the end , we will all need to attain the joint targets that we are laying down in the Europe 2020 strategy .
That was one of the major problems with the Lisbon Strategy , on which , ultimately , we all have work to do .
Only if all the Member States truly stick to the targets laid down in the strategy will we be able to achieve these targets together .
It will not succeed if the European Council believes itself to be the administrative body and if things are organised at the last minute .
It will only succeed if those working in this institution truly realise the political leadership role that it has to play .
Furthermore , it will really only succeed if the principle of solidarity is fundamentally laid down in this Europe 2020 strategy .
That means , first of all , individual responsibility on the part of the Member States in all those areas where they , themselves , are responsible .
This includes reform efforts on the labour market , but it also includes national budgetary policy .
Conversely , this also , of course , means an obligation to assist on the part of the other Member States - in other words , Member States that have got into difficulties through no fault of their own will also receive assistance .
What is more , it will only succeed if the Commission takes the lead politically .
In other words , we absolutely must avoid the mistakes of the Lisbon Strategy .
It has often been said in the past that the strategy of cooperation that characterised the Lisbon Strategy failed .
We need clear objectives from the Commission , and I believe that Parliament will support the Commission in this area .
( ES ) Madam President , I think we are all aware that five hundred million members of the public will be following the European Council to be held next week with unusual attention .
The reason is that the European Council will have the opportunity to issue a message of commitment to the exit from the crisis , which is what those who are suffering from it the most are desperately waiting for .
Furthermore , the exit from the crisis must , of course , be reflected in that commitment to the strategy , it must be convincing in the change of model for growth and in its emphasis on economic , social and environmental aspects .
From the economic point of view , it must be reflected in the commitment to governance .
From the social point of view , it must be reflected in the commitment to workers and social protection - the model that made us Europeans - and , in particular , to equality ; I want to underscore that emphasis in a document in which the commitment to equality is clearly improvable .
Furthermore , from the environmental point of view , it must be reflected in the commitment to recovering the spirit that made Europe the leader in the commitment to environmental sustainability and preventing climate change at the Copenhagen conference and , above all , to acknowledging that deeply disappointing taste in the mouth with which we left the Copenhagen conference .
However , the most important thing of all at the Council meeting is that there must be a clearly European commitment to support monetary union with the coordination of fiscal , budgetary and economic policies on a par with monetary union .
The message of solidarity with Greece is not a message for Greece ; it is a message for Europe and Europeans .
It is not a matter of rescuing Greece ; it is a matter of giving European signs of life , of engagement with deep reality , with the deep historical commitment that monetary union represented .
Understand once and for all , therefore , that we are not talking about Greece ; we are talking about all of us .
There have been delays in getting the new institutions going ; there must not be any delay in getting the answers going that Europeans expect from the next Council .
( EL ) Madam President , it is true that my country , Greece , has failed over the years to develop its economy with the necessary moderation and consistency .
Now , however , it has fully assumed its responsibilities .
The Greek people are paying a heavy price .
However , we must not hide our heads in the sand .
Greece is not the only country in EMU facing serious problems .
It was not the only country to take recourse to the toxic services of certain credit institutions .
It is not , nor will it remain , the only target of speculators .
We all know - and we know full well - that the Greek issue is a European issue .
EMU will remain mutilated without more coordinated economic and fiscal policy and , above all , without solidarity .
The crisis , any crisis is the mother of change .
The current crisis may give birth to a stronger Europe and Greece may be the midwife of that change .
So let us not shoot Greece down .
Let us together shoot down the speculators who would like to see the euro on its knees ; that is what the European Council should do tomorrow .
( HU ) Madam President , I would like to call the attention of the Commission and of the Council to the fact that when determining the new objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , they must not forget those policies that are currently working well , that is , the cohesion policy and the common agricultural policy .
These are tried and true instruments which , although needing reform , can significantly contribute to the achievement of the new EU 2020 objectives .
It is regrettable that these two very important Community policies were omitted from the earlier material provided by the Commission .
Hungary and the new Member States therefore consider the formulation of these policies , the legal harmonisation of the internal market , and the elimination of the bottleneck in infrastructure and energy security , extremely important .
And finally , this EU strategy cannot replace appropriate debate on the budget directive , and we consider it very important that the regional dimension of the cohesion policy also be given space . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate about the euro , the debate about Greece , has defined recent days .
I would like to draw your attention , at this point , to what strikes me as a disturbing piece of news , namely that 40 % of Germans now believe that the introduction of the euro was a mistake .
We have to be disturbed by that , because the introduction of a Community currency is not a one-way street .
Europe 's integration process is not irreversible .
I believe that we must keep the promise that we gave the German people when they gave up their national currency , namely , that the euro would be just as stable as the German mark .
I am also firmly convinced that we in Europe need a discussion about the social market economy , about the regulatory framework .
We should not be talking about how we are making Germany less competitive .
Instead , we should be discussing how we can make the whole of Europe competitive so that we can be successful on global markets .
That is what our aim must be ; that is why I am calling for a debate on the social market economy in Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , I agree with everyone who feels the need , at this point in time , for stronger European integration , especially in the economic field , and I hope that that will not only be discussed at the euro area summit but also actually at the European Council .
However , the truth is that the population does also - and my fellow Member mentioned this just now - see negative sides to the euro .
There was a birth defect when we launched monetary union in terms of having a single currency whilst , at the same time , failing to shape economic policy more jointly .
We must now acknowledge that that was a major mistake .
The voice of reason tells us that a solidarity fund - for Greece too - must now be set up so that Greece can obtain lower interest rates .
There has , however , been too little mention in this debate of the fact that Greece itself must also do something .
One important element would be for it to cut back on its military budget .
An EU Member State that spends more than 4 % of its gross national income on military expenditure , on armaments from countries such as Germany , France and others , is not what we need in the European Union , and so it is right that there should be cuts in this area .
Madam President , I would like to make the point that you could not make this up today .
Almost every speaker here has discussed Greece - the crisis in Greece - and yet Mr Barroso said at the beginning that it is not even on the formal agenda for the two days at the European Council .
That is incredible .
The whole world is watching every day what is going on here .
The truth of the matter is that you are again trying to hide the fact that this project is not working .
It is rapidly failing .
We have already seen the good people of Germany saying that they are not happy with the situation .
But should it not be for the people of Greece to have their say , not the dictators in this place ?
Surely it should be for the good people of Greece perhaps to have a referendum on whether they should be in the euro .
It is their case .
It is their cause .
I am sickened by what I have heard today from many .
It is a self-centred opinion for those other Member States , looking after themselves .
Greece is the problem at the moment .
I feel it will go from Greece to Spain and then Portugal and Italy and so on .
The rollercoaster will start .
Mark my words : the problem is here to stay .
( SK ) I will be very brief , because most of the issues have already been mentioned , of course .
My personal opinion is that the situation we have already been tackling for some months now in Greece is not a unique situation , and it seems to indicate that a new approach is required in terms of adhering to , or , as the case may be , not adhering to the Stability Pact .
We have , in principle , two options : either we insist on adherence to what is valid and what is in the treaties and take the full consequences of this , or we understand that the Stability Pact , just like anything else , is subject to a certain amount of development and must therefore also undergo certain changes , and we draw up these changes and carry them through in such a way that not only do we maintain growth and economic stability directly in those states that are members of the euro area , but we also prepare other EU Member States , which are not yet in the euro area , to join , without us having to make dramatic use of the structural funds , for example , in these countries .


( FR ) Madam President , I have one observation and three proposals .
Firstly , my observation : I do not understand why President Van Rompuy is absent from such an important sitting - Minister , you are not a member of the European Council - and I believe that he could have been here .

My three proposals concern Greece 's recovery plan .
In the medium term , I support Mr Cohn-Bendit 's idea , which was in fact mentioned just now : if the European Union were able to make a pact with Turkey to solve the Cyprus issue , we could help Greece recover two per cent of its GDP .
My second proposal concerns finance , since we do not have the instruments .
Why does the European Union not support a series of financial commitments , which would enable interest rates to be reduced and which is an objective on which a consensus has been reached within the European Parliament ?
Lastly , it has been said that Greece 's accounting was flawed .
It is not only in Greece that accounts are flawed .
I propose that we create public sector accounting standards for the entire European Union so that we have financial statements that are consistent , above board and reliable for all the Member States .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first let me tell you how impressed I was by the clear demonstration of solidarity and by the calls for responsibility from most of the speakers .
This is exactly what we need at this moment , because it is very clear that a European problem needs a European solution .
Sometimes , I wonder if we have not sufficiently learnt the lessons regarding the consequences of our course of actions , if we do not follow European solutions to European problems and try to find something specific even though we have to deal with it collectively .
I think it is very clear that we are not just a group of countries .
We are a European family , and if one of our family members has a problem , we must definitely come to the rescue .
The Commission is therefore ready to propose an instrument for coordinated assistance to Greece which will be fully compatible with European law , and I am sure that this is possible .
I would like to thank all of you for support when it comes to the EU 2020 strategy .
I cannot overemphasise how our citizens are expecting leadership at this moment , how they expect us to improve our performance and how they expect us to lead them after the crisis and set very solid medium-term strategies , as our international partners such as China , the United States , India and others do .
The time has come for a decision .
I was listening very carefully to the calls for better governance .
I was listening very carefully regarding improved monetary and economic surveillance and that we have to do a better job of enforcing the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is exactly what the Commission has in mind and these very proposals will come very soon .
I would like to thank all of you who supported the Commission on having very clear concrete goals for tomorrow 's European Council conclusions .
I think it is very important to have a medium-term strategy , but we have to have very clear indicators of where we are going and what our goals are .
The Commission therefore insists that the European Council accept these concrete headline goals after the deliberations tomorrow and the day after .
We need higher employment , we need a better gender balance and we need stronger education .
It is very clear that we need to invest more in research and development , and it is absolutely clear that we need to fight poverty .
Therefore , the Commission insists on solidarity , on responsibility and on having a concrete strategy for Europe and European citizens .
Let me just express my hope that the positive spirit which was present here , which was clearly supporting solidarity and responsibility , will be just as present during our leaders ' deliberations tomorrow .

Madam President , I believe this has been a very important debate : a debate on an issue that is at the heart of European concerns at the moment - the Greece issue - but , beyond that , on the economic situation of the European Union as a whole , a debate at which , by the way Mr Audy , the Presidency of the Council has been present , as agreed in Parliament : I represent the Presidency of the Council here .


With regard to the issue of Greece , about which there has been most debate and to which most reference has been made , the Presidency-in-Office of the Council has very clear ideas .
Firstly , Europe is an integration of economic policies : we have integrated economies .
Secondly , Europe is based on solidarity and therefore has a strong social content .
Thirdly , Europe has economic and financial stability .
These three European characteristics are clearly implied in the Greece issue .
That is also why the three ways of seeing Europe take account of and reaffirm one another in the very important statement made by the informal European Council on 11 February 2010 .
That was , I think , one of the most important statements that has ever been made in the Council , because it is a statement that tackles the problem of Greece by talking about solidarity and the absolute political commitment to the financial stability of the euro area ; the commitment to act when necessary to safeguard that stability .
I am sure that this weekend 's European Council , which is the same European Council that met on 11 February , will strengthen and preserve that stability .
A strong political message on Europe will be sent out from that European Council ; one of support for its economy , support for its currency and , therefore , a message of support for solidarity , because this is what the public is hoping for , although it is true that a number of Eurosceptics are hoping for failure .
Such a failure will not come about in the European Council .
Rest assured that such a failure will not come about , but that the political commitment to solidarity at the heart of the European Union and at the heart of the euro area will be reaffirmed .
Moreover , we are going to look further ahead .
We are going to look at the short and the long term .
We are going to talk about how to engineer a coordinated exit from the crisis , bearing in mind that there will not be a complete withdrawal of fiscal stimuli until there is economic recovery .
We are also going to talk about more long-term goals , goals which I would like to single out , in particular , the element of economic , territorial and social cohesion ; in essence , solidarity .
And we are going to talk about where there will be a new form of supervision different from the Lisbon Strategy .
There will clearly be changes in this regard : the leadership of the European Council was not in the Lisbon Strategy .
The coordination of economic , employment and social policies that is in the Treaty of Lisbon was not in the Lisbon Strategy .
The importance of the Commission 's role - of supervision , tracking , monitoring , control , of laying down requirements to meet the goals - was not in the Lisbon Strategy .
The elements of creating incentives with the structural funds were not in the Lisbon Strategy .
Clearly , very important progress is therefore being made .

Finally , Madam President , I shall refer to Mr García-Margallo 's speech , which was the only speech aimed directly at the Spanish Presidency by criticising the way in which the European Union is , in his opinion , being led .

I have to tell you , Mr García-Margallo , that the Spanish Presidency of the Council is working in a close and coordinated way - the Community method - with Mr Van Rompuy , President of the European Council , to push forward the essential goals .
It is also working closely with the Commission and Parliament .
You referred largely to the economic issue .
I would like to ask you whether you think , for example , that adopting a decision such as the one adopted at the European Council - obviously with the participation of the Presidency of the Council - on the political commitment of Europe to the financial stability of the euro area is not leading the European Union .
I would like to know whether you think that it is not leading the European Union to contribute to the holding of a debate this weekend on no lesser subject than the Europe 2020 strategy , in which , by the way , majority support was generally won for the speeches made in Parliament .
The debate was also on governance , as a fundamental element in that regard .
I would like to know whether you think that it is not leading the European Union to have negotiations going on at this moment with this House on the financial supervision package .
Furthermore , I would encourage you , Mr García-Margallo , to work with this Presidency so that we can reach an agreement as soon as possible between the Council , which has adopted a position , and Parliament .
During the Spanish Presidency , by the way , we want to remove the Directive on ' hedge funds ' from the European Union and we want to remove it with as much agreement and consensus as possible .
I do not think that should be criticised , quite the contrary .
I also think that it is leading the European Union to be very much in agreement and work with the Commission on the proposal that the Commission will submit on the coordination of economic policies in enforcement of Article 136 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Equally , it is leading the European Union for there to be a general policy for getting out of such debt , debt that was essential to the European Union in the face of the crisis and in the face of the social need to tackle the crisis and to protect the most vulnerable .
This is unavoidable debt that must be dealt with now , properly , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , in order to get back on track in terms of the Treaty of Lisbon 's parameters .
This is leading the European Union according to the Community method .
This is leading the European Union , and leading the European Union means holding a European Council this weekend that will clearly express its support for Greece and for the Greek Government .
No , you cannot take the floor using the blue card procedure , because this is reserved solely for MEPs .
Therefore , the Minister 's speech brings the debate to a close .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
One of the important topics on the European Council agenda relates to the EU 2020 strategy on job creation and economic growth .
We need to coordinate European policies so that we can meet the challenges and needs we are facing at the moment .
We also need to set clear long-term objectives .
Priority must be given to the sustainable development of the European economy .
The Commission 's new strategy for the next 10 years envisages five courses of action : the creation of new jobs , the battle against poverty , the reduction in the school dropout level , investment in research and development and the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
The last Member States to join the EU need resources and support from the European Union in order to achieve these ambitious targets .
Romania supports the 20-20-20 target on cutting carbon emissions by 20 % , increasing the proportion of energy obtained from renewable resources by 20 % and boosting energy efficiency by 20 % .
The more ambitious 30-30-30 target , which envisages achieving a 30 % threshold in all three areas , would definitely incur costs which are excessively high for my country .
This would be an unrealistic target for a number of European states .
As a project , Europe has been about peace , social well-being , freedom and growth .
It has served as an example in terms of its social model and has also taken the lead on environmental issues , without equal on the global level .
The economic , financial and social crisis that we are currently experiencing requires a concerted response at European level .
The crisis in Greece and the attack on the euro require a joint response , but unfortunately , this has been delayed .
It is both possible and desirable to find a European solution in order to avoid these constant speculative attacks on the euro .
The EU has credibility and liquidity .
If the required coordination is in place at European level , this should be enough to calm the market swiftly and cover the cost of the loans that Greece needs .
This is a time that requires solidarity between the Member States and Europe 's institutions .
It is even a matter of duty .
It is to be hoped that the upcoming European Council will take steps towards achieving integrated and coordinated solidarity .
Such an attitude is needed if the European project is to move forward .
Solutions for the monitoring of each Member State 's deficit must be sought later .
The seriousness of the social problems that are being experienced in various EU Member States , including unemployment , lack of job security and poverty , make it vital that the spring European Council gives a serious and thorough response .
However , we fear that its responses are aimed mainly at the supposed sustainability of public finances , while neglecting measures aimed at social sustainability .
The response to the situation in Greece is an important matter , especially because what is happening there contradicts everything that was trumpeted about the virtues of the euro and the blessings of being in the euro area : being in the vanguard of the strong currency of rich countries .
It was said that being in the euro area would be a safeguard against financial crises , as the country in question would be able to avoid loans and receive money from the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
The initial crisis was enough to show that there is no real solidarity within the euro area and that so-called ' economic and social cohesion ' is nothing more than propaganda used in electoral campaigns .
Now Mrs Merkel is even threatening that Member States which do not fulfil the requirements of the Stability Pact , such as Greece , amongst others , will be expelled from the euro area , forgetting that Germany has been and is the major beneficiary of policies based on a strong euro ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The economic and financial crisis , and Greece , require European action .
An end needs to be brought to the public arguments .
We await a joint answer from the summit .
We say ' yes ' to the Greek Government 's savings and reform programme - Greece is firmly resolved to do its homework and comply with the European rules .
We also say ' yes ' to loaning money where the reform programme would otherwise be threatened .
We do , however , say a definitive ' no ' to fines and to expelling a country from the euro area .
All that would do is to institute a domino effect that would lead to a loss of confidence by the markets .
We also say ' yes ' to Commissioner Rehn 's proposal for prior approval of the draft budgets by the Commission .
Budgetary and economic data must be inspected by Eurostat and the Commission .
I demand a strict review of the books in all the Member States based on a joint list of criteria .
The tax systems and those tax rates relevant to the internal market must be harmonised , the economic , budget and social policies coordinated .
I demand a ' Europe 2020 ' planning committee involving the Commission , the Member States , the European Investment Bank , the European Central Bank and Eurostat .
I therefore call on the Heads of State or Government to put a joint European willingness to act unambiguously on the record .
Greece is an example that Europe must learn from .
The conclusions must be drawn at the local , the European and the global level .
More European collaboration and less national egoism are the order of the day .
in writing . - I would like to speak about the European Digital Agenda .
The Commission 's figures show that barriers to the digital single market exist : only 7 % of online transactions are cross-border .
Although Internet and relevant infrastructure objectives serve as solid prerequisites for further development , improving the infrastructure must be complemented by the creation of a pan-European regulatory framework , utilisation of services and enhancement of ICT skills .
By 2020 , a single and secure European e-services area should be created .
It would provide EU citizens with easy and safe access to all digital services , both public and commercial .
Member States should develop national plans for the digital switchover of public services .
Particular focus should be on encouraging the participation of lower socio-economic groups , as they are the most likely to be excluded from the digital society .
Cross-border e-authentication and digital signatures should be characterised by legal and technical interoperability so that cross border e-authentication could be used by all service providers and consumers across Europe .
The comprehensive approach to the digital single market should include reducing the remaining fragmentation in financial services , logistics , consumer protection and intellectual property .
A 100 % target should be set for citizens to have both access to , and the ability to use , e-services .
The horrendous financial crisis in Greece and the financial imbalance in other Member States of the euro area raise questions about the static and dynamic strength of the very structure of EMU .
There can be no doubt that the restoration of the public finances of a Member State of the euro area is its responsibility .
However , the financial crisis has brought the correlation between full , uniform monetary union and the imperfect economic union of the EU to the surface .
It has urgently highlighted the need to set up politically directed European economic governance , for Europeanising economic policy and economic risk , for covering the structural deficits of EMU , for more Europe and for coordinated and solidarity-based European action .
What is needed is a European support mechanism , a European Monetary Fund equipped with the necessary resources and facility for intervention .
Coordinated regulatory intervention is required in order to protect the common currency against speculation .
A detailed examination of the operation of the credit default swaps market is needed .
The European Council is being called upon to give fundamental answers to the crisis in the euro area and to express real solidarity towards Greece in order to overcome the financial crisis .
Greece is not begging .
It is demanding that the short supplies of Greek citizens should not vanish into the pockets of international speculators .
During the current economic and social crisis , combined with the climate crisis , the EU has devised a new strategy for the next 10 years .
The EU 2020 strategy must help create a more inclusive Europe , with an economy which is integrated and environmentally friendly .
The development of research and innovation must become a priority to enable us to combat the effects of climate change and create green , ' intelligent ' jobs .
For this reason , the targets set must be mandatory in order to ensure sustainable growth and the development of a more inclusive labour market and decent living conditions for all citizens .
The EU can only succeed if we know what direction we want to take when it comes to the economy and social policy .
For that reason , particular attention must be given to the drawing up of the 2020 strategy .
The Member States must produce clear concepts , visions and ideas .
Producing a strategy for the next 10 years is certainly an ambitious undertaking , but it should be remembered that this is not about the final details .
The EU needs to ask itself where it wants to position itself and what priorities it is going to set for itself .
One objective which , in the long term , would also yield positive social and economic consequences , would be to create a sustainable energy mix for Europe .
A rethink is necessary in this area , and not only because of the ever dwindling supply of fossil fuels and the impact on the climate that non-renewable energy sources have .
Europe must also take on the leading role when it comes to environmentally friendly technologies .
In my view , however , nuclear power is little suited to leading Europe into a sustainable energy future .
The purpose of the European Council meeting which begins tomorrow is , principally , to discuss the general framework of the Union 's new Europe 2020 strategy and to evaluate emergence from the economic crisis as well as the situation in Greece and other countries in the euro area .
These are closely interrelated topics , for the Union 's strategy for economic growth and employment is related to these issues .
In evaluating the current situation , we need to answer questions about how the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact are being observed in different countries , and where was the European Commission in all this ?
We can assume that the Europe 2020 strategy will be viewed in different ways among the Heads of State or Governments of the Member States .
This is the result of significant conflicts of interests of individual countries , which , in turn , come from differences in levels of development .
For obvious reasons , the countries of the last two enlargements , but not only these countries , are going to fight for a greater emphasis on cohesion policy , infrastructure development and agriculture , although let us not forget innovation and new technologies .
The successful development of Europe and a return to a path of growth in the next decade will be dependent equally on realisation of the objectives of the strategy contained in the Commission 's proposals , but also on continuation of the more traditional policies .
For the Union to cope with the difficult challenges in the global sphere , it must first reduce internal disparities , and this cannot be achieved without respecting the treaty 's principle of solidarity .
The main theme of the Spring European Council is the EU 2020 strategy .
At the start of this year , the unemployment rate reached 10 % , while the figure in countries such as Spain and Latvia reached almost 20 % .
67 % of European citizens feel that job losses are their main concern .
European leaders ' main concern must be to preserve existing jobs and create other new ones to allow European citizens to make a decent living .
This objective can only be guaranteed through making substantial investments in economic and social development , transport and energy infrastructure , agriculture , research , education and health .
This is precisely the reason that the European Council must focus particular attention on the EU 's industrial policy .
According to European statistics , compared to December 2009 , in January 2010 , industrial output fell by 2 % in the euro area and by 0.2 % at EU27 level .
At Community level , industry generates 26.4 % of GDP , but there are Member States where industrial output contributes only 14 % of GDP .
The European Union must retain its global competitiveness .
In order to achieve this , jobs and industrial output must be kept within the European Union and not relocated to third countries .
Development of the European Citizens ' Initiative based on Article 11 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union ( debate )
The following point is the Statement of the Council and of the Committee on Development of the European Citizens ' Initiative based on Article 11 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union .
Allow me to extend a very warm welcome to a group of reporters from my region , Castile-La Mancha in Spain , who have been in the press gallery and are currently visiting the EU 's institutions .
Mr President , I am grateful to Parliament for having had the initiative to hold this debate on , it seems to me , one of the most important , most relevant aspects from the democratic point of view , on the development of the European Union and of Europeanism amongst the European public .
This relates to a very relevant issue , which begins a new stage in the European Union ; as you know , of course , it concerns the Citizens ' Initiative .
In other words , the possibility for at least one million European citizens , both men and women , from the various Member States , to be able to sign a legislative initiative .
A legislative initiative that is , understandably , addressed to and set out before the Commission , which is the EU body with capacity for legislative initiatives .
The Citizens ' Initiative is a very clear priority for the Presidency of the Council .
Very clear .
It is a priority because we believe that it is a priority for Europe .
When a country chairs the Council of the European Union , we believe that it should not implement its own priorities , its own goals simply as a country during that Presidency , but must go further and must be capable of representing Europe 's goals .
The Citizens ' Initiative , with its possibilities , with those entitlements it gives to citizens - to the approximately five hundred million European citizens - is an essential goal of Europe and for that reason , is one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency , not through being a priority of Spain , but through being a priority of Europe .
Citizens are hoping that the Treaty of Lisbon will be implemented as quickly as possible after eight years of losing time through institutional uncertainties .
We have to make up that lost time and essentially respond to citizens , for what they want is participation .
In other words , we have to gradually effect a rebalancing between the Europe that was being built during the 20th century more from the bottom down - albeit a democratic Europe - and a Europe that is also built from the bottom up .
That is why we believe that the Citizens ' Initiative must get going as soon as possible , because it will be evidence of the political will of the Member States , of Parliament and of the Union 's institutions to give the public a voice and enable citizens to participate in the life of the Union .
It will also counteract something that is unfortunately happening in the European Union as well : the fact that political debate is , for the most part , likely to be at national level ; inbred debate .
Here in Brussels , or in Parliament , a European debate is taking place , but in each of the Union 's countries , it is the national debate that predominates , not the European debate .
The citizens ' initiative is a tremendous device for successfully unleashing a genuine European debate in civil society .
The initiatives put forward by citizens of various countries will unleash a European debate in every country , not just a purely national debate .
That is why , Mr President , we have considered the citizens ' initiative to be a priority .
As soon as the Commission submits its draft regulation - we would like to thank the Commission , and I must say especially President Barroso and Vice-President Šefčovič , for the concern with which they have prioritised this issue in the Commission 's work schedule ; we are also grateful that it will take place imminently and very speedily , as Mr Šefčovič will be telling us shortly - we shall have a text that enables us , together with the Council and Parliament , to set in motion what European citizens are undoubtedly hoping for , before this six months are up .
We shall need to work on the different aspects involved , some more technical , others more political , but we must encourage it to happen .
That is why , from the time of the informal meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs at La Granja de San Ildefonso , as Mr Šefčovič and Mrs Malmström - still in office because the new Commission had not yet taken over - will remember , to the first meeting we held with the Commission in Madrid when the new College of Commissioners took over , and now this afternoon in Parliament , we are anxious to push this initiative .
I would ask them - this would be the message I would like them to pass on to you , honourable Members - to show the utmost concern for this initiative .
I know that they will .
Moreover , I would ask them to bring the utmost speed to something that I believe fairly easily unites general consensus in its various aspects , through the discussions that have taken place in the Council , Commission and Parliament , on the committee in which I participated , the Committee for Institutional Affairs , for example .
I therefore think we can put this into practice , as it is one of the aspects of the new stage that is now beginning in the European Union that is most exciting for the public .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would really like to thank Parliament for putting this very important item on the agenda .
I would like to personally thank my dear friend , Diego López Garrido , and the Spanish Presidency , for keeping this on top of the Spanish Presidency 's agenda , because I believe that the instrument we are going to have will really change the way we do politics in the European Union .
Until now , the European construct was based on representative democracy .
I think this was very well reflected also in the Lisbon Treaty , where it is very clear that Parliament 's powers are very much strengthened and when we are going to include the national parliaments more in the European legislative process .
And we needed to complement it with greater inclusion of citizens in this process , through this instrument of participatory democracy .
There was the debate , a while ago , on whether one cancels out the other and whether it is a zero-sum game .
I really do not think so because I consider both elements of representative and participatory democracy as mutually reinforcing , and both help to create real European political and public space .
I also believe that , thanks to this instrument , we will underline even more the importance of European citizenship for Europeans .
As Diego has already said , I am also convinced that this would lead to stronger , better cross-border Europe-wide debates in Europe , more on European topics , and not only on national topics that we see so often in the capitals of our Member States .
The Commission was and is very grateful for the work the European Parliament has already done on the European Citizens ' Initiative .
For us , the resolution you adopted on 7 May last year was very important political guidance and a very important pointer as to how we should prepare this initiative .
As you know , the Commission , when preparing such important pieces of legislation like this one , wants to engage the European public in as wide a discussion as possible .
Therefore , we organised a public debate on this issue , based on the Green Paper that we issued in December last year .
I must say that we have been very positively surprised by the responses we have got .
We got more than 300 responses coming from a range of contributors : individual citizens , organisations , public authorities and even some national parliaments .
We evaluated the responses we got and completed the consultation process with a public debate in Brussels , where more than 150 stakeholders were in attendance , including honourable representatives of Parliament .
If I had to sum up this debate , I would say that there were a lot of innovative , interesting and positive suggestions coming to the Commission 's table .
What were the major conclusions ?
That citizens are very much interested in having this initiative in place as soon as possible , that they would like to have it as user-friendly as possible , that they would like to have it simple , straightforward , understandable and , most of all , accessible .
And , as you would agree , these are clear and very important parameters for having this legislation prepared in this way , because only these parameters would guarantee that citizens would use this instrument for better communication with the Commission and with the European institutions .
Drawing on the results of the consultations and also on the proposals made by the European Parliament , the Commission is currently finalising its proposal .
I hope that the College will adopt the proposals we are working on on 31 March .
I can also tell you that this probably would not be possible without strong encouragement from the Spanish Presidency .
It is very clear that such a top priority for the Presidency must be respected , and I know there is strong commitment from Spain to try to make progress on this initiative within the term of its Presidency .
So , I am very hopeful that , thanks to the constructive approach of the Presidency , the Council and Parliament , we will have this new and very important instrument in place well before the first anniversary of the Lisbon Treaty coming into force .
Mr President , it was in this very House , almost seven years ago , at the end of the constitutional convention , when we Members of the European Parliament and members of the national parliaments succeeded in putting forward a proposal that was accepted by the Presidium .
I had the honour of taking it to the Presidium and we approved it .
Furthermore , I wish to recall here the names of Mr Lamassoure and Mr Mayer , because it was they who drew up the Citizens ' Initiative proposal , a popular initiative that is today incorporated into the treaties .
A popular initiative that is an example of participatory democracy - Mr Šefčovič has explained this very well - and of European democracy , because the issues that need to be covered by this initiative must be European issues , not local issues .
Participation by citizens , therefore , and issues dealt with at European level .
Mr Šefčovič , who is preparing this proposal , has not told us what it involves .
He has left us with our mouths watering .
On behalf of my group , Mr Šefčovič , I would ask that it contain at least three ideas .
Firstly , that it should be clear and simple .
In other words , do not let us make things complicated .
It must be something accessible to the people , so that they can participate without having had to have gone to university .
Secondly , that it should provide for cooperation between the European authorities and the national authorities , because , in my opinion , the national authorities must play an important role in the way signatures are organised .
Thirdly , that we should educate , through the European Commission and through Parliament , by explaining how this legislative initiative may be used to avoid disappointments .
I will give you an example of this that I saw on the Internet .
An online petition has already been launched to use the popular initiative to make it possible to change the seat of Parliament so that there is only one .
Well , this is impossible and we must say so from the start ; it calls for reform in the treaties and cannot be dealt with by the popular initiative .
There is , therefore , a lot of educating to be done , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , and of Parliament , in an initiative that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) endorses and hopes may serve to promote the sense of belonging to the Union and public participation in the Union 's business .

Mr President , Mr Šefčovič , I was very pleased to learn that the Commission plans to approve this draft regulation next week , on 31 March no less .
I believe this is great news , I think it is appropriate and right to congratulate the Commission , Mr Šefčovič and the Spanish Presidency for the boost they have given to this initiative and for agreeing to submit a very important proposal to this House .
Very important because , in the first place , I believe that it strengthens the legitimacy of Parliament .
This is because it gives the public direct access to Parliament , not through parties , but in a way that gives direct access to us here with nothing more or less than a bill .
It is direct public access to Parliament that justly strengthens its legitimacy .
It strengthens the notion of citizenship , which is at the very root of the European project .
From Maastricht to here , it is the citizen who is central to the European project and is the one who is becoming the key player here .
Thirdly , I would say that it is something that gives extraordinary encouragement to the connection between institutions and citizenship , something that we are always demanding and never achieve .
It is the opportunity for people to actually get close to Parliament and learn how it can be useful .
That is what leads me also to make a couple of recommendations that are , to a large extent , in line with those Mr Méndez de Vigo was making before .
I think that it is important to draw up a text that is , in the first place , truly flexible .
In other words , that it should allow that right to be exercised ; that it should afford it to many people , because we need to specify how many countries , what percentages , what systems of signatures .
Be flexible , please !
Make access to this initiative easy , but let us make it clear as well and not disappoint expectations .
There is a fundamental procedure , beforehand , to be carried out by the Commission to say whether or not a draft initiative will be successful , whether or not it is possible to carry it through .
Before signatures are collected , we must say ' yes ' or ' no ' , in order not to disappoint expectations : clarity and flexibility in this project , ladies and gentlemen , and , of course , well done .
The European Citizens ' Initiative is important because it is one of those rare innovations introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon that we might say will , in real terms , increase opportunities for the public to make a contribution .
This is obviously just a small step forward and collecting a million names will be quite a job ; even then , we can only suggest that the Commission should do something .
The Commission will then , in its wisdom , decide whether it does anything or not .
If the citizens ' initiative experiment is successful , as I hope it will be , it is very possible that afterwards , we will be able to make further progress along the path towards direct influence .
That is why it is very important now , as we establish a framework for the citizens ' initiative , that that framework is defined in such a way that the initiative can be introduced easily and that it is clear and comprehensible .
We should not raise false hopes or create misunderstandings .
A procedure for advance conformity has been discussed .
I think that it is something that should be considered very carefully .
It may have its good aspects , but I do not know if it is right to trim down the initiatives at that stage .
Let us allow the public to have their say .
In my opinion , it is important that the threshold for the various Member States - the number of countries involved - should not be too high : a quarter would be sufficient to regard the initiative as having gone ahead and to make it seem likely that it will be taken forward .
We need to ensure that the Regulation does not create needless barriers to the implementation of the citizens ' initiative , but that it makes it clear and simple .
Let us hope that there will be a good deal of initiatives and that the Commission will take them forward .

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner Šefčovič , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we have , at this point , a major opportunity for Europe , this shared Europe of ours , that began with treaties between States - the classical instrument of foreign policy , in which the citizens were more or less spectators - to now increasingly become a Europe of the citizens .
What we are discussing today is the first instrument that provides for direct citizen participation at the European level .
I think it is clear to everyone what an opportunity this offers , in particular , for the creation , for the gradual development , of the likes of a European public , a European demos , which this Europe does need , as we continue to debate matters in France , in Italy , in Portugal , in Germany , et cetera , thus , essentially more or less separately .
As far as relates to the citizens , there are hardly any Europe-wide debates at all .
A European citizens ' initiative of this kind could help to bring such debates about , however , and it could help to overcome , to some extent , Europeans ' feelings that Brussels is a long way away and that they - the citizens - have no voice in Brussels .
What we are doing here is creating a first instrument that will allow the citizens to make their voices heard in Brussels .
The crucial thing , however , is what form we give it .
I want to make the point very clearly that it has not yet been determined whether this measure will ultimately be a success or a disappointment .
That depends on the form that we choose for this measure .
I can well understand , Commissioner Šefčovič , that you are unable to present details to us today , as I know that you have not completely made your mind up yet .
We do have an opportunity , here , however , to perhaps briefly put a couple of points on record together .
There is , therefore , one very particular point that I would like to bring up .
For me , the success of this will rise and fall by the fact that the Commission proposal or at least , ultimately , what is decided as a legislative proposal here , not only contains hurdles and stipulations that citizens must observe , but also stipulates that the Commission must seriously work on a citizens ' initiative that has reached it , as , in my view , it would be extraordinarily frustrating if a million citizens had signed such an initiative and , in the end , the whole thing just disappeared , silently and unceremoniously , into a wastepaper basket .
We need three levels of admissibility checking .
Firstly , the formal level : does it have the necessary signatures ?
Secondly , the legal level : is the matter at hand one of the competences of the European Union , does it not violate current law ?
Then , finally , we need a content-based check , and , in this regard , I think it is important that the citizens are invited to this examination , that there is a hearing , that they are valued and their concerns are discussed , and that they do not just receive some ex cathedra letter from on high .
This is by way of encouragement .
Briefly , I have a second piece of encouragement to mention .
One third , or nine Member States , seems to me - and seems to us in this House collectively - to be too high .
Parliament has declared itself in favour of a quarter , and this figure must be seen in conjunction with the second hurdle , namely the hurdle within the Member States .
In the talks that we have had , I proposed that this be graduated depending on the size of the Member States , as it makes a major difference whether a large or a small State is involved , and I see that there is openness to this proposal .
Due to the time constraints , I cannot now go into any other points .
I hope that we can together bring this first instrument of transnational democracy into being .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I think many of us should welcome any initiative that takes power away from the European Union and other political governments and devolves power closer to the citizen .
In one respect , I would like to make a request for more flexibility .
Why should we predefine the issues on which citizens can raise an initiative ?
If they want to raise an issue , let us be held accountable and let us give our view on whatever we think .
If , for example , it is on the place where Parliament should sit , we should respond .
Why should we avoid the issue ?
Let us tackle what the citizens are asking us head on .
There is one issue that I would like to make clear , and that is transparency .
It is going to be difficult for any individual , or group of citizens , on their own to collect the required number of signatures .
Therefore , you might see a number of organisations organising the collection of these signatures .
They should be transparent about their funding , so that you do not get organisations who hijack the process to basically request more funding for initiatives they believe in .
Let it truly be an initiative of the citizens and not of civil society organisations and NGOs .
Mr President , our citizens ' mistrust of the European Union is growing .
The low turn-out at the EU elections speaks volumes .
If the European Citizens ' Initiative is interpreted in such a way that only a few are able to take advantage of it , this will only exacerbate the situation .
Our group is therefore calling for the rules not to be made too stringent .
For example , issues may still be relevant to Europe as a whole even if the first million signatures come from only a very few countries .
However , as the European Parliament , we can also do something to take the citizens ' initiative seriously .
We can take a decision in this Chamber that every time a citizens ' initiative is approved , we will undertake to conduct a debate here - a debate that may lead to a statement on the initiative in question .
In this way , we will also be taking citizens ' wishes seriously and I hope that the groups can work together to bring about the adoption of something along these lines , for example , in the form of an amendment to the rules of procedure .
( NL ) Mr President , I have been listening to everything that has been said here up to now with clear-headed , and thus very great , scepticism .
After all , our own experience - gathered from the referendums in the Netherlands , France and , last but not least , Ireland - has taught us how the eurocracy responds to the will of the people and expressions of this will .
What is this European Citizens ' Initiative , in essence ?
In essence , it is a mere palliative , a sham intended to suggest a modicum of citizens ' involvement in the Treaty of Lisbon without really bringing that involvement into the decision-making process .
Indeed , this is clear from everything we have learned up to now : complicated procedures , constraints on the topics and , if anything should emerge in the end , this is to be considered and , in particular , decided on in exactly the same eurocratic , rather undemocratic cenacles as before .
What we need in Europe are binding referendums , for example , on the accession of Turkey .
These are necessary in order to restore democracy but , unfortunately , the European Citizens ' Initiative is merely a kind of castrated caricature of such things .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcomed the statements by Mr López Garrido and Mr Šefčovič .
The new Treaty of Lisbon urges us to swiftly adopt a systematic course of action to promote the citizens ' initiative , which is testament to the existence of a European people .
Indeed , it is a well-known fact that one of the harshest criticisms of the Union is that it is not a fully democratic structure .
The Treaty of Lisbon has sought to reduce the democratic deficit in several ways , including by making provision for at least one million European citizens to submit a proposal for a legislative initiative .
This new instrument , in order to be a serious tool , will have to produce legal effects of a certain importance .
It certainly cannot have equivalent value to the pre-existing petitions which are signed by a wide range of individuals - a clear distinction must be made - and it must therefore be regulated in such a way as to prevent its abuse and still allow broad discussion , as the expression of informed and verifiable popular consensus .
However , the most important aspect of the initiative laid down in Article 11 of the Treaty of Lisbon is its symbolic significance : the democratic deficit is being tackled not only by the decision-making power of the people 's representatives , but even more so by the very existence of a European people which is not just the mathematical sum of the citizens of the individual nations .

Therefore , with regard to the rules we are considering , there are two aspects that I consider to be particularly important : the first concerns the subject matter , which must be - as someone already said - a European issue ; the second is the distribution of the minimum number of signatories across a significant number of Member States , representing an appropriate percentage with respect to the electoral weight of each country .
I hope that the new rules will help citizens of France , Italy , Germany , Spain and so on feel that they are , first and foremost , citizens of Europe .
Mr President , the European Citizens ' Initiative is one of the major innovations of the Lisbon Treaty , aimed at increasing direct democracy in the European Union .
This new tool should be correctly used by being fully exploited .
Furthermore , its credibility must be assured .
In this respect , serious requirements need to be addressed .
Let me briefly mention only two , knowing that there are several others .
The collected signatures must be verified appropriately .
This is a crucial question that can cause serious problems , as the relevant legislation is very different in our Member States .
We must find the optimal solution - the appropriate balance between different rules and common requirements .
The second topic is the admissibility of the initiative .
Again , every aspect must be examined carefully in order to find the best way to go .
Should the topic of the public discussion be limited in the defence of the values of the Union , or should freedom of expression prevail ?
Are they mutually inclusive principles ?
I welcome and am grateful for the progressive work of Vice-President Šefčovič and the Spanish Presidency .
I am glad that the stakeholders had the opportunity in February to discuss the majority of the questions that need to be solved so that the citizens ' initiative is operational .
I would really like to know the outcome of the meeting .
How is the Commission going to handle the issue of verification and admissibility of an initiative , and at what stage ?
Of course , when we prepare a report here in the European Parliament , we really have to be clear what approach we are going to deal with .
I strongly believe that we are here to represent the European citizens and we have to be clear that we are capable of sending a very strong message for all of us .
I strongly believe that the Spanish Presidency is doing an excellent job as a member of the trio together with Belgium and Hungary , my good comrades .
So , thank you very much again , Vice-President . You did an excellent job .
Let us continue .
Mr President , this is an instrument that has huge potential and could deliver an important democratic signal to Europe .
When I think of my own country , if you want to get forward a legislative initiative in the UK , you have to find a Member of Parliament , they have to be lucky enough to win an annual ballot or lottery , and then it is likely to get talked out by the government of the day .
So , I think we are about to deliver something very important and very exciting into the hands of Europe 's citizens .
That makes me proud , but it has to be user-friendly , accessible and credible , and that means we will have to be reasonably strict about it being within EU competence and adhering to human rights at the outset .
We will have to be able and want to give support to promoters to meet the technical requirements .
Most importantly , parliamentarians should be prepared to act together with initiators of an initiative .
This does not compromise our rights .
It is something that we can join hands with citizens over , but they must direct their message to the Commission .
We can help , and that way we can establish together a real European democracy .

( FR ) Mr President , my colleague , Mr Häfner , has mentioned some of the conditions for ensuring that this initiative is , as he said , feasible , credible and legitimate .
I , for my part , would like to draw this House 's attention , on the one hand , to the opinion of the Economic and Social Council , which is very interesting , and which could also shed light on the decisions to be taken and , on the other hand , to stress the fact that participatory democracy works when everyone - the MEPs , the Council , civil society organisations and unorganised citizens for whom the citizens ' initiative is an opportunity - has a role to play .
In this regard , Commissioner , pursuant to Article 11 of the treaty , which also provides for the possibility of establishing a structural and organised dialogue with civil society , I would like to ask you what kind of initiative you envisage - on the model of the social dialogue provided for by the treaties - and to know whether , alongside the citizens ' initiative , which is very interesting and very useful , you intend to organise the dialogue with civil society in a structural and interinstitutional manner .
( NL ) Mr President , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , citizens can launch citizens ' initiatives .
This represents progress , as citizens are still too far removed from Europe and it is difficult to involve them in policy development .
I see the European Citizens ' Initiative as a good opportunity to increase support for Europe among citizens .
Mr President , I wish to draw attention expressly to a citizens ' initiative that was launched recently .
It is an initiative by Mr Kastler , who is present here today , and it calls for Sundays to be kept free as a day of rest and reserved for family and contemplation .
I endorse his plea fully and wholeheartedly , and am working with him to collect as many signatures as possible in the Netherlands .
I would appeal to everyone to support and publicise this initiative .
Such initiatives can indicate what citizens consider important .
I call on Parliament and the Commission to take these signals very seriously , as Europe is there for citizens , not the other way round .
( PL ) Mr President , the increased role which the Treaty of Lisbon gives to the European Parliament , as well as the European Citizens ' Initiative , are a very important step towards the strengthening of European democracy .
However , in order for the initiative to fulfil its role , procedures must exist which would not limit its democratic character at the outset .
The European Parliament does not , in fact , play any role in the process of the citizens ' initiative at present .
The previous Parliament voted that the Commission should decide which of the initiatives that are submitted will be accepted and which rejected .
I think the European Parliament 's role should be much greater , here .
Parliament should work together with the Commission to evaluate and give opinions on initiatives which are submitted .
In this way , decisions on the admissibility of proposed initiatives would lie equally in the hands of the representatives of the electorate , and not only of the executive .
Parliament is currently the only European Union institution which is chosen in free , democratic elections , and the citizens ' initiative is , in fact , about the problems and views of the people .
If an initiative is rejected by the Commission , and so by the executive which is supposed to put it into effect , this may not be understood by the citizens .
It is also important that the organiser of an initiative - a social organisation or a non-governmental organisation - clearly and explicitly specifies the subject and objective of the initiative , although it does not necessarily have to submit a motion for legislation .
I think , too , that the procedures concerning initiatives should be harmonised in the Member States , because too much variety will make it difficult for us to gain broad support for these initiatives .
( SK ) The citizens ' initiative , as one of the powers of EU citizens , represents significant progress for democracy and for the direct participation of the broader public in political life .
I very much appreciate and value your approach in this matter , Commissioner Šefčovič .
I would now like to refer to the questions put by my colleague , Zita Gurmai , because I , too , consider it important to find an answer to some of these questions .
One of them concerns the place and method of formalisation , in other words , the place where signatures will be collected under an initiative , be it in a government office or somewhere on the street .
In connection with this , there is also the question of whether there will be a conflict with other human rights , for example , the right to freedom of expression .
The second question concerns the financing of the whole process .
Who , therefore , will be responsible for financing citizens ' initiatives ?
Will it be the European Union or will it be the Member States or the actual citizens who are mounting an initiative ?
In the worst case scenario , it would amount to a violation of democratic principle by establishing solvency as a condition of involvement .
Last but not least , it will be essential for the Commission to specify a precise time limit within which these signatures will be collected , or , as the case may be , collected in a valid manner , not forgetting , in particular , the need to retain the openness and transparency of the whole mechanism in such a way as to prevent it being abused by the interest groups that operate throughout the EU .
I offer you my sincere thanks , Commissioner , and I will be keeping my fingers crossed for you to succeed in this .
Mr President , as somebody who has campaigned twice for a ' yes ' vote to Lisbon and promoted the citizens ' initiative as positive , I disagree with my colleague .
I think it is not just a fig leaf .
Yes , there are constraints , but it has potential , and it is a real meaningful step towards facilitating participatory democracy .
I have discussed this matter with citizens .
I have facilitated citizens to participate in the Commission 's consultation and in the hearings in the Petitions Committee .
However , we must not just consult with citizens : we must listen to what they say and we must ensure that their views are taken on board in any legislation we produce .
This is an opportunity for the EU institutions to clearly show that the citizens ' initiative will reflect the views of European citizens from start to finish .
This legislation must be citizen-friendly and it must be highly visible .
There must also be easily accessible assistance and help given to citizens who wish to organise a petition .
It should be made clear where the Commission can act and where the Commission cannot act .
It would simply lead to further accusations of a democratic deficit and cynicism and anger on behalf of citizens if a million signatures were to be gathered for a petition and then it were deemed to be outside the competence of the EU .
So we need absolute clarity on this and we need to be proactive .
While we need to squeeze every possibility out of this legislation , we must not promise more than we can deliver .
The citizens ' initiative is like a newborn baby .
It has unlimited potential but it must be handled with care when it takes its first tentative steps .
( DE ) Mr President , in designing this instrument , we have an enormous responsibility to bear , as the hopes of citizens who think European and who want to push and assert European concerns at European level are riding on us .
We must avoid those errors that are currently looming in relation to petitions at all costs .
We need to avoid the European Citizens ' Initiative becoming just a wailing wall where there is no follow-up to the complaints made .
Active citizens are awaiting the result ; they are waiting to see what form we give to the initiative .
If we set the hurdles too high , we will be frustrating a major potential for Europe .
Think about it .
It will take an enormous effort for interested parties in a particular subject to collect a million signatures .
If these are then thrown straight into the bin without being properly dealt with and without the proper follow-up , then we have probably done democracy in Europe a disservice .
It is therefore of particular importance how the Commission deals with this concern .
For me , this is the key issue .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Šefčovič , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , the citizens ' initiative is an additional contribution to the creation of a true European civil society .
It is a new opportunity for European citizens to have a greater say in the decision-making process .
I hope that its introduction will help strengthen the sentiment of belonging to the same entity , our Europe , since this European sentiment is unfortunately very weak and all too often lacking .
Looking beyond the technical , administrative and practical aspects associated with the actual implementation of the initiative , I believe that our message must , above all , be political .
Indeed , we must not lose sight of the guiding principle that underpins the introduction of this initiative : bringing citizens closer to the institutions , stimulating their interest in Europe , promoting their involvement , and making them stakeholders of European policies .
That is what we must always bear in mind .
Whether we are talking about the minimum number of Member States from which the signatures derive , the collection , verification and checking of those signatures , or the admissibility of initiatives , we will have to ensure that citizens are not hindered in their desire to present an initiative .
For example , I would like to point out that the costs involved in having a notary validate the signatures must be reasonable .
Some Member States , which have already introduced this type of initiative at national level , at times charge excessive amounts .
It is these kinds of obstacles that we must avoid in the case of the citizens ' initiative .
Lastly , we must not lose sight of the enhanced role of our Parliament .
As the guardian of the democratic will of the European citizens and the guarantor of budgetary transparency , it must have a greater involvement in the process of implementing the initiative .
Only in this way will we make the Union 's extra bit of soul a true democratic heart .
Mr President , this is one of the most important democratic advances for the European Union .
Two thirds of the people of Ireland voted for the Lisbon Treaty and one of the reasons was because of the availability of this citizens ' initiative .
For the first time , citizens on a transnational basis can request that the Commission bring forward proposals .
But this needs to be a transparent process .
We must know who is organising these initiatives and we must know who is funding these initiatives .
They must not be captured by corporate interests .
The Commission , which will have to decide on whether or not to act on a proposal , must not be the body that decides on its admissibility , in my view .
I believe we must expand the role of the Ombudsman to decide on a central European level what is admissible and what is not admissible .
The minimum number of states that is necessary , I believe , should be seven , not nine , as proposed or indeed as suggested by the Commission , and I must argue and insist that the one million threshold set by the treaty should not be breached .
It must not be raised by having a high proportion of citizens in Member States and a high number of Member States .
It is extremely important that the treaties are complied with .
And , finally , could I say that I believe it should be possible to enable citizens to register on the Internet .
( ES ) Mr President , I want to begin in Spanish by thanking the Spanish Presidency for having taken the decision to present the initiative earlier than was originally expected .
Many thanks for that .
( DE ) I will now continue in German .
I would like to thank the Commission for having taken on the Spanish Presidency 's initiative and for having come out and said , ' OK , we will act quicker than that , we will put forward the proposal next week ' .
We hope that there will be a finished proposal by the summer .
That is important in order to meet the expectations of the citizens .
Like many of those who have spoken before me , I believe the planned nine-country hurdle is just too high .
My proposal would be to start at five , which is a fifth of the Member States .
It is not easy to collect a million signatures , even if , perhaps , you can use the Internet to do so .
It is necessary , however , to show the people that we want them to participate in this shared Europe of ours and to hold a real European debate .
I think it is important that the legal , formal and content-based examination of this matter takes place right from the outset and not once people have already begun to collect signatures .
There should also be support for the initiatives , for example , with translations .
If that happens , we will be able to once again enthuse the citizens about our shared Europe - and more strongly , too .
( SK ) Commissioner , thank you for providing an outline of the next steps .
We have progressed from conceptual goals and several lines of text in the Treaty of Lisbon to a directive through which the EU will be regulated .
The citizens ' initiative shows the citizens of the EU a further means of European integration .
Member State citizens will have the opportunity to lobby European institutions .
It should be pointed out , however , that the right to a citizens ' initiative may be a democratic instrument , but it also opens the door to a federalised EU .
I support the citizens ' initiative , but it will be necessary to integrate the competent Member State authorities into it as much as possible .
The protection of national constitutions must be given precedence and guaranteed .
As the Commissioner said , this initiative must be balanced , and I might add that in no case should it be allowed to serve as a pretext which might threaten the principle of subsidiarity .
The framework for the application of this measure must be clearly defined , so that we can avoid unrealistic expectations on the part of some institutions , and particularly on the part of EU citizens .
Mr President , I am very happy with the citizens ' initiative .
If you do not mind , I will switch to Dutch to explain why I am so happy !
( NL ) Mr President , I am delighted with the European Citizens ' Initiative because citizens currently have the chance to indicate their wishes just once every five years , but this way they will be able to play a genuine role in the European Union in the interim , too .
It is also important , therefore , that they know when they can come knocking at our door .
In fact , it is not our door but that of the European Commission .
Does the man on the street know when it is possible to appeal to the Commission ?
A far-reaching information campaign is necessary to let citizens know .
I must say that the critical point to make in this regard is that the citizens ' initiative will be truly mature only if all the European institutions take the one million citizens ' voices seriously ; and ministers and Heads of State or Government should also listen to these .
Of course , this means that , if one million European citizens wish to dispense with the Strasbourg site , that desire too must be heeded .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that this right of initiative granted to European citizens by the treaty will help bring the peoples closer to Europe and to the European institutions to a greater degree than the costly awareness campaigns funded by the Union which , hitherto , have produced modest results : electoral turnouts confirm this .

This initiative certainly further strengthens democracy , since it allows citizens to propose laws directly .
In other words , it is a form of direct democracy which complements parliamentary representation .
We must not let this opportunity slip through our fingers .
The Commission must make this right of initiative straightforward , understandable and accessible , and assist and support citizens from the initial stage of the process through to the signature collection stage , for example , by determining the admissibility of their proposals .
This is a practical contribution to European democracy .
( EL ) Mr President , we often refer to the need to increase the participation of European citizens , to the need for us to get closer to the Union 's institutions , to the citizens of all the Member States .
We debated this intensively at the last European elections , when we saw in many Member States that participation was particularly low .
A very important event has occurred between then and now , which has changed the very structure and operation of the Union .
I refer , of course , to the Treaty of Lisbon , an important treaty , the epicentre of which is the citizen , the basic pillar of which is how all of us , Parliament , the Commission and the Council , can get closer to the citizens .
This principle finds specific expression in the citizens ' initiative in Article 11 ( 4 ) .
This is an important and exceptional arrangement which promotes democracy , political equality and transparency .
Of course , what we want is for this arrangement to be applied correctly and to see it in practice .
This is where the problems arise .
While all my fellow members are right to highlight the need for this procedure to be reliable , for the role of the Commission and the role of Parliament to be defined , we must all be able to work together so that this important citizens ' initiative , if signatures are collected , does not go to waste .
My conclusion is this : we all have a responsibility to promote this initiative .
We all have a responsibility to explain this right which all our fellow European citizens now have , to give them to understand that they personally can set procedures in motion , without any other intervention , at the level of the Union 's institutions .
Above all , our message must be clear and must be contained in a simple , understandable , comprehensible procedure which , if nothing else , functions for everyone , functions for the citizens , functions for Parliament , for the Union 's institutions , for the Member States and for all stakeholders in the procedure .
( PT ) Only a few months ago , some were saying that the Treaty of Lisbon would never come into force .
Yet here we are , beginning to think about how we are going to implement it and laying down some of its provisions .
The Treaty of Lisbon has an important contribution to make in fighting the democratic deficit .
I am talking about the strengthening of parliaments ( both the European Parliament and national parliaments ) .
Even more importantly , I am talking about investment in a Europe for the public , with rules on the area of freedom , security and justice , on monitoring subsidiarity , and with the realisation of this innovative initiative which stems from public action .
I endorse what has been said by many of my fellow Members and especially by my colleague , Mr Méndez de Vigo , but I would like to emphasise that when regulating this instrument , we must ensure that it is truly Europe-wide .
It needs , of course , to avoid being the expression of the will of the public in only one country or a limited number of countries . We do , however , need to seek a solution that will encourage and stimulate public involvement .
If we have to choose between being very strict and rigorous or being more generous , I would err on the side of being more generous .
If we come up with solutions that discourage public participation , we are betraying the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon and denying the European public because , ladies and gentlemen , we need more Europe and a Europe that is aimed more at the public .
We need the European public to have greater involvement and to actively exercise their citizenship .
( SL ) I would like to express my satisfaction and pleasure that we are today discussing this initiative which will , I am sure , reduce what we call the democratic deficit or partially eliminate it .
Generally speaking , it is a fact that democracy is today taking a backwards step .
As some research suggests , democratic dialogue is becoming narrower and the notion of democracy is being confined merely to democratic elections and nothing more .
All of this has an impact on the mood of our citizens , who are becoming increasingly passive , and is reflected in low electoral turnouts , or even in a lack of trust in the institutions of democracy .
For this reason , it is very important that we have adopted the Treaty of Lisbon because it expands the role of parliament , both the role of national parliaments and that of the European Parliament .
Above all , it enables citizens to take forward initiatives and I am delighted that is the case .
As a result , we are now witnessing something that we could describe as a European democracy project taking shape on a European level and I think that we have already made a major leap forward in this respect .
However , this so-called European democracy must , of course , be further extended to cover other areas , including , for example , nominations for the European Commission .
In brief , there are a number of areas where the European institutions involved could be further extended in democratic terms .
I firmly believe that this project , i.e. this initiative , could greatly strengthen European democracy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have a wonderful opportunity today : the chance to assert a value , namely the instrument of participatory democracy being offered to citizens under the Treaty of Lisbon .
The fact that after only a few months we are discussing this instrument is , in my view , in itself an absolute value that should be safeguarded .
I am certain that it will , of course , be crucial to determine clearly and precisely what is meant by a significant number of Member States .
We must use a criterion which combines , on the one hand , the citizens ' drive to participate in the institutions and , on the other , our drive to give this instrument democratic validity .
Naturally , the procedures must be simplified , straightforward and flexible .
I personally have visited several schools in the last few weeks , and was met with a great willingness to listen , but , above all , I gained a great awareness of the increased role that children wish to play in a Europe which is changing , in particular , under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Therefore we need transparency , objectivity and change in order for this instrument to serve society but , at the same time , to serve the institutions .
In this regard , Parliament is being called upon , together with the Commission and the Council , to decide , precisely , on simplified procedures .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those people who has brought one of the first citizens ' initiative petitions into being , specifically , on the subject of protecting Sundays .
Today , we have the pleasure of debating - and then deciding upon - a potential way of involving the citizens in the process of Europe 's political work .
That means that this is a potential way to bring about more democracy and to counter Europe-fatigue .
That said , I am not here just to give praise .
Rather , I have two requests to make of you , when you now take this Regulation into its final phase .
Firstly , we Europeans are technologically advanced people .
I would like to ask you to make the Internet the definitive medium so that a citizens ' initiative with a million signatures is also admissible with electronic signatures , which are also legally binding .
Secondly , I would like to point out that what we are doing here is just a first step .
I would like to go a step further .
We now have a right of initiative for the citizens .
It would be my wish , however , for us to also have referendums , as we have in my home region of Bavaria , at the European level in future .
What happens is that there is a petition for a referendum , then , when enough people have put their name to it , there is the possibility of a referendum .
It would be my wish that we should also have this in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , public consultations on the European Citizens ' Initiative have just ended , and it turns out that the consultations attracted only 323 respondents .
This result shows that all the European Union institutions should now strongly engage in promoting this new instrument , because at the moment , it can be seen that very few people are aware of its existence .
The results of the consultation do , however , show the direction which the Commission should take in framing appropriate executive legislation .
Firstly , it is essential to establish common principles , which would apply throughout the Union , for the collection and authentication of signatures , and also to ensure that citizens will be subject to the same requirements , for example , as regards age .
Another important matter is the introduction of a certain form of evaluating admissibility ex ante , with the assumption that initiatives and initiators are aware that formal recognition of admissibility is not equivalent to the Commission putting forward a legislative proposal on a particular matter .
I am sure the European Citizens ' Initiative can become an important instrument by means of which debate will be conducted in the future - broad debate on matters of interest to all Europeans .
For this reason , I eagerly await an appropriate regulation from the Commission .
Mr President , the use of the referendum - direct democracy - is not an exotic version of democracy .
It is the original form - government by the people and not government on behalf of the people .
So perhaps we should be grateful to the EU for introducing this .
I think not .
The EU only likes democracy when it can manage it and arrange for a result that it wants .
We have heard that the power to call such a referendum will be limited by mischievous provisions , such as the EU 's competence and the EU 's own version of human rights , which , in reality , means political repression , limitation on freedom of speech and even on freedom of thought .
One final point is that democracy means government by the people - an identifiable and cohesive unit - and not government by an arbitrary collection of persons .
Mass migration has made this difficult to achieve .
Europe as a whole has become even less of a single people than it might otherwise have been .
Nevertheless , it is better than nothing , and we might , at least , demonstrate that this initiative was a hollow promise .
( RO ) I believe that the inclusion of the European Citizens ' Initiative in the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon marks an important step in the consolidation of democracy in the European Union .
Another important way of exercising and consolidating democracy is the use of referendums .
I wish to digress at this point by telling you that three referendums have been held in Romania since 2004 , with the last one on the switch to a unicameral system and a reduction in the number of MPs .
There was a 51 % turnout , with an overwhelming majority voting in favour of the proposal .
I wish to welcome the Commission 's initiative in launching a broad public consultation on the regulation online .
This will determine the number of states from which signatures need to be collected , the minimum number of signatures from each country , and the rules for verifying them .
I would like to end by asking the Commission when it thinks that this regulation will come into force , as I believe it must be finalised as soon as possible .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the last few years , the European Union has experienced a crisis of confidence on the part of its citizens .
One of the signs of this is the very low turnout for elections to the European Parliament , arising from the widely-held feeling that citizens cannot influence events in the EU through their vote in any way whatsoever .
I therefore warmly welcome the possibility of citizens ' initiatives which the Treaty of Lisbon opens up for EU citizens , and in this context , also the public consultation with the Commission and the Green Paper on how to bring the citizens ' initiative to life in concrete terms .
I agree in principle with most of the proposals in the Green Paper .
However , if we hold out a helping hand , we should not at the same time be afraid that EU citizens will grasp it .
Therefore , if we care about maximising the dialogue with citizens , I consider some of these limiting measures to be too strict .
These mainly concern the minimum number of Member States that the citizens signing an initiative must come from , and the definition of a so-called substantial number of states .
The proposal for one out of three states , in other words , nine at present , is , in my opinion , discouraging and unrealistic for prospective initiatives in practical terms .
A reduction in this number to 20 % would , I believe , be a step in the right direction for the general public of the EU , who will , for example , also take note of the greater emphasis being placed on the role of the macro-regions in creating EU policy .
And why not ?
( HU ) The possibility of a European Citizens ' Initiative can promote the development of public debates on European questions , leading to a true European public sphere .
The representatives of civil society can address those social questions which the political groups now represented in the European Parliament cannot or do not wish to raise .
Of these questions , I would like to emphasise one in particular .
I consider it important that , parallel to the advance notice of proposals for a resolution and even before the gathering of signatures begins or perhaps after a certain number of signatures have been collected , the Commission should give an opinion , based on its own competence and on Community law , as to whether the proposal in question would be acceptable .
A rejection on formal grounds or due to a lack of legal basis after the million signatures have been collected can portray not only the Commission but the entire European Union in a very unfavourable light .
( LT ) The Treaty of Lisbon provides for the strengthening of the role of civil society in European institutions and the opportunity for European citizens to initiate legislative proposals .
The citizens ' right of initiative would allow no fewer than a million citizens to call on the European Commission to take law-making initiatives in a specific area .
However , collecting such an amount of voters ' signatures is really difficult ; therefore , in order to establish an effective mechanism for democratic participation and to ensure the accessibility of this initiative to citizens , the opportunity must be provided to initiate a proposal , with clear guidelines and a simplified and appropriate procedure .
Unfortunately , since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force , the citizens ' right of initiative has not been put into practice .
None of the aspects of the citizens ' initiative have been discussed yet , and there is no concrete action plan on how to guarantee the transparency of initiatives and democratic accountability , so that citizens do not fall victim to the representation of large companies ' interests .
Thus , the civil dialogue is the most important element of the democratic model of Europe and of my own country of Lithuania and is an essential foundation for this , so I call on the Commission to take all measures to ensure that this citizens ' right of initiative is properly implemented as soon as possible .
( GA ) Mr President , our colleagues have done many interesting things in relation to this issue and they agreed unanimously that this is a wonderful facility to put in the hands of our citizens .
The citizens ' initiative was a powerful and convincing argument against the ' no ' side in the Treaty of Lisbon referendum in Ireland , especially when they argued that it was a grab for power by the European Union rather than a truly democratic attempt to involve the citizens .
But there is a big difference between putting something into a treaty and putting it into effect , and there is a big challenge here for us .
On the one hand , there is a danger - and a real danger - that the process could be hijacked by vested interest groups and by powerful lobbies who would have no difficulty in getting a million signatures .
That is why the suggestion by my colleague , Mr De Rossa , concerning the involvement of the Ombudsman , might be well worth considering .
On the other hand , however , this has real possibilities for citizens .
One initiative started by my colleague , Mr de Castro , is well worth considering , that of making Sunday special and whether we want to rest on the seventh day , like our creator , or treat it the same as any other day of the week .
That is an important consideration .
So I think there is great scope here , and I look forward to its development .
Mr President , I must express my deep satisfaction regarding the debate that has taken place .
This was , moreover , a debate that has taken place at the request of Parliament , which specifically wanted this debate to be held on the citizens ' initiative , and I consider there have been a string of speeches in which I have seen absolutely unanimous support for this as a priority of the Spanish Presidency of the Council .
Furthermore , there is support for it to be carried out quickly .
In this respect , I believe that Mr Šefčovič 's announcement of the presentation of the text of the regulation on 31 March was welcomed with great satisfaction by all of you as well .
Once again , I thank the Commission for the speed , concern and enthusiasm with which it has dealt with this matter and the fact that we can therefore , as of now , begin this legislative procedure .
I hope that it will end as soon as possible with the setting in motion of this legislative initiative , which almost everyone who spoke considers necessary , urgent and indispensable .
I believe that this can , moreover , be interpreted as support by all the parliamentary groups and all the honourable Members , including those who , like Mr Kamall , in his extraordinary speech , supported the popular legislative initiative because , in his opinion , it will weaken the European Union .
Mr Kamall is not here ... I am sorry that he is not , I am sorry to give him bad news and discourage him , because this initiative will strengthen the European Union , not weaken it at all .
It will strengthen it because it is an initiative which , in short , strengthens the two essential concepts of the European Union : democracy and citizenship .
These are the two main political pillars of the European Union : democracy and citizenship .
This is an initiative which , to some extent , tries to offset that paradox which we see : a European Union that is increasingly powerful , and Parliament is proof of that ; that is increasingly influential ; and that has an ever greater effect on the lives of the public .
Yet it is a European Union that is unconnected with the debate that is carried out in each country .
It is a paradox that affects democracy itself .
This citizens ' initiative will , as Mr Méndez de Vigo said , extend a series of debates of European importance , on issues that are European , not local .
This is because it forces contact between people from different countries ; therefore , it is clearly European in effect .
It is undoubtedly one way of strengthening this democracy , and also the citizenship or European demos referred to by Mr Casini , who is , moreover , Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which will , for the most part , be dealing with this initiative .
That citizenship that Mr Jáuregui considered so important in his speech , that so much represents the roots of the European Union ; or Mr Sógor , who referred to it as well ; or Mr Häfner , who mentioned it too .
As Mr Kastler also said , this initiative must be applied .

It is an appeal to citizens , because European civic identity develops when it is put into practice ; not simply when a right is obtained , but when that right is put into practice and exercised .
That is what I think is the important thing that should happen as soon as this citizens ' initiative enters into force .
I once again repeat my thanks to the Commission and to Parliament , which , I am sure , will deal with this matter meticulously , thoroughly and swiftly .
Mr Iacolino mentioned a particularly speedy procedure to enable us to see this initiative emerge as soon as possible and Mrs Băsescu , in her speech , also appealed for the speed with which we want to see the initiative set in motion .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would first like to thank Diego for an excellent summary of today 's debate .
I would like to thank all of you for your support and positive expectations linked to the citizens ' initiative .
I can assure you that I will be happy to present to you the proposal at the earliest convenience after its adoption .
Because of time constraints and the fact that the proposal is not yet finalised , we could not go into details today .
However , I am very thankful for your views and opinions because they really reflected the nature and the quality of the views and opinions we have been collecting in the preparations of the European Citizens ' Initiative .
There are many things on which we all agree .
The first one is , clearly , transparency .
I can assure you that we are looking for a solution which would guarantee , through the registration of the initiative by the Commission , that we would know who the organisers are and how they are financed .
We would have a very strong indication whether the initiative is really genuine , whether it is really a citizens ' initiative , and whether it is really a European initiative .
I think it must include all these elements in order to make good and successful use of this new instrument .
We all agree on practicality . We would like to have a system which is user-friendly .
We would like to create a system where the citizens would not have the feeling that they have to go through a very burdensome procedure to collect or to give their signatures .
We are looking into these opportunities and , of course , we are looking into ways in which modern IT technology - so characteristic of our century - can be used .
It is clear that there are different systems for the verification of signatures in the Member States .
One of the clear responses we gathered from the public consultation was that the citizens would prefer having a certain uniformity when it comes to the verification and the collection of signatures .
At the same time , we got the clear message from the Member States that we should look for a system which would not be too burdensome or too complicated for the national authorities , because it would be the Member States who would have to verify that the signatures collected for the citizens ' initiative are real and genuine .
I listened very carefully to your calls for having very clear procedures once the initiative is successful and once the signatures are collected .
I would like to assure you that we will definitely do that . In the proposal , there will be very clear deadlines - when , how and in what timeframe the Commission will have to react when the citizens ' initiative is successful .
As you have listened to the opinions here , you will agree with me that the most difficult issue we have to tackle is the issue of admissibility - how we can find a solution which would avoid the frustration of citizens , how we can protect EU values , and how we can keep this institute of the European Citizens ' Initiative serious and real .
I can assure you that there are no easy answers to these questions and to these slightly contradictory requests .
The Commission is looking into the option which would defend European values and human rights from the outset .
At the same time , we would like to have a clear view that the proposals for the citizens ' initiative have a genuine potential to be successful .
We would like to avoid possible abuse where we might get proposals for the initiative every second week on nonsensical issues on which there would be an obligation to pronounce a view on admissibility , and then for it to be appealed to the Court - initiatives whose only reason for proposal would be the self-promotion of the potential organisers for negative political agenda .
We have also to bear this in mind .
I hope that we will find the right balance on how to keep this admissibility check in adequate proportion .
To give a short answer to Vice-President Durant 's question concerning communication with civil society , I think that the European Citizens ' Initiative is the best answer .
We have a very good structured dialogue organised by the European Economic and Social Committee and I had a very lengthy debate with them just two weeks ago .
I think that strong and wide public consultations are taking place through the smart-legislating proposals .
We will widen this and use it even more in the future .
In view of the time , let me conclude by saying that I am really looking forward to being back soon with a proposal .
I look forward to our mutual discussion on this issue and what I hope will be very dynamic and speedy procedures so that we can have this very important instrument approved as soon as possible .
The item is hereby closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The new legislative framework on the European Citizens ' Initiative is undoubtedly welcome .
There had long been a case for citizens to have access to such an instrument .
On the other hand , I share the sentiments of those who have taken the floor today and called for the regulations which will be used as the basis for implementing the citizens ' initiative to be simple , accessible , easy to understand and involve as little red tape as possible .
This is the only way that the citizens ' initiative will actually manage to become a proper instrument available to Europeans , which they can use to make their voice heard .
This is the only way that the EU will successfully move closer to its citizens and become more democratic .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives the citizens of the European Union the right to propose a legislative initiative .
This is one of the most important steps in the building of civil democracy and direct inclusion of the citizens in the EU decision-making process .
The European Citizens ' Initiative can contribute to a reduction in the gap between the institutions and the citizens , and can support the development of European civil society .
Therefore , rapid adoption of a regulation to govern the process , conditions and procedures for presentation of such an initiative is essential .
The citizens of the European Union eagerly await this .
The European Citizens ' Initiative is mainly about greater involvement of the citizens in creating European law .
Therefore , I would like to raise the matter of digital signatures in the citizens ' initiative , as an additional channel for attracting interest in European politics .
Since we can already vote via the Internet and carry out banking operations online , we are certainly able to develop a secure system which would allow us to identify digital signatures .
Transparency of procedures is also important .
The organisers of initiatives must be publicly responsible for transparency concerning the financing of the campaign to collect signatures .
Even the establishment of clear criteria for the course of such a campaign does not ensure protection from possible abuses of this instrument by Eurosceptics , for whom collecting a million signatures , with the use of significant financial resources , may not constitute a major problem , as the last European Parliament election campaign showed .
One solution could be to oblige initiators to maintain an Internet site containing financial information , such as sources of income , expenses and financial reports .
Today 's debate is another step on the road to establishing the final form of the European Citizens ' Initiative .
The idea to create a tool enabling the citizens to participate more fully in the democratic life of the Union was mooted as far back as 2005 after the unsuccessful constitutional referendums in France and the Netherlands .
Those votes reflected a noticeable lack of communication between the European Union and its citizens .
Even the recently published results of the social consultations , starting with the Green Paper on a European Citizens ' Initiative , show the low level of interest on the part of individual citizens .
The Commission received as few as 159 responses from individuals .
The citizens ' initiative makes it possible for us to change this situation and give a stronger voice to our citizens by giving them the right to call directly on the Commission to bring forward new policy initiatives .
To guarantee that the initiative does not become an instrument in a political game , we must not make demands of our citizens which are too strict .
However , we must make sure that guarantees against abuses are met .
It is important that the European Citizens ' Initiative be a truly supranational instrument which will be citizen-friendly and easy to use .
It should be simple , understandable and easily accessible .
If the draft of an initiative does not meet formal requirements , its idea should remain and be presented in the form of a petition .
In this way , the work put into its preparation and the effort invested will not be wasted .
Fulfilment of these conditions will allow Europeans , for the first time in the history of our integrated Europe , to have a real and direct influence on the creation of European policy .
Situation in Tibet ( debate )
The next item is the Commission 's statement on the situation in Tibet .
Mr President , I see that the EU Spanish Presidency is leaving the meeting room , so I would like to express my deep disappointment that neither the Spanish Presidency nor the High Representative will be present for this discussion and that their seats will be empty .
It is a disgraceful move against the European Parliament , which is the only EU institution elected by the people of Europe , and it sets a very bad precedent , especially having the Treaty of Lisbon in force .
May I ask you , Mr President , to forward to those who will be absent that the agenda of the plenary session is decided by Parliament , not by the Council and not by the EU Spanish Presidency , and that at least one of them should have been present here today .
I was informed that the Spanish Presidency had already announced earlier , a month ago , that , to its greatest regret , it cannot stay beyond this time .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for putting this issue up for debate today , because I think that it is worth discussing and I think we should start by stating the fact that our relationship with China - which we consider to be very important and strategic - has made enormous progress over the last number of years .
Having such a strong strategic partnership would and does definitely permit us to tackle all issues , including the most sensitive ones .
We have constructed an impressive framework of high-level interactions where we regularly address the global challenges that our citizens are facing without neglecting the issues where our views may differ - and Tibet is definitely one of them .
It is evident that differences with China on Tibet remain .
We have real concerns about the human rights situation in Tibet , about the fact that Tibet has remained largely closed to international media , diplomats and humanitarian organisations and also about the lack of progress in talks between the representatives of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities .
The EU position does not leave any room for misinterpretation .
Therefore , let me stress : the EU respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China , including Tibet .
We respect the ' one China ' policy .
However , we have always supported peaceful reconciliation through dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
This dialogue has to be constructive and substantive , addressing all core issues such as the preservation of Tibet 's unique culture , religion and traditions and the need to achieve a system of meaningful autonomy for Tibet within the Chinese Constitution .
The dialogue should also address the participation of all Tibetans in decision making .
For the EU , Tibet is a human rights issue .
We have consistently passed this message on to our Chinese counterparts and listened carefully to their views , and we make every effort to understand their position in a spirit of mutual respect .
But human rights are universal , and the situation in Tibet is a legitimate concern for the international community , a point that we regularly make to our Chinese interlocutors .
In the Sino-Tibetan dialogue , the Tibetan side has recently submitted an updated memorandum on genuine autonomy for the future of Tibet .
We welcome that the Tibetan side has reiterated its firm commitment not to seek separation or independence .
We are also pleased that the Dalai Lama remains committed to the middle-way approach and to dialogue as the only means for achieving a mutually acceptable and lasting solution .
The EU welcomes the fact that both parties continue to hold talks even if we note with regret the lack of results and the lack of momentum .
Let me conclude by appealing to the representatives of the two sides to continue and intensify the dialogue with an open spirit and with a view to achieving a durable solution in Tibet .
From our side , I can guarantee the EU 's wholehearted support to such a process .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the ninth round of Sino-Tibetan talks failed to produce any concrete results and has not improved the situation of the Tibetan population on the ground .
We regret the absence of any statement by the EU before the end of the talks , and hope that the European Union will release a statement on the evaluation of the outcome of the talks .
The European Parliament would like to know in what way the EU Council could help create a mutually acceptable solution to the Tibet issue and ensure basic human rights and genuine autonomy for Tibetans .
My second point is to remind you that the European Parliament insists on the importance of the European Commission supporting development and civil society projects in favour of the Tibetan population in Tibet and of Tibetan refugees in exile - in India , Nepal , Bhutan - in economic and social fields such as health and nutrition , livelihoods and education , access to jobs , gender issues , the environment and the revitalisation of settlements .
On this last point , the Tibetan revitalisation plan for refugee settlements , drawn up by the central Tibetan administration in Dharamsala , presents the needs of the Tibetan community in exile and could be taken into account and supported by the European Commission .
Finally , President Obama recently met with the Dalai Lama in the White House .
We look forward to seeing Baroness Ashton inviting the Dalai Lama and meeting him in Brussels .
This would create an opportunity to start coordinating national positions on Tibet and to define a unified and clear EU position and policy on this issue .
The appointment of an EU special coordinator for Tibet , which is mentioned in the EU budget , could be a useful tool in helping to define a common European position and strategy on Tibet .
Mr President , it is now two years since the events , the uprisings , in Tibet , and we hope that , following the demonstrations on this occasion , there will be no repetition of the assaults , arrests and deaths that occurred two years ago .
In any event , the timeliness of this debate is very doubtful , because Parliament has stated its opinion on the issue of China on a number of occasions over the last few months and , above all , because China is a big international player whose relations with the European Union go well beyond the issue of Tibet .
Although the issue of human rights is very important , Parliament only states its opinion on Tibet and not on human rights .
At any event , in this debate , our position , the socialist position , is very clear : we hold exactly the same position as the European Union .
In other words , we defend human rights and we also defend dialogue , meeting and agreement .
In this respect , we are entirely in favour of and delighted by the resumption of negotiations between the Chinese authorities and the representatives of Tibet , and we plead for a mutually acceptable solution based on respect for the religious and cultural rights of minorities and within the framework of the territorial integrity of the single State of China .
I deeply regret the fact that the Vice-President of the Commission and the EU 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy is not here , because it is she who chairs the Foreign Affairs Council and who ought to attend debates on foreign policy .
Furthermore , to say that the Spanish Presidency is wrong not to be present at this debate is deeply unfair , because the Spanish Presidency is indefatigable .
Mr López Garrido 's presence in this House to talk about all matters is almost superhuman .
We have equipped ourselves with a High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy who presides over the positions of ministers on matters of foreign policy and it is she who ought to debate these issues with Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems clear that China has no intention of negotiating or engaging in dialogue with regard to Tibet .
China 's involvement in international trade , the Olympic Games and past changes in Beijing 's leadership have not led to any substantive change in policy .
In the meantime , the David versus Goliath struggle continues , especially with China altering the demographic balance in Tibet , which is of great concern , and , when necessary , even using military repression , as happened two years ago .
In particular , something which , in our view , is part of the heritage of mankind , namely Tibetan culture and spirituality , is disappearing .
Obviously , China 's Communist Party knows very little of spirituality and cultural identity .
In this respect , if we accept what could be defined as cultural genocide in Tibet , we will have to be prepared to accept many more episodes of this kind in the future .
We must not give up .
What we are asking , first and foremost of the Chinese , is to accept Tibetan culture for what it is .
They accepted the specific nature of Hong Kong being a country with two systems , so they should accept being a country with three systems .
China 's shoulders are broad enough to enable it do so .
We are asking the European institutions , from Baroness Ashton to the Council , not to let down the European citizens who have shown their attachment to the Tibetan cause in many ways .
We are also supporting - as is Mrs Andrikien- the creation of a coordinator for Tibet .
This is a battle for freedom which therefore concerns the identity of our continent .
When it comes to whether or not to renew the arms embargo on China , I think we should take this matter into account too .
( FI ) Mr President , I , too , strongly condemn the Spanish Presidency for walking out of this House .
They did not even listen to what Mrs Andrikienwas saying .
She asked the Council to have the courage to be present during this debate and express their view of the Tibet question .
Mr President , you made a mistake : you said that Spain had stated that they could be here until 18.50 .
This is not true .
They had originally said that they had to leave at 17.00 , but they were obviously able to be here for almost two hours longer when the citizens ' initiative was being discussed .
There must be no repeat of this .
I assume that the Commission , whose VicePresident is Baroness Ashton , is in earnest and will do what it just said it would .
That is , our relations with China are so important that we must also be able to discuss difficult issues such as the Tibet question .
I take the view that now is just the right time to renew the European Union 's support for Tibet .
We must do something about the fact that nine rounds of negotiations between China and the Tibetan Governmentinexile have not led to any outcome , and I completely agree with Mr Rinaldi here .
It would appear that China does not want anything from the talks .
China wants to continue to violate Tibetan cultural , religious and language rights .
We cannot accept cultural genocide of this sort .
A month ago , I went to Dharamsala and I met the Dalai Lama .
I talked with him for an hour just before he left for the United States to meet President Obama .
I was convinced that I had to propose in Parliament that we should discuss the situation in Tibet .
The Dalai Lama is a calm , peaceful person , and it is quite wrong for China to claim continually that he is a dangerous separatist and that he caused the unrest and riots we witnessed in Tibet two years ago .
On the contrary , the Dalai Lama has said that representatives of China are welcome to study documents in the archives of his governmentinexile in order to assure themselves that he had not fomented violence .
Despite this , the claims persist .
I am calling on the European Union to condemn these remarks and raise the matter with China .
If the European Union is not bold enough to defend Tibet , not many others will .
We can take a leaf from President Obama 's book : he had the courage to receive the Dalai Lama .
In my opinion , it would be a very normal gesture if the European Union 's High Representative also did something similar , as has been proposed here .
We need to keep this matter alive in the European Parliament .
Reference was also made here to the fact that we need a special representative for Tibet .
We have all kinds of special representatives .
Why could we not have a special representative for Tibet , for whom there is even cash in this year 's budget ?
It is quite intolerable that the Council should walk out of this debate .
The Council is cowardly and does not have the courage to face up to this problem , which is a question of defending human rights .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the fate of the people of Tibet and their remarkable Buddhist culture remains uppermost in the minds of those of us in this House who believe in human rights .
Since the Communist forces of the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) invaded 61 years ago , Tibetans have faced a systematic suppression of their unique way of life .
The mass migration of Han Chinese and the arrival of the high-altitude railway at Lhasa have further consolidated Beijing 's hold on Tibet .
Meanwhile , the Dalai Lama , from his Indian exile , continues his peaceful campaign to highlight the situation faced by his people .
Uighur jihadists have also exploited recent unrest in Tibet to foment their own violence against the Chinese Government .
Tibet should be given the maximum possible autonomy and we know that this is possible under the ' one country , two systems ' mantra that applies not just to Hong Kong but also to Macao , so why not Tibet ?
Beijing will undoubtedly dismiss our concerns in this Parliament as an unwarranted intrusion into their internal affairs , but a fresh and more relaxed approach to Tibet by the PRC could well pay dividends for China 's internal security as well as its external image in the world .
I would also like to add my voice to those who deeply regret today the fact that there is no presence from the Council or from the rotating Spanish Presidency , or that the High Representative for Foreign Affairs is not present .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was stunned by Commissioner Šefčovič 's words just now when he said that we respect the territorial integrity of China .
This means that the Commission recognises China 's right to occupy Tibet , which is a very serious matter .
While the Tibetan people continue to be threatened , the Dalai Lama , in the 2008 Memorandum and in the Notes attached to it this year , has confirmed his commitment not to seek the separation and independence of Tibet , but effective autonomy for the Tibetan people within the framework of the constitution of the People 's Republic of China : a compromise policy of mutual benefit aimed at preserving Tibet 's culture , based on compassion and non-violence .
The Tibetan people expect responses from the Chinese Government ; for example , talks with the Dalai Lama 's representatives and consenting to the request made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to send a delegation to uncover the harsh reality .
The European Parliament should also listen to the Tibetan community .
By strengthening national synergies , it could try to establish a European coordination network for the Tibetan people who , without robust action on the part of the international community , are in danger of being wiped out .
Madam President , Tibet is a beautiful country and its people are devout , they are patient and they are oppressed - probably the most oppressed by the Chinese in that whole region .
I think that the debate this evening has shown an extraordinary consensus of view around Parliament on , for example , the appointment by the EU of a special coordinator for Tibet .
Events push us towards making some decisions in this House .
This week , Google has abandoned China .
We have the continuing problems of human rights in China , with the disappearance of the Christian human rights lawyer , Gao Zhisheng .
All these things highlight the attention we need to pay to China , and indeed Tibet , and I would like to remark that , with the Shanghai World Expo opening in May , all people doing business in China should have regard to the United Nations Global Compact for businesses , some 4 000 of whom have signed up to it .
Finally , can I just say that , if the EU will not appoint a special coordinator , I believe Parliament should appoint a rapporteur for Tibet .
( PL ) Madam President , the matter of Tibet and of the Tibetans continues , unfortunately , to be an important problem .
The situation is not as bad as it was two years ago , when the anniversary of the Tibetan uprising was accompanied by brutal persecution , murders and torture .
On the other hand , we cannot say that the situation is good .
Several days ago , some schoolchildren were arrested for attempting to celebrate the anniversary of the uprising in Gansu and Kanlho .
Tibetans are forbidden from doing anything to rescue their own culture , identity and religion .
The Chinese authorities say that the Dalai Lama is a private person .
This reminds me of the efforts of Polish Communists , who , 25 years ago , said the same about Lech Wałęsa .
I hope the Tibetans ' struggle will end with the same success as the Poles achieved , and that truth will be victorious this time , too .
Today , the 21st meeting of the Tibetan Task Force for Sino-Tibetan Negotiations begins in Dharamsala .
This is an institution which operates under the auspices of the Tibetan government- in-exile and is intended to help in this dialogue .
It seems to me that the European Union , too , should do something to ensure that the dialogue is genuine .
Sometimes , we complain that not much can be done , but in this case , we can take specific measures , and this has already been mentioned , today .
This is why the absence of the Council is so important - our appeals are directed to the Council , which appoints special coordinators .
I , too , subscribe to this appeal , because this request has been expressed many times in the European Parliament 's resolutions on Tibet - the request for a special coordinator , who will have a real influence on the dialogue which is taking place between the Tibetans and the Chinese .
One more thing : I cannot understand how it is that in 2014 , China is going to host another Olympic Games event - this time it will be the Youth Olympic Games - while we are unable to force China to make advances in the field of human rights .
This is sad , indeed .
( HU ) Madam President , I am convinced that our image of the Tibetan processes is an oversimplified one .
The area is undergoing a process of modernisation while , at the same time , the criticisms that have been expressed are justified .
It is clear that the only lasting solution would be autonomy , and indeed an expanded , true autonomy .
As I pointed out in Beijing , during our visit , when the European Parliament 's delegation was there , by analogy with the ' one country , two social systems ' approach , this autonomy could be developed along the lines of ' one country , two religious systems ' .
It is not enough to formulate criticisms .
China would be open to dialogue , open to an official representative of the European Union , be it Romano Prodi or Benita Ferrero-Waldner or Margot Wallström , serving as a mediator between the Dalai Lama and the Beijing leadership .
It would be good if the Commission , Ms Catherine Ashton and the Council thought this through .
At the same time , we are talking about Chinese relations , but do my fellow Members know that the European Council has never in the course of its history put the relationship between the European Union and China on the agenda ?
Nor was it ever debated in the Council of Foreign Ministers .
Therefore , in order for us to succeed , criticism on the matter of Tibet is not enough .
We also need a conception and mediation .
( PL ) Madam President , I greatly regret that this important and necessary debate is being held in the significant absence , or perhaps I should say the insignificant absence , of Mrs Ashton .
She , in particular , should be here , today , and should not only participate in theatrical performances as she did yesterday , when she spoke to the Members of six Committees about her plans on the subject of the European External Action Service .
After all , Tibet is also an important challenge .
We may agree or disagree on Tibet , but , really , Mrs Ashton should be here .
It seems to me that this shows the European Union wants to wash its hands , because it is easier that way , because , in fact , many Member States , whose representatives are Members of this Parliament , prefer to do business with Beijing , and it would not be convenient for them to express an opinion or speak about China .
Today , Mrs Ashton is like Pontius Pilate , who washed his hands .
This is embarrassing .
( DE ) Madam President , recently , we have heard time and again of serious violations of human rights in Tibet , of torture , of cases of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial .
When the occasion of the 50th anniversary celebrations of Chinese rule in Tibet is used to espouse a view of a liberation of the Himalaya region , it is a little bit rich !
This shows , once again , that history is written by the victors and that there is always great invention in the justification of acts of war .
That is also an art , by the way , that is being exploited in Iraq and in Afghanistan , and one in which the United States has also found some support amongst a few Member States of this Union .
Nonetheless , we must still , in my view , continue our efforts to obtain better living conditions for oppressed minorities such as the Tibetans , the Uighurs and the Mongols .
It is not enough to offer minority rights in the form of purely folkloristic performances for foreign tourists .
I believe the fact that , over recent years , China has spent approximately EUR 15 billion on developing the region and that , in the run-up to the 2008 Olympic Games , it also stated that it was willing to hold talks , shows that international pressure absolutely can bear fruit .
( RO ) Mr Kaczmarek spoke earlier about the protests in 2008 .
Two years have passed since then and we do not even know today how many people were detained , how many were arrested and , subsequently , how many were perhaps released .
We do know what these people were doing : they were participating in a peaceful demonstration , waving Tibetan flags or distributing pamphlets .
It is shocking that two years after these protests , we do not know exactly how many of these people were involved in the action and punished by the Communist Party .
Indeed , I am concerned about the Chinese Communist Party 's interference in the independent operation of the justice system by requesting people 's arrests and rapid convictions .
National security cannot be used as grounds for abolishing fundamental civil rights .
I also want to take this opportunity to emphasise the need to adopt a common European position on human rights and the protection of minorities in China .
If we fail to adopt such a position , we know what happens .
We have seen it in the past where Chinese Communist leaders try to intimidate EU Member States individually .
I would like to end by reiterating the position which I also expressed during the January plenary , namely , that dialogue on human rights is an instrument which has proved to be ineffective and inadequate .
I believe that this issue must be dealt with during summit meetings .
In fact , Catherine Ashton admitted yesterday during the meeting we had as part of the Committee on Foreign Affairs that the approach based on human rights dialogues needs to be reviewed .
I agree with the High Representative in this regard .
( PL ) Madam President , I can understand why businesses and private entities put profit above respect for human and civil rights .
I can even understand why individual countries behave this way , but I cannot understand why the European Union is doing this , because the European Union was established on values which , today , we call European values .
What is the European Union 's reaction to the very events which we are talking about at the moment ?
The absence of Mrs Ashton - we have spoken about this - the exit of the representative of the Council at precisely the moment when we began to talk about Tibet , and , finally , the Commissioner 's initial speech .
Mr Šefčovič , you said you are appealing to both sides for dialogue .
Was that a joke ?
Do you really mean to appeal to the representatives of Tibet for that dialogue ?
I was under the impression that they are willing for this .
If you have the courage , please appeal , principally , to the Chinese authorities , because it is they who are making this dialogue impossible .
Madam President , Tibet and its cultural heritage is our common treasure .
It is in our common interests that the Tibetan identity , religion and language be preserved and developed under the best possible conditions .
Sadly , this is not the case .
Under the cover of industrial development , there is cultural genocide taking place and Tibetans are on the verge of becoming a minority in their homeland .
This can be prevented only by granting them a genuine autonomous status .
The EU can be influential in contributing to the start of an unprejudiced and constructive dialogue that would respect both sides .
I would note , Commissioner , your statement that Tibet is our legitimate concern .
As a result of such a dialogue , and through opening up Tibet to foreign media and UN human rights experts , the Chinese Government has everything to gain , not only domestically but , most of all , internationally .
China can become truly great only by showing respect towards its minorities .
As a goodwill gesture , the Dalai Lama , whose authority is recognised worldwide , should be allowed to visit his homeland .
The EU should take full advantage of the Lisbon Treaty in showing active solidarity - through concrete acts - with the fate of a nation whose existence is under threat and whose natural right to autonomy and safeguarding its culture is being harshly repressed .
I support the idea that Baroness Ashton should meet with the Dalai Lama and that the EU should provide for a special representative for Tibet after all .
( SK ) On 10 March , we commemorated the 51st anniversary of the uprising in Tibet , but also the second anniversary of the protests , both violently suppressed by the Chinese armed forces .
The main issue is the unwillingness of China to hold a dialogue with the legitimate representatives of the Tibetan minority , and the attempt at gradual assimilation and the destruction of culture and religion in Tibet .
I know personally what a godless and materialistic communist regime is capable of .
One of the oldest cultures and one of the oldest religions , which have survived for many millennia , are in grave danger .
The global public cannot remain silent .
I myself am a member of the Friends of Tibet group in the European Parliament .
Such groups now operate in many of the world 's parliaments , for example , in the US , Germany , Australia , India , the Czech Republic and elsewhere .
I am proud to announce that , from 9 March , a Friends of Tibet group will also be operating in the National Council of the Slovak Republic .
I believe that together , we can help to solve the Tibetan problem by mediating negotiations between top Chinese representatives and His Holiness , the 14th Dalai Lama .
This is also a possible way to successfully conclude and resolve the problem of Tibetan refugees , most of whom live under difficult conditions in neighbouring countries .
I appeal to the Commission not to forget this hard-pressed group of people in its programmes .
( PL ) Madam President , we are optimistic about today 's debate , because it seems to me there is a great deal of unanimity here .
However , on the other hand , there have , in fact , already been very many such debates here , and we are very good at talking .
I do not want to fly into a holy rage because I am a hypocrite , just like basically everyone in this Chamber .
A hypocrite who is dependent on something - on those cheap goods from China .
However , at this moment perhaps , we ought to have enough self-respect to speak categorically and oppose certain things , and to respect those ideals which are dear to us .
Perhaps the first and most important step will be something which has already been mentioned here , something we have talked about .
I am referring to the appointment of a special coordinator for Tibet .
Someone who will guide the process , someone who will take responsibility on our behalf for the challenge related to the problem of Tibet , so that we will not sit on the fence , and so that we will say firmly and resolutely that human rights and civil liberties are important to us .
Let us do this .
Let us do it now .

( ES ) Madam President , talking about Tibet here today is a matter of justice and a matter of responsibility . I therefore disagree with those who think that this issue ' was not of concern ' .
We have been reporting this matter for many years and I am concerned to see that , despite the enormous efforts being made by the Tibetan delegation , and especially the Dalai Lama , to promote dialogue , to move closer to the Chinese authorities , to find a fair and lasting solution to this conflict , the blockade situation is continually caused by the Chinese authorities .
We in the European Union cannot go on putting up with this game , far less fuel it .
I therefore consider it essential not only to once again remind you of the urgency and relevance of this debate , but also to remind you anew that the one currently standing in the way of a solution is China .
We must also be clear in this respect .
The only way in which the European Union can be consistent when it says that it is committed to human rights is by accepting that it must also bear a cost in terms of business and in economic terms .
Otherwise , nothing will be credible in terms of human rights .
Madam President , on 10 March , we celebrated the 51st anniversary of the popular uprising in Tibet .
Since then , through his consistent and persistent commitment to represent genuine autonomy for his people , the Dalai Lama has offered the world a model on how to pursue democracy through non-violent means .
We Europeans keep learning from His Holiness , the Dalai Lama .
Recently , he voiced his solidarity with the ethnic Uighur minority and he took the side of Aung San Suu Kyi and other democratic dissidents .
Here in the European Parliament , we are committed to ensuring the protection of human and minority rights around the world .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , I will go straight to the Commissioner for clarification .
For me , Tibet is an occupied country , and I believe that many other Members in this House , across all the groups , share this view .
Even you , Commissioner , cannot render international law null and void .
I believe this to be a concern that really pulls on the heart strings of every European citizen .
Everyone knows of the sorrows and the cultural genocide in Tibet , and everyone feels sympathy , and it is only right to ask the important question : where is the EU in all this ?
We are very quick to judge small countries that commit transgressions .
We react strongly , and we pass our judgment on small countries very quickly .
Yet , when it comes to judging large countries , economically important countries such as China , we are very careful politically .
We tread on eggshells , both politically and diplomatically .
It is no sign of courage and backbone for us to tear into the minor offenders only to screw our eyes shut when it comes to China .
We are likewise unable to put pressure on China through millions in development aid .
I therefore expect the High Representative ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SL ) I am one of the few who recently had an opportunity to visit Tibet .
Progress of some sort has come to Tibet , but this progress has resulted in more bad than good , because it has broken down traditional cultural values , marginalised traditional Tibetan architecture and imposed a modernised image on Tibet 's spiritual life .
Rivers have been polluted and motorways which blot the Tibetan landscape have appeared .
However , there is some progress under way in Tibet .
We cannot deny that and I think that our demands on , and expectations of , China should go hand in hand with a demand that Tibet should also benefit from this progress , and that life there should not just go on as if in a museum .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I think that the debate today once again has clearly shown that we have genuine concerns over the situation in Tibet .
I think that the interventions have underlined that these concerns remain real and legitimate more than 50 years after the Tibetan uprising on 10 March 1959 .
Moreover , our discussion has underlined the necessity for both parties to promptly resume dialogues .
I can inform you that the European Union welcomes the resumption of the dialogue between the envoys of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government , which was restarted again in September 2002 .
Since then , we have strongly supported this dialogue and hope that this process will lead to positive results and to resolving outstanding issues in a peaceful and sustainable way for Tibet .
In its political dialogue and in its further contacts with China , the EU 's representatives regularly encourage China to use this process pragmatically in order to address all outstanding issues relating to Tibet .
While China considers this to be an internal matter , it took note of EU views and concerns and informed the EU of its own point of view on the matter .
I have to underline that the EU also raises the human rights situation in Tibet in its political dialogue and in its human rights dialogue with China .
Moreover , the EU consistently stresses the importance that it attaches to the respect of freedom of expression and of religion in Tibet .
We closely followed the latest development in this dialogue , and the dialogue between the Chinese Government and the representatives of the Dalai Lama is taking its course .
I can inform you that during the past month , we have been debriefed by both sides on the latest round of talks and have encouraged them again to make substantial progress .
To conclude , let me express my belief that the debate here today has also confirmed our continued commitment to the involvement with China on this issue and the work we will be pursuing together with the aim to achieve improvement of the respect of human rights and freedoms in Tibet .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , two years ago in Lhasa , peaceful protests were made by a number of monks , to which the Chinese authorities responded with brutal intervention from the police and the army .
Dozens of civilians were killed and several hundred were wounded .
Since that time , the Tibetans have held over 200 peaceful protests , with the involvement of a variety of social groups , including teachers , students and intellectuals .
In the previous parliamentary term , the European Parliament adopted eight resolutions on Tibet and debated the matter many times .
The results of these efforts are still not satisfactory .
Recently , the Chinese authorities detained 30 pupils from a school in Machu , who , on the second anniversary of the events in Lhasa at the beginning of March , gave expression once again to their convictions and began a peaceful protest .
We have , doubtless , not even heard about many similar incidents .
Therefore , I propose that this problem be included in the responsibilities of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and given a broader perspective .
This would be followed by specific action and , I hope , visible results . Thank you for your attention .
The media , today , are full of information about China .
Reports , articles and books write unremittingly about China 's development and modernisation , and about the economic miracle which is taking place there .
In this context , the media have , recently , also been writing about Tibet .
The American magazine Newsweek stated in a recent report that ' China is doing a lot of good for the Tibetans ' , because it is helping what is one of the world 's poorest regions to emerge from its backward state .
The report points to Chinese investment in transport and telecommunications infrastructure , education , health and access to water and electricity .
So it seems that President Hu Jintao 's plan is being put into effect , which , while improving Tibetans ' standard of living , is attempting to force them to relinquish their freedom of speech , freedom of religion and aspirations for autonomy .
However , can his strategy be successful ?
The unrest in Lhasa , which broke out two years ago on the anniversary of the anti-Chinese uprising , as well as the events of two weeks ago , have shown most emphatically that the Tibetans feel persecuted in their own land .
The history of my own country has taught me that any price would be worth paying for liberty and dignity .
Economic interests cannot be made a reason to forget the persecuted and the suffering .
It seems to me that the European Parliament is a body which should call particularly strongly for the right of the Tibetans to preserve their identity .
We represent , here , the people of the European Union , and on their behalf we should assure the Tibetans of our solidarity .
On 10 March 1959 , the Tibetan people , in a revolutionary mood , defended their leader , but their initial enthusiasm was mercilessly crushed by the Chinese communist regime 's ' peaceful liberation ' that claimed several thousand civilian victims .
Since then , the Dalai Lama , forced into exile , has been conducting his peaceful protest for half a century .
Since that time , Tibetans have not been allowed to commemorate that day freely .
In Eastern Europe , where I come from , the story is a familiar one .
Although here , it seems that we have done away with similar practices on the part of communist systems , I think that we should not forget the lessons : in every people 's history , there are events whose commemoration should not be forbidden .
However , what we are talking about here is more than that .
As a representative of a national minority community , I empathise with the plight of the Tibetan people , and ask my fellow Members to support with their votes Tibet 's peaceful efforts along the path to autonomy .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches in accordance with Rule 150 .
Rule 150 states that we may spend a maximum of 30 minutes on this item .
We had more than 74 requests to speak under this item .
That will clearly not be possible .
Thirty minutes and 74 speakers for one minute will simply not work .
Therefore , we have , for the first time , selected in advance the Members who will be granted speaking time using clear criteria , namely that those who requested speaking time in another debate with one-minute speeches but did not get chance to speak will now be granted speaking time where possible , whereas those who have already spoken in other debates will not be granted any speaking time .
All of those who have not been granted speaking time were informed of this in advance by e-mail .
Therefore , they do not need to be here to wait in vain for their speaking time .
I hope that you understand that .
This was the only possible way to enable the debate to proceed in an orderly manner .
Therefore , those who have been granted speaking time can now begin straight away .
( SV ) Madam President , on 11 April , Sudan intends to elect a president and a parliament as well as regional assemblies .
These are the first elections in Sudan in 24 years and we are following developments in the country with a great deal of interest .
The International Criminal Court in the Hague has issued a warrant for the arrest of Sudan 's President , Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir , who took power in a coup d 'état , for crimes against humanity .
We all know how Sudan has suffered under his rule of violence .
In just the first few months of this year , no fewer than 400 people have been killed in southern Sudan .
It is difficult to say how free the election will be .
On Monday , al-Bashir threatened to expel the international election observers .
He said that if they interfere in Sudan 's affairs , he would cut their fingers off .
We know that Sudan is a country in need .
At the International Donors ' conference in Cairo last Sunday , Egypt 's representative said that the countries of the world will need to find a little over EUR 1.4 billion for the reconstruction of Sudan 's Darfur region .
It is my hope that the election in Sudan will create the conditions for a ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LT ) Recently , there has been much talk about the recovery of the EU economy , but the majority of Member States have yet to see the end of the crisis .
In public , discussion of the crisis is limited to the state of public finances , although the rapidly increasing unemployment in some Eastern European Union Member States has already reached a critical level .
It is strange to hear EU and EP high officials praising some governments for their excellent work when , each month , the number of unemployed in those countries is growing at a catastrophic rate , social guarantees are being reduced and the number of people living below the poverty level is increasing .
It is becoming very difficult for the people in such countries to understand whether the European Union is implementing a policy of poverty reduction or actually increasing poverty in the social area .
In my opinion , governments that have been unable to resolve unemployment stabilisation problems should not receive praise .
The European Commission should take greater responsibility and responsibly supervise the implementation of national government crisis management plans , especially in the area of social reforms , and assess the effects of such reforms on the people .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 16 people convicted of various types of crime have been elected to the Italian Parliament and , at the last European elections , Italy sent three MEPs who have been convicted by final judgment .
There is no law in Europe prohibiting people who have been convicted by final judgment , or who are awaiting further legal proceedings , from standing for election ; everything is left to the discretion of the Member States .
Italian citizens have come up with the ' Clean Parliament ' programme .
We therefore call on the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to amend the Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage to make it a condition , in order to stand for election to the European Parliament , not to have any criminal convictions , including those that have not become final .
The Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs in the last Parliament , Mr Leinen , undertook to do this , but everything was left to his successor , Mr Casini , who has already stated that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs will not pursue it .
We would point out that not only is this the responsibility of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but that Article 223 ( formerly 190 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union actually stipulates that the European Parliament should implement a uniform electoral procedure throughout the European Union .
( FR ) Madam President , Hondarribia airport is classed by the civil aviation authority as one of the most dangerous in the country .
Its runways are located above the town centres of Hendaye and Irún , and the Franco-Spanish Treaty stipulating the number of authorised flights is being flouted .
Yet the airport 's extension is being planned against the advice of the riverside residents and of the elected representatives on both sides of the border , who are already against maintaining the current level of traffic .
Does the European Commission approve of the destruction of the protected nature areas of the Bay of Chingoudy , the site of the Ramsar Convention and a Natura 2000 site , the regeneration of which it itself financed ?
Moreover , the Basque Eurocity of Bayonne-San Sebastián already has an underused international airport , which is far away from any vulnerable nature areas .
Would it not be better to improve the services provided in Biarritz by introducing non-polluting forms of transport ?
I should like to know which measures the President is going to take with regard to this extension .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to raise the problem of the murder of the Russian journalist Maxim Zuev .
Mr Zuev was killed about a week ago in Kaliningrad .
He was a well-known journalist and blogger .
This is not the first case of a journalist being killed in Russia .
Since the year 2000 , there have been at least a dozen such cases .
This is a disturbing phenomenon , because we know that if there is no freedom of speech , and if journalists are not able to work , there is no freedom at all , and there is no democracy .
In our dialogue with Russia , we should always draw attention to this .
I hope to organise a seminar in the European Parliament this year , provided I obtain the consent of my delegation for Russian affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I think every one of us , in talks at various levels with our Russian partners , should emphasise that freedom of the media and freedom for journalists to do their work is the foundation for dialogue and freedom both in Russia and in the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to report to you on the fact that recent articles state that US public prosecutors have filed charges against the German company Daimler for bribery of foreign officers in a bid to win and sign government contracts .
The bill of indictment states that the company has been involved in a long-term bribery process .
The same issue arose with Siemens , which applied the same practice and corrupted the governments of thirty countries in a bid to win contracts from public corporations , a scandal which is still rocking Greece .
As a result , apart from the financial crisis , we also have a moral crisis .
Until recently , the German Government did not prosecute bribery outside its borders and pretended that it knew nothing of these events .
Finally , instead of acting , instead of activating the Fraud Prevention Committee , the European Commission does not defend the legality and , in numerous cases , does not safeguard European citizens ' money .

( EL ) Madam President , I must announce to the European Parliament that , at 02.15 this morning , the Turkish corvette Bafra violated Greek territorial waters , coming within just 18 miles of the Athens coast , and even asked to board and search a Greek merchant vessel sailing alongside .
This proves that everything said in the first part of the debate about Greece 's so-called economic problem is not wholly accurate .
Greece 's problem is mainly political .
It comes from the fact that this neighbouring country is threatening Greece with a casus belli and is systematically provoking the Greek armed forces , not only with violations of its waters , but also of its airspace .
( The President noted that there was a problem with the microphone )
... I must tell you that Greece has taken strict measures which , in the final analysis , are literally throttling Greek households and Greeks are now at the end of their tether .
It has worn down the resistance of Greek society and the economic strength of the Greeks .
As I said , its problem is mainly political .
We are not asking for money from any European citizens .
We are asking for the support of the European Union as an entity , so that we can overcome these irregularities in the markets which are attacking the euro .
( DE ) Madam President , around ten years ago , the then 14 other EU Member States imposed their so-called ' sanctions ' on my country , Austria .
For seven months , there was an ' ice age ' .
Austrian ministers were no longer permitted to take part in informal Council meetings , but Austria was still allowed to continue to pay fees as a net contributor .
Apart from sanctions , there was also a result .
The independent report from the Wise Men clearly established that the Freedom Party 's involvement in the government did not pose any danger to democracy and human rights .
The conclusion was that the EU sanctions that were disguised as bilateral measures had no valid legal basis .
They were an unwarranted encroachment on Austrian sovereignty .
I do believe , however , that the EU learnt from this to have respect for the political opinion of others and for the national sovereignty of the Member States and their citizens , and that is certainly a good thing .
Moreover , in view of the peace in the east , I also hope that one of the main investigators , the current MEP , Louis Michel , will feel that , after ten years , he can once again go to Austria on holiday .
( FR ) Madam President , yesterday , France paid tribute to one of its police officers , Jean-Serge Nérin , a French brigade leader who was killed in the most cowardly way by ETA on 16 March , during a shoot-out in the Paris region .
Although responsible for the deaths of almost 830 people in 40 years , this is the first time that this terrorist organisation has attacked a French police officer .
Mr Nérin 's death reminds us of our duty to cooperate in the fight against terrorism .
Very early on , Franco-Spanish cooperation proved to be a model of its kind within the European Union .
France and Spain were the first Member States to introduce joint investigation teams within the European judicial area .
Implementing European arrest warrants also proved very effective .
Unfortunately , these cooperative efforts between our police officers and our judges were unable to prevent Mr Nérin from being killed .
We shall therefore have to increase our cooperation if we are to combat terrorism more effectively .
Madam President , a major campaign of people power in Val di Susa in north-west Italy seeks to stop a high-speed train project known as TAV being built .
Stretching from the French border to Turin , the very beautiful Val di Susa is only one to two kilometres in width but already has a major motorway , another main road and a railway line .
The ' NO TAV ' campaign has clearly shown that there is no justification for TAV .
Only 38 % of current rail capacity is used .
It would be massively damaging to the environment , destroying or polluting aquifers and releasing dangerous concentrations of asbestos and uranium from tunnel excavations .
Only big business and major construction interests stand to gain .
Tens of thousands of people have mobilised in opposition and , scandalously , police violence is being used to intimidate the campaign .
I call on the EU to withdraw all funding for TAV and for the cancellation of TAV .
The ' NO TAV ' campaign 's motto is ' Sarà dura ' .
They will not flinch .
A victory for people power in Val di Susa would be a victory for common sense and for the environment .
Madam President , I am increasingly concerned about the way local councils in my constituency in the North West of England are using car parking charges to top up their revenue .
Take the small town of Congleton , for example , which is a local semi-rural community .
The introduction of car parking charges will severely damage local industry and a fall-off in trade will result in a loss of revenue , forcing already hard-pressed SMEs into bankruptcy and possible closure .
People are blaming the British Government , some blame the Unitary Council and others point the finger at the town council but , as always , the dark hand of the European Union lies in the background , for they are all working towards the framework set out in the EU 's European transport policy for 2010 .
You see , this is the genius of the EU : it is always one person removed .
Whether it is post office closures or fortnightly bin collections , the finger always gets pointed elsewhere and the corruptive influence of Brussels does not appear on the radar .
Madam President , I come from the West Midlands , and 20 % of the West Midlands is classified as green belt .
The green belt has successfully protected the beauty of our countryside and blocked arbitrary urban sprawl .
However , encouraged by the European Union , the UK Government has increased house building , endangering the green belt , which is particularly close to my heart because it is near to where I live on the Meriden Gap .
This shows a lack of respect for our culture and traditions , but what do you care ?
Since the UK joined the European Union - or the European common market , before that - you have blatantly disrespected our culture and traditions , and there is nothing less to be expected of you .
( RO ) I am standing up to speak today before you and my fellow Members in order to express my view that Europe needs a new , much better integrated strategy for resolving the problem of violence against women .
This issue has been dealt with in an ever-increasing number of European states on a bipartisan basis by parties which have a very different view of society in general .
The reason for this suggestion is that the problem of domestic violence extends beyond the area of ideology and is a direct and immediate part of the human and political vision of a more just and balanced society .
I wish to emphasise the need for action to prevent psychological violence as well against women .
Recent studies have shown that this kind of violence always precedes acts of physical violence .
I welcome the fact that the Spanish Presidency has taken up the battle against the various types of violence against women by means of the European Union 's political priorities .
However , these measures must continue .
Setting up a European inter-gender violence monitoring centre and introducing protection orders and an emergency telephone number are intended to restrict the occurrence of this phenomenon in the European Union , while providing support in the battle against violence outside the EU as well .
( LT ) I am delighted that the European Union and the Member States have made a commitment to combating poverty by declaring 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , since almost 80 million of Europe 's inhabitants are living below the poverty line .
Many Europeans , even those in employment , are struggling with poverty every day and do not have opportunities to enjoy a decent life .
EUR 17 million has been earmarked to implement Europe 's planned action in 2010 and this budget will be used to organise information seminars , work groups and public consultations in order to overcome poverty stereotypes .
This is an excellent initiative , but how do we ensure that these funds will be used effectively and transparently and will directly reach those citizens who need that aid most .
I would like to stress that it is impossible to curb rising poverty in a year .
Therefore , I would like to call on EU structures and Member States to take concrete action and make long-term commitments at all levels of authority to ensure the transparent and targeted allocation of funds intended to directly help people experiencing poverty .
( EL ) The decision by the Israeli Government to push ahead with its plan to build 1 600 new homes in East Jerusalem , to extend the settlement on the West Bank , to maintain the isolation of the Gaza Strip , and to generally step up the attacks by the Israeli army in the occupied Palestinian territories reveals to even the most ardent disbeliever the criminal plans of Israel and of the imperialists in general against the Palestinian people and the people in the area as a whole .
Israel is unleashing a new round of murderous attacks against the Palestinian people and has secured the support of and upgraded its relations with the European Union , the USA and NATO under conditions of escalating infighting between the imperialist Quartet .
This support was repeated with particular emphasis and zeal by the United States of America during the recent visit by the Israeli Prime Minister to the United States , which stressed that Israel is something more than a top priority for US geostrategic imperialist plans in the area as a whole .
We are fighting with all the workers to create ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) After the Second World War and the redrawing of boundaries , about 400 000 Slovaks remained in Hungary and a similar number of Hungarians in Slovakia .
The Hungarian minority in Slovakia still exists in the same numbers today , but in Hungary , the situation is different .
The Slovak minority has been decimated from the original 400 000 Slovaks to less than 33 000 , in other words , not even one tenth of the original number .
This is because the Slovak Government provides the Hungarian minority with education in the mother tongue at more than 700 schools , while the Hungarian Government allows the Slovaks in Hungary just one single elementary school .
That is why the recent criticism concerning the education of Hungarian minorities in neighbouring countries by President Sólyom , a man who looks on complacently and passively while his administration stifles the ethnic minorities in his own country , can only be described as an obnoxious , hypocritical and malicious provocation of the Serbs , Romanians and Slovaks who , in contrast to the Hungarians , genuinely look after the ethnic minorities on their own territories .
After all , the Hungarian ombudsman for ethnic minorities also warns that Hungary is continuing to work towards the total assimilation of ethnic minorities .
( RO ) The European Union has extremely stringent food safety regulations and producers are obliged to invest huge sums of money in order to comply with these regulations .
Nevertheless , more than 75 % of all chickens slaughtered in the European Union are contaminated with bacteria , according to a recent study carried out by the European Food Safety Authority .
Salmonella and Campylobacter , two of the most toxic bacteria , are present in the carcasses of three quarters of chickens reared on European farms .
Once studies of this nature get into the mass media , they naturally raise concerns among consumers .
Against this backdrop , we must ask ourselves two questions .
Firstly , what can we continue to do to ensure that Europeans have access to safe , good quality food ?
Secondly , is it possible that the rules which are currently in force , although they are stringent and , incidentally , extremely bureaucratic , are not the most suitable ?
( HU ) The new Member States are now implementing the 2007 European Union wine market organisation .
In the process , the European Commission acted in contravention of the law - too bad there is no one here - when it unlawfully registered the Tokaj label , upon Slovakia 's request , both as a Protected Designation of Origin and as having Protected Geographical Indication .
This is contrary to EU regulations because this wine can belong to either one category or the other .
The Slovak request is now no longer in the Community 's E-Bacchus database among the protected designations of origin .
The Commission has thus put an end to this illegal situation , and I thank them for it .
There is , however , another irregular situation , because the Slovak national law on which the registration is based does not exist , since Slovakia has repealed it .
For this reason , I ask the Commission to remedy this irregular situation .
( PL ) Madam President , the European External Action Service is going to be the diplomatic corps which represents the Union and assists the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs .
In the work of this service , consideration must be given to the cultural and national differentiation which exists within the Union .
Every country must have the feeling that its own interests , its own culture and its own experience are being properly represented in the service .
For this objective to be achieved , what is needed is sharing , or participation , on an equal basis .
Meanwhile , how is the corps of the European External Action Service being created ?
It is to be composed of staff from the appropriate services of the General Secretariat of the Council and the Commission , as well as personnel delegated by national diplomatic services .
Diplomats put forward by the Member States are to make up only one third of the whole corps .
However , irrespective of the background of the staff and their route into the service , the principle of proportional representation of all the citizens of the Member States should be adopted .
After all , staffing in all the Union 's institutions is managed according to this principle .
I see no reason for things to be done differently in this case .
( PT ) Recently , the European Union concluded an agreement with the countries of Latin America under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation in which it committed itself to substantially and progressively reducing the tariffs on imports of bananas from those countries .
I would like to call your attention to the fact that this agreement has directly negative effects on European banana producers , particularly those in Madeira , Portugal .
It will be even more detrimental to banana producers on the Canary Islands , Spain .
I would remind you that the situation of producers in these regions is already seriously hampered by the physical characteristics and mountainous terrain of the islands and by the size of their holdings , which mean that they face permanent difficulties that impede their development .
Urgent measures therefore need to be taken to help banana producers from Madeira and the Canary Islands , in view of the serious and immediate impact that the new Geneva Agreement will have on the European import market and , as a result , on the production and commercialisation of bananas that come from these outermost regions .
Madam President , it has now been over a year since the aircraft maintenance firm SR Technics announced that they were closing their facility at Dublin airport , with the loss of over a thousand jobs .
In an effort to compensate for those losses , an application was submitted in October 2009 to the European Globalisation Fund ( EGF ) on behalf of SR Technics workers .
However , this form was rejected as ' incomplete ' by the Commission and I can confirm that , almost five months later , the Irish Government has still not submitted a complete application .
While the Irish Government has been distracted by an economic collapse of its own making and a spate of ministerial resignations in the last few months , an application form with the potential to transform hundreds of lives has been left sitting on a minister 's desk .
This House is aware that the Irish state coffers are bare .
A cynic would be forgiven for thinking that the government 's inaction may be down to its own difficulty in meeting its end of the bargain if the EGF payments are finally secured .
Would the Irish Government be prepared to do something about that ?

( PL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to address you all and , in particular , Mr Potočnik , on a matter which is troubling people who are involved in speedway , a sport popular in many EU Member States .
The matter concerns implementation of Directive 2002 / 49 / EC relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise .
Implementation of this directive means that riders are being forced to fit new silencers to their bikes .
These silencers mean , on the one hand , a reduction in attractiveness of the spectacle itself , because the noise is an inherent feature of the sport .
On the other hand , the silencers mean greater danger , danger for the riders themselves , the danger of damaging their health or losing their life .
In connection with this , I would very much like to ask Mr Potočnik to consider putting forward a proposal for an amendment to exempt speedway from Directive 2002 / 49 / EC .
( HU ) Madam President , in the province of Vojvodina in Slobodan Milošević 's country , Serbia , Hungarians continue to be assaulted .
The perpetrators are either acquitted or sometimes charges are not even brought against them .
Decades ago , there were some 400 000 Hungarians living in Vojvodina , making up one third of the population .
Compulsory emigration and massive settlement of members of the majority have reduced their numbers to 290 000 over the years , and their proportion of the population has dropped to 13 % .
The method by which mass assaults on minorities are carried out was introduced by the famous Serbian secret service , the UDBA , aimed at ethnic Albanians in particular .
The spontaneous legacy of this practice continues today against Hungarians .
Madam President , the European Parliament should take decisive action to stop the anti-Hungarian terrorism in Serbia .
A condition for the latter 's accession to the European Union should be to do justice to the many tens of thousands of victims of mass murders since the Second World War , as well as a ban on the violence against Hungarians that continues to this day .
( PL ) Madam President , women are under-represented in science and scientific research .
In Europe , they account for 30 % of researchers and only 18 % of professors .
Among those involved in the management of science , we account for 27 % .
Poland , where the share of female board members in institutions of higher education and scientific institutes is 7 % , is in second-to-last place among the 27 Member States of the Union .
This is why the ' Women in Science ' research project , prepared by the Polish-based Academic Enterprise Foundation , is so important .
The project concerns research into the causes of discrimination and the search for effective anti-discrimination measures .
Citizens ' projects , which come from citizens themselves and are directed at citizens , have the greatest chance of success .
I appeal to the European Commission for special support and practical help for social organisations which take up such matters .
When the citizens of the Union write to the Commission , their letters must not go unanswered .
( GA ) Madam President , as I was saying , I was very pleased when I heard former Commissioner Kuneva state that a review of Council Directive 90 / 314 / EEC is needed .
And why is that ?
Because it has many faults .
It does not take into account people who are booking their holidays themselves on the Internet without using a travel agency .
The directive does not give any protection to consumers who are based in one country and who purchase a product or flight or accommodation in a country outside the European Union .
As well as that , the directive does not mention scheduled flights .
It has many faults and I am extremely pleased to say that former Commissioner Kuneva was correct when she said that there is a real need for a new directive .
Madam President , 20 years ago , the Romanians were dying for freedom , including in education , which , until then , was subject to tight political control .
As a result of their sacrifice , universities have gained their freedom too , which they have enjoyed ever since .
It would therefore be sadly ironic if the current attempt by the Romanian Ministry of Education to speedily pass new legislation which practically eliminates that freedom and opens the door to the repoliticisation of the system were successful .
For instance , in the draft , the rectors elected would have to be confirmed by the Minister , who is himself a political appointee , and universities would be forced to merge on arbitrary criteria , or could even be closed and their assets repossessed .
As a professor myself , and as an MEP , I consider it my duty to my fellow professors in this House to expose such intended undemocratic practices that are openly opposed to the Lisbon Strategy on education and cannot be tolerated in an EU Member State .
That concludes this item .
Thank you all for your understanding and for the disciplined proceedings .
I hope that all of those who did not have an opportunity to speak this time will get the chance to do so next time .
Priorities for the 2011 budget - Section III - Commission - Budget guidelines : 2011 - other sections ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Jędrzejewska , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on priorities for the 2011 budget - Section III - Commission and
the report by Mrs Trüpel , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the guidelines for the 2011 budget procedure , Section I - European Parliament , Section II - Council , Section IV - Court of Justice , Section V - Court of Auditors , Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee , Section VII - Committee of the Regions , Section VIII - European Ombudsman , Section IX - European Data Protection Supervisor
Madam President , the budget procedure for 2011 is a highly specific and exceptional one because it concerns the first budgetary year which will begin and be approved in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It might be said we are pioneers in this exercise , which is why , of course , a particular responsibility rests upon us .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives Parliament additional powers in the area of the budget .
It is up to us as to how we use those powers , and we are counting on a constructive dialogue both with the European Commission and with the Council , so that the new possibilities provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon can be used in the best and most effective way .
A very significant new feature introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon is that we will not now have two readings of the budget .
This means that both Parliament and the Council will only have single readings .
This , of course , poses a particular challenge - that of discipline .
As Parliament , we have to be disciplined , because we are going to have - to put it simply - only one chance .
There will not be a repeat - a second chance .
We have to establish very many things at the conciliation meeting .
For the new budgetary procedure to proceed efficiently in the autumn , we must work together and be disciplined .
This year is also exceptional , because in view of the late election of the European Commission , the Commission has not had the opportunity to present its annual policy strategy .
It is , therefore , both highly exceptional and interesting that it is the European Parliament which is expressing its thoughts first , and that the first opinions on the budget for 2011 come from the European Parliament in the form of this report , and not from the European Commission , as was the case in every ' ordinary ' year .
Why else is 2011 so special ? The budget for 2011 is the fifth budget in the Multiannual Financial Framework .
As you know , the Multiannual Financial Framework covers the years 2007-2013 .
We have already learned a great deal during the four previous budget procedures .
In Polish , we say we have reached the wall .
In English , they say they have reached the ceiling .
However we say it , we are in a situation where the Multiannual Financial Framework is becoming exhausted .
We are , in fact , reaching the wall , the moment when the margins are very small and Parliament 's room for manoeuvre , of any kind , is radically reduced .
The margins are very small .
Particularly worrying are the margins in Heading 1b - around EUR 1 million , and in Heading 3b - around EUR 9 million .
For this reason , of course , our options are limited , and this is why the report of the Committee on Budgets which I have drafted so strongly demands , expects and requests an ambitious review and revision of the Multiannual Financial Framework , not just because those margins are coming to an end , but also because when the revision is carried out , it will be necessary to take into account the significant budgetary consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives new powers to the European Union in areas such as space policy .
What is significant is that it also establishes the European External Action Service .
Reflection on the budget is also essential , and on how we intend to realise the EU 2020 strategy .
None of these undertakings was provided for in the Multiannual Financial Framework .
We must , now , begin a discussion about how to finance these new plans and ambitions .
I would very much like - and the report of the Committee on Budgets carries this message - the guiding principle of the budget for 2011 to be youth .
Young people are already the driving force and future of Europe .
Education and investment in youth is also an investment in the present and the future of Europe , society and the economy .
I would like to stress how important a moment in everyone 's life is the transition from the environment of school , academic learning and education to the first job .
This is a very difficult moment , especially during a crisis .
I would like to mention some statistics : 21 people between the ages of 15 to 24 are unemployed .
It is very important that the European Union should not be indifferent to this difficult aspect , either , and that we work together so that the difficult moment of transition from education to the labour market will be made easier for young people .
I would like to emphasise that in an era of rapidly advancing technological change , and also of demographic change , we must create a society based on knowledge , with citizens who are able to change their qualifications during their life and professional career , who are given the possibility to make such a change and who also receive the support of the European Union in this process .
The support of the European Union should include programmes of international exchange at an academic level , as well as for practical experience and training , and also at professional level .
This will , at the same time , increase the level of social integration and the flow of knowledge , and will make it possible for the citizens of the European Union to be truly mobile .
Mobility , as you know , is , quite rightly , a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the treaties and a foundation of an efficient internal market .
I will now switch to English because I am now going to be replacing Mrs Helga Trüpel .
So I am now playing a different role , not only concerning the European Commission 's budget , but now the other institutions and the Parliament 's budget .
I have prepared to speak in English which accounts for the change of language .
At this stage of the procedure , the purpose of the resolution is to paint a general picture - in a budgetary context in particular - and to issue some guidelines for the administrative budgets of different institutions , including the European Parliament and excluding the Commission , about which I spoke earlier .
The general context is that the circumstances under which the budget for 2011 will be adopted are very challenging because the margin under heading 5 is very limited and because the successful implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon is the priority for all the European institutions .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty changes the procedure for the adoption of the budget and therefore requires even closer cooperation and dialogue among the institutions .
Interinstitutional cooperation covers several aspects - such as translation capacities and recruitment - and exchanging best practices and improving effectiveness could be achieved for areas that have so far not been considered in this context , such as EMAS , non-discrimination policies and teleworking .
The development of a medium- and long-term building strategy has been a concern of the Committee on Budgets for a long time , not only as regards the Parliament , but also regarding the other institutions .
Uncertainties as to the size and the shape of the budget for the External Service and the Court decision on pay adaptation make the financial situation in heading 5 even more unpredictable .
Turning specifically to the European Parliament 's budget , the Bureau 's guideline document contained the following objectives for Parliament 's budget : developing expertise to Members , as far as research capacities and library briefings are concerned , and adapting institutional aspects deriving from the Lisbon Treaty .
Therefore , the committee emphasises legislative excellence , which is a top priority .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am in a listening mood this evening .
I am listening to Parliament 's priorities for 2011 , just as I was listening to the guidelines the Council accepted on 16 March .
I can agree with the major points and I can agree that this is not the routine annual procedure for two reasons mentioned by Parliament 's rapporteur .
The first is that we are adjusting to the post-Lisbon Treaty environment .
We have partly adjusted , but some work remains to be done .
Good cooperation between the institutions is needed more than ever , because of a single reading in Parliament .
What has been already agreed are some transitional period arrangements agreed at the November conciliation .
A pragmatic timetable permitting predictability in the budget has been in place since 1975 and has also been confirmed .
What remains are the modalities in the Conciliation Committee .
This is essential now , given there is a single reading of the annual budget .
Therefore , tomorrow , in the course of a trialogue , the Commission is going to present the modalities for discussion and how we can agree the conciliation technicalities before starting the real procedure for 2011 .
The second reason for the annual procedure not being routine is that we are in a post-crisis Europe where many Member States are struggling with budgetary deficits and indebtedness , and many with even more challenging problems .
Therefore , more than ever , we should attach importance to sound financial management , to accurate forecasting and the rational implementation of a budget .
The budget headings which appear to be under-financed are easy to detect .
Here I am referring to heading 1a and heading 4 .
It is due to this spirit of cooperation that we are able to modify the financial perspective four times in the course of a procedure , i.e. four annual procedures .
Our conclusions should be presented in the framework of a report on the functioning of the interinstitutional agreement which will be issued on the same date as the draft budget , 27 April , and sent to Parliament .
Our rapporteur , not my rapporteur this time , but the parliamentary rapporteur , Sidonia Jędrzejewska , ( my services are now being trained on how to pronounce the rapporteur 's name properly ) rightly places youth and the opportunities for youth at the centre of her report .
In other words , the report on priorities is clearly upgrading heading 3 .
This concerns education and the place of youth on the labour market and is justified in this respect when we see the numbers of unemployed .
But it is equally important that we should deliver promises of a recovery plan .
That is also what is important for the citizens of Europe .
What is important is implementation .
That should be at cruising speed by 2011 .
Efficiency in administration is also important and in this respect , I have to underline that the Commission , despite the adjustment to the Lisbon Treaty , will not request any new posts this year .
We are to adopt the draft budget in the college on 27 April and , as is the custom , present it immediately on the same day to the members of the Committee on Budgets in Parliament .
Therefore , I am looking forward now to starting the procedure for 2011 .
I am promising a good spirit of cooperation , which will really be needed this time , given the prototype procedures to be tested this year .

Mr President , Mr Lewandowski , in the economic crisis , the EU budget , too , inevitably comes under pressure ; this is only natural .
Brussels , too , must watch how it spends every public euro .
Nevertheless - and I am speaking here on behalf of the Committee on Development - investment in developing countries must remain a priority .
Sustainable growth in poor countries will afford people opportunities they do not currently have .
Not only that , but their development forms part of the solution to our crisis .
Developing countries are a market , and a fast-growing one at that .
Europe will just have to spend its funds more shrewdly , for example , using a combination of subsidies and loans for micro-finance support .
Better access to financial services in poor countries will enable people in those countries , too , to achieve their ambitions .
We must protect the development cooperation budget , however hard that may be .
European Commissioner for Development , Andris Piebalgs , must continue to bear responsibility for his own budget , rather than High Representative Ashton doing so , as currently seems to be the intention .
After all , choices relating to poverty reduction must never be dependent on our diplomatic interests .
I welcome the fact that we can deem the 2011 budget the ' youth ' budget .
As such , it contributes to the adoption of the proposals that we submitted to help young people , for example , in access to employment , as is also the case with the so-called Erasmus first job initiative .
Promoting entrepreneurship among young people , providing incentives and strengthening innovation and the digital agenda are other proposals that will contribute to sustainable economic development in Europe , and will result in the creation of new jobs .
With regard to Parliament 's budget , it is worth noting that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) supports a budget that is both sustainable and rigorous , in which every expenditure item is justified .
We believe and recommend that Parliament should abandon a budgetary model that is purely incremental .
Instead , it should move towards a zero-based budget , which makes efficiency , and therefore savings , possible .
A long-term building policy needs to be set out as a matter of urgency in order to make this concept of sustainability , rigour and efficiency a reality .
We still need to find out more and more thoroughly about what our fixed expenditure is .
This must still be followed by a cost-benefit analysis of the various policies implemented .
We would stress once again that excellence in lawmaking should be Parliament 's main priority , and that our institution must have at its disposal all the resources necessary for this to be achieved .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which requires a single reading of the budget , will call for greater cooperation and more dialogue .
For our part , this dialogue must be honest .
We are committed to seeing that it is .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 2011 budget guidelines are the first step towards the next European budget , a very definite step .
In the Committee on Budgets , we have made a great effort to establish the main identifiable priorities that highlight European action .
The first priority is young people , not only because they are the resource on which to focus for innovation , research and development , but also because they are the basic starting point for farsighted social policies .
However , the 2020 strategy is also a main priority : tackling unemployment , climate change and , above all , the need to genuinely and practically implement this new strategy for the future , allocating sufficient resources to it , without compromises and without cuts .
However , these guidelines are also a very realistic first step .
There is much less leeway in the financial perspective and this means that there are insufficient resources to carry out what is most important : new actions .
This is particularly sensitive with regard to the first heading , the heading on competitiveness , growth and employment .
There is , however , another important issue : the budget also needs to be highly flexible and to be able to respond quickly to citizens ' needs , to people 's needs and to changing needs .
So there are priorities , but there are also essential conditions in order for the budget to really be a useful instrument to help Europe grow .
These include sufficient resources , clear-cut implementation of future strategies , above all , the 2020 strategy , and lastly a definitive solution for a flexible instrument that - alone - can enable us to face future challenges .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to stress three points .
Firstly , concerning the Structural Funds - approximately 35 % of the budget .
We are doing only half as well as we did in 2000-2006 .
The current absorption rate in all funds is 14 % and it was 25 % before .
So the question is how to take into account , how to deliver , how to fulfil this part of the budget .
Otherwise , we will have a situation where the money is not used .
On the other hand , it could be a reserve .
Secondly , we have to reimburse some claims from the earlier period and the Commission has planned five billion to provide this .
However , in some countries which have not claimed more than six months ' reimbursement , I do not think that all the money will be asked for .
There is also the question of whether this money will be used or not .
I also have to say something about two very serious matters regarding roll-over budgets which go from year to year .
In the agriculture budget in 2009 , payments were EUR 2 billion less for rural development than in 2008 .
Now much more money is due to be paid out but the question is whether all projects will be fulfilled in 2010 or not .
Lastly , regarding the Seventh Framework Programme .
If we look at heading 1a concerning the Seventh Programme for R & D , payments in 2009 were significantly smaller than in 2008 .
So the question is whether delivery will be satisfactory .
Then we can plan the budget according to the situation .
We have so many needs in other areas as well .
So are those reserves or not ?
Mr President , the motion for a European Parliament resolution on priorities for the 2011 budget contains a paragraph which reminds us that the financing of priorities must not be detrimental to fundamental areas of European Union policy , such as cohesion or structural policies or the common agricultural policy .
That paragraph has the nature of a stipulation which would appear to be necessary , in view of the previously defined budget priorities .
Indeed , those priorities leave much to be desired .
The panacea for the disease of the crisis which is eating away at Europe is supposed to be , first and foremost , innovation .
However , the motion overlooks the fact that the poorest regions of the Union often do not have at their disposal the conditions for the development of innovation .
There are countries where the foundations of a modern economy are , as a matter of fact , only just appearing .
If Europe is to be a continent of equal opportunities , the answer to this state of affairs is , principally , cohesion policy and structural policy .
Especially during a crisis , we should remember this aspect of EU policy , particularly the solidarity aspect , so as not to perpetuate the division of the continent into poor and rich parts .
Today we are beginning the debate on the broad guidelines for the 2011 budget , and the suggested priority is youth .
This prioritisation is particularly important at the moment or during the period of life that marks the transition between studies and the labour market .
In itself , this choice of priority is something to be welcomed .
One proposal , for example , is the creation of an Erasmus first job programme .
The problem is that in politics , the devil is in the detail .
What are we talking about when we talk about an ' Erasmus first job ' ?
How are we to implement it ?
By diverting Erasmus funds to students , or by creating a new programme with fresh money ?
This is not a mere detail , and neither is the matter of whether Erasmus is aimed at insecure jobs , or rather at decent jobs that will represent a real future for young people .
Is it , ultimately , a programme that will combat youth unemployment , as it is intended to do ?
Or will it end up being a programme that is simply aimed at covering up unemployment ?
I believe that these questions go to the very heart of the debate .
The most pertinent issue in 2011 will still be the unemployment that is rampant in the EU .
It is our responsibility to tackle unemployment .
This should provide a challenge for the European budget , but the 2011 budget is being held hostage by a financial framework which has been agreed for seven years , and which has not been altered , despite the crisis .
Without a thorough and rigorous review of this financial framework , the budget that we are set to approve at the end of the year will be condemned to stagnation and mediocrity even if we adopt the best priorities in the world .
They will not go beyond mere intentions and will only have a minor bearing on the structure of the budget .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the proposed 6.5 % increase on the Parliament budget for 2011 is yet another indication of how far this House has departed from the real world and the interests of its voters .
How can we explain to our constituents in normal times , let alone in times of crisis , that the total cost they are paying for each one of us exceeds GBP 2 million per year ?
How can we tell them that if they want a high-level parliament - which some take pride in - this is the bill they have to pay ?
How do we explain to all those who are losing their jobs that we , the MEPs , need more staff because of the Lisbon Treaty ?
Or that the officeholders in this Parliament need an increase in their allowances because they work harder ?
The 15 % of youth who are unemployed in the UK , or worse , the 45 % of youth who are unemployed in Spain , will not be able to see how this increase will help them get a job .
Many of them are fairly well educated .
They only lack job opportunities .
I , frankly , would not be able to respond if they asked this question .
Can somebody explain to my voters how the fact that this Parliament has two seats , one in Brussels and one in Strasbourg , will help them pay the mortgage , feed their children and educate them , because this is a big part of the GBP 2 million cost that I spoke about before .
As regards the Commission , it is all very nice to talk about noble objectives such as investing in youth and education , promoting the study of languages and fostering innovation for economic development and job creation in Europe , but the Auditors ' report gives no comfort on how European Union funds are being spent , nor do the outstanding commitments show the EU is very good at planning .
No proposal for an increase in the budget should be tolerated ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the priorities for the European Union 's 2011 budget revolve around the economic and financial crisis .
Associated with this are the positive joint efforts to implement an exit strategy that is as comprehensive and socially just as possible .
I would like to concentrate on two aspects .
Firstly , a central element of the 2011 budget is the focus on young people .
They will certainly play a key role in Europe 's future .
Investment in youth means thinking today about the Europe of tomorrow .
Secondly , the current situation demonstrates very clearly how quickly jobs can be destroyed , even in a strong economic area .
The 2020 strategy also focuses on innovation .
The hopes that are legitimately associated with this will create new jobs and alleviate the social difficulties .
( HU ) Fellow Members , we all know that the European Union 's budget needs serious reforms .
We also know , however , that these reforms cannot be put through within the framework of a one-year budget .
What is our problem ?
Our big problem is that this is an extremely inflexible budget .
We cannot rise adequately to the daily challenges , or even to the annual challenges except with difficulty .
And there is , of course , little room for manoeuvre , the options are limited .
The rapporteur has produced a balanced proposal .
She has taken into account the realities of the situation and formulated sound targets .
I hope that Parliament will follow and support the text and proposal before us .
It is a particularly good thing for us to turn towards young people , for otherwise young people will turn away from us , away from the concept of Europe .
I would like to speak for a few more minutes about the cohesion policy .
The cohesion policy is not a form of do-goodism .
True , there are enormous gaps between the developed and the underdeveloped regions .
We seek to eliminate these differences , or at least to shrink them .
But when we raise a region up , it is the competitiveness of all of Europe that is increased , and we grow stronger and better in the face of global competition , assuming , of course , that the Member States take advantage of the opportunities , the money does not remain unused and moreover , the money spent brings results .
Otherwise , there is no greater waste .
The waste is even greater than that caused by the fact of there being two seats , if programmes are run that do not produce the necessary results .
I hope that there will be progress in this regard .
The Committee on Budgets is very keen to see that we get value for our money . Thank you for your respectful attention .
Mr President , I welcome this report on Parliament 's budget guidelines and I welcome the discussion on what our priorities are to ensure that Parliament can do its job .
The initial report was perhaps understandably vague and general .
However , the amendments at committee stage ensured we are now clear on what is important .
The Committee on Budgets tried to balance the need to recognise our responsibilities following Lisbon with the need to keep increased spending as low as possible and that is particularly important with margins and public finances being so tight .
I am sure all Members will take that point on board .
That is why deciding our priorities in these guidelines is crucial and , of course , it is not just about spending money .
It is also about looking for savings and it is about spending the money in the best possible way .
Therefore , I am pleased that , for example , the need for an integrated knowledge management system that would bring together all the different sources of information for Members and citizens is widely accepted .
The analysis of Europarl TV , to see if it is effective or not , is also welcome .
An evaluation of a secretarial allowance and the global cost of employing more staff , including accommodation , I believe is also vital , as is a medium- and long-term building strategy for the Parliament and other institutions which perhaps we should be working with much more closely than we are already .
And , of course , there is always the difficult issue of the 20 % threshold agreed so many years ago .
I and the Committee on Budgets believe that any changes to that 20 % should be the subject of a discussion between the Committee on Budgets and the Bureau and eventually between all the different institutions .
It should not be a unilateral decision .
The S & D Group have tabled a few more amendments to be voted upon tomorrow which we believe will improve the guidelines even further .
One amendment points out the difficulty of putting all administrative expenditure under heading 5 ; another amendment calls for the early publication of the guidelines and estimates to ensure we can make our decisions in a proper and timely way .
I hope tomorrow , colleagues will support these and other amendments which are aimed at improving the guidelines .
I would also hope that colleagues would recognise that , following the agreement of these guidelines , we will have to undertake difficult discussions on the estimates recently published by the Secretary-General .
Only then will we begin to talk about our priorities and only then will we have the proper discussion to achieve the balance between functioning as a Parliament and keeping our expenditure as low as possible .
( SV ) Mr President , in hard economic times such as these , budgetary issues are difficult and sensitive .
The guidelines for the 2011 budget also include the European Parliament 's own budget .
The expenditure in heading 5 has traditionally been apportioned in such a way as to give Parliament a share of less than 20 % .
As a consequence of the Treaty of Lisbon , people are now saying that Parliament should devour a greater proportion of the money .
A review of the increased need for resources that Parliament 's new powers may give rise to is certainly justified , and we have already received more money for 2010 precisely as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon .
At the same time , the Treaty of Lisbon cannot be used as some kind of new money-dispensing machine for Parliament .
We also need to be able to make our own organisation more efficient and to try to make savings where possible in order , by doing so , to also be able to finance any additional needs .
Now people are also calling for increased appropriations for the staff that support Members of the European Parliament in our work .
The intention is surely a good one , but it is interesting , for example , that the MEPs in my group more or less unanimously feel that there is no urgent need for this and that it is not necessary in these economically meagre times .
The guidelines that we are to approve today are good , and I think we should view them as a challenge to examine our own expenditure with a critical eye .
( NL ) Mr President , we are living in financially and economically difficult times .
Everywhere , belts are being tightened , and public authorities , too , are having to control expenditure and make economies .
In addition , citizens have little confidence in European policy , and this concerns me greatly .
I wish to present two proposals relating to the examination of the next budget , therefore .
Firstly , we MEPs must all be just as accountable for our general expenditure allowance of EUR 4 200 per month as we are for all our other allowances .
This is not the case at present , which is not what I would call transparent .
Moreover , I shall be tabling an amendment in this regard when we discuss the report by Mr Staes during our April part-session .
Mr President , my second point concerns the budgets of the national Information Offices of the European Parliament .
I consider these particularly generous , and take the view that they must be cut by a third over a three-year period .
I call on my fellow Members to support these proposals .
This would demonstrate our desire for transparency and our intention not to give ourselves special treatment .
( NL ) Mr President , the 2011 budget brings us face to face with the priorities of the European Union .
At this economically difficult time , the Union must first realise that its financial resources come from Member States , who face having to make drastic cutbacks .
It is not only Member States who must make cuts , then ; the EU should also trim down its public funds and spend these in a more targeted manner .
I have a substantive question regarding the priority the rapporteur gives to youth .
As a rule , social and youth affairs can be handled very well by Member States .
Yet I would draw attention to one issue where EU support is truly indispensable .
The report mentions young people 's transition from education to the labour market .
I would ask the rapporteur whether she also means to devote attention to the specific needs of vulnerable young people .
Here I have in mind young people who have grown up in children 's homes and who suffer from a severe lack of vocational guidance .
Last month , on a visit to Bulgaria , I saw a truly inspiring example of this .
I welcome European support for such Member State initiatives wholeheartedly , for example , within the framework of the Structural Funds .
I am counting on you .
Mr President , the most important priority of any budget should be only to spend your own money .
Spending someone else 's without their permission is not budgeting , it is theft .
British taxpayers are fleeced to the tune of GBP 6.4 billion in direct payments to the EU annually and we are still denied our referendum .
Taking that money , without a democratic mandate , is not a victimless crime .
Fifty thousand of our pensioners died of cold this winter because they could not afford to heat their own homes .
Our soldiers are killed by Taliban bombs because we cannot afford blast-proof vehicles .
Thousands of cancer victims are denied expensive life-saving drugs .
GBP 6.4 billion would right all those wrongs and still leave change to build eight new hospitals and 50 schools .
There should be only one budget priority - slash spending and stop robbing Britain .
Our pensioners , soldiers and cancer victims need the money more than the EU .
To you , it is a budget .
To them , it is a matter of life or death .

( ES ) Mr President , I welcome Mr Lewandowski , an old friend of this House who now sits on different benches to those of the Members .
I also want to welcome the return to the traditional system of budgetary guidelines .
I believe that this is a good thing , because in this way , the Commissioner can listen to Parliament 's budgetary priorities before drawing up the draft budget .
The things the Commissioner is hearing or will be hearing today are very different to those he undoubtedly hears every day from the various general sides that put pressure on him to let them have a bigger budget .
We in Parliament are not going to put pressure on him for the time being .
As he knows , we will be doing that from September onwards .
For now , we just want Mr Lewandowski to be very clear about what the budgetary priorities of Parliament represent .
They represent our suggestions .
New challenges for the 2011 budget arise every day .
We already have new pressures in category four , where we are allowing for a very tight margin that will be made tighter by the need to include the Baltic Sea Strategy .
We shall have pressures in agriculture , not only because we are using codecision for the first time , but , above all , because we are intending to use it through Parliament and we will not agree to further cuts to the agricultural budget to fund other areas .
We shall also , of course , need to resolve the ever-problematic issue of category five : administrative costs and greater transparency .
One last thing : this House is very open to saving money from both the EU budget and from Parliament 's budget .
What we political groups are not open to , I believe , is putting up with the demagogy of certain people who make it their way of conducting politics .
( SV ) Ladies and gentlemen and , in particular , our former fellow Member , Janusz Lewandowski , who I would like to welcome back .
I would like to comment briefly on both reports .
Firstly , I would like to thank Mrs Jędrzejewska , who has produced an excellent report .
However , we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have tabled amendments to a couple of paragraphs that we think are important .
Firstly , we need to make it clear that climate change is still a major priority .
We must not ease the pressure on this issue on account of the failure in Copenhagen , but instead must work hard to carry out our own task , namely to find solutions to the problem of financing .
Secondly , with regard to the Europe 2020 strategy : our strategy requires the Union to also invest in and improve the implementation of the strategy .
We must fight proactively to develop the economy and for an ambitious social agenda , and these are political areas that quite simply require more substance .
Among other things , we need to send a clear message to the Member States and the Council that it will be necessary to review the budget ceilings for the next three years , particularly in heading 1 of the budget , which is the heading dealing with growth and employment .
When it comes to Parliament 's own budget , even if we have significant needs , we must take account of the economic situation and impose major constraints on ourselves .
We need to strengthen Parliament and especially the capacity of the political groups to be able to fulfil the requirements of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In all other respects , however , we need to look for ways to make savings and increase efficiency .
This is particularly relevant , as heading 5 of the budget , for administration , is severely stretched .
We recently discussed the new External Action Service , for example , which will certainly require extra resources .
We must focus on Parliament 's core task and elsewhere employ a great deal of constraint .
Mr President , in times of economic stringency , faced with cuts in public spending right across European countries , all the EU 's institutions should be looking at how to cut costs and waste .
Parliament should be taking a lead .
Instead , it continues in a self-indulgent manner , with its costs and staff numbers constantly increasing with no thought of constraint .
In any other organisation , new priorities would be met by compensating reductions elsewhere , but not in this House it seems .
MEPs bear the brunt of public blame , but it is the overinflated bureaucracy , needless excesses and the redundant buildings which cost the money .
How can you continue to justify Parliament 's GBP 94 million annual self-promotion budget with eight million spent on the superfluous Europarl TV and this bizarre scheme for a GBP 2 million House of European History ?
It is ridiculous that you maintain so-called information offices in every Member State , at an annual cost of 40 million , when it is the job of 736 MEPs to answer any questions their constituents may have .
It is a continuing scandal that this Parliament has not demanded that Member State governments stop the Strasbourg circus once and for all .
We need to send a clear message to our governments on this and save 200 million a year .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by talking about the Commission 's budget .
The European External Action Service is something that I take a particular interest in .
However , this is not yet included in the budget that the Commissioner is soon to present .
However , the question of how much it will cost is of key importance for us .
I am in favour of us including this service within the Commission , as that is where it belongs .
One thing is clear : what happens in this service will have significant consequences for the budget , including in relation to the multiannual programmes .
We cannot have administration of multiannual programmes outside the Commission .
We cannot allow this under any circumstances .
Our choice of legal construct for this service will be very important , as the budgetary consequences will be directly dependent on this .
For that reason , what is most interesting about this budget is what it does not include .
We very much hope that the Commissioner will soon be able to supply figures to show what the whole thing is expected to cost .
In 2011 - this much is already clear - the areas where we will have the largest expenditure - including for this service - particularly in the administration lines , are the areas where we have the least amount of leeway .
Everything is accounted for , down to the last cent .
I am therefore in favour of us taking an immediate look at the staff regulations for ways to make savings .
I also have a suggestion in relation to special leave for officials and assistants working in the Member States , where travel to their home countries for special leave is based on travelling by rail .
This rail journey basis should be scrapped , with the focus put on airline tickets and flying time instead .
I now turn to Parliament 's budget .
Anyone who works in this Parliament - and that , unfortunately , cannot be said of all the Members - needs staff .
I would therefore like to ask specifically that we provide ourselves with appropriate means to enable us to work .
However , I do not think that creating a connection with the buildings is appropriate , because we also have electoral districts and can conclude service contracts .
The Bureau should be so kind as not to trouble the Members on this account .
I have one further request .
The President of the European Council is not yet accounted for in the budget .
It would be nice if we could acknowledge his existence in the budget , too .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a different EU and we also need a different EU budget .
I think we need the courage to make big decisions .
We should certainly not get bogged down in minute technical details .
I would like to say three things about the EU budget .
Firstly , we need transparency where the EU budget is concerned .
How high is administrative expenditure , for example ?
The current EU budget does not provide any realistic information on this .
My second point is about savings .
It is very easy to save billions in the EU budget without reducing the quality of the services provided by the EU institutions .
For example , we could shut down a large number of the EU 's agencies .
Then there is the second seat in Strasbourg .
We should perhaps discuss the usefulness of the bodies that lack an area of competence , such as the Committee of the Regions or the Economic and Social Committee .
Thirdly , how is the money used ?
The money should be given , or given back , to where it comes from , namely the taxpayers .
Of course , we should also use it to support sound projects - I am thinking , for example , of a genuine Erasmus programme for trainees .
I think we need courage .
We would all do well to take note of this .
( PL ) Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has acquired significant additional competences .
The time has come for decisions about spending money from EU coffers to be made jointly .
However , time is also needed for this mechanism to begin to work .
It is certain that this year and the next few years will be crucial for the establishment of the final form of the new budget procedure .
Only with Parliament , the Council and the Commission working together as partners will it be possible to develop a procedure which will comply to the greatest degree with the provisions of the new treaty .
I would like to express support for the appeal to increase the Community budget in view of the new responsibilities facing Parliament following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is no doubt that for Parliament to perform its duties effectively , it needs the appropriate means .
The responsibility of Parliament is growing , which is why we , as Members , need more advice , expert opinions and support from a variety of professionals , and someone has to pay for this .
Another priority which is presented in the report , and which is deserving of full support , is the need for greater investment in youth , and so in education , which is the foundation of a modern and innovative society .
Europe is still behind in the technology race with the USA , Japan and other new world powers .
However , this can , certainly , be changed , but it requires significant outlays .
As part of the fight against poverty , we should finance programmes such as the free distribution of food among the poorest .
We should develop programmes such as those which make milk and fruit available at schools .
We must not tolerate undernourishment among children and young people , since we are saying so much about education and a knowledge-based economy .
Work is currently under way on the strategy for the economic growth of the Union over the next 10 years ( Europe 2020 ) .
In relation to this , it is necessary to take account of expenses which will be incurred as a result of the strategy , and this needs to be done now , at the stage when we are working on the budget .
For the strategy to be successful , greater outlays are needed on cohesion at regional and European level , promotion of employment and combating the effects of the crisis .
Finally , I would like to thank fellow Member , Mrs Jędrzejewska , for a very substantive and innovative preparation of the priorities of the budget for 2012 .
( PT ) Young people , science and innovation are at the heart of the priorities of the next European Union budget .
Investing in young people is investing in the future .
Education , professional training and the transition from the educational system to the labour market are the central concerns of this budget .
Young people with degrees are increasingly affected by unemployment .
That is why I consider the Erasmus first job mobility programme to be a strategic commitment to the future , because it establishes a clear link between the education system and the labour market .
The proposal for the creation of the Erasmus first job programme , which I presented alongside Mr Fernandes , is based on the following principles : firstly , additional funding for existing programmes in the fields of education , science , training and innovation ; and secondly , each case will have a training component and a component in which the trainee will have a contract with an innovative European company and will be cofunded by the European budget .
Of the other priorities of this budget , I would pick out the areas of scientific research , innovation and the digital agenda .
This budget also concentrates efforts on supporting the development of green and innovative technologies , thus making an essential contribution to economic recovery and giving impetus to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Commitment to young people , innovation and science is the key to making Europe a world leader once again .

( PL ) Mr President , Mr Lewandowski , Mrs Jędrzejewska , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a splendid report .
Of course , the economic situation in the European Union is still not satisfactory , but the report does , in large measure , tell us how to create European added value .
I think giving particular attention to youth in mid- and long-term priorities is an excellent idea for helping to solve our problems .
I think maintaining trends related to innovation and the emphasis on digital technology are good examples of the rapid development of the European Union .
The support for small and medium-sized enterprises , mainly in the weakest regions , is also interesting .
However , it is also worth emphasising that , on the question of mobility , the policy of investment in the Trans-European Transport Network , and so questions of transport , will arise .
I think investing in youth is crucial , and so I would like to express my thanks , and also the thanks of the Committee on Culture and Education , for all efforts whose objective is to support measures relating to investment in young people .
( RO ) The 2011 budget must take into account the European Union 's new powers , as well as the consequences of the economic and financial crisis .
Our priority must be to preserve existing jobs and create new ones .
I believe that the European Union must invest in an intelligent and ambitious industrial policy .
It is not acceptable that in 2010 , industry accounts for only 14 % of GDP in prominent Member States .
This is why the 2011 budget must consider redefining budget priorities , a task which Member States can only carry out in 2010 during the mid-term review of the 2007-2013 financial outlook .
These priorities must focus on transport infrastructure , energy efficiency , industrial policy and research , agriculture , education and health .
We are expecting the Commission to put forward this year a firm proposal for setting up a European fund specifically for developing the transport infrastructure , and the EU 's contribution to this will also feature in the 2011 budget .
( PT ) The economic and social situation in the EU calls for a substantial change to be made in 2011 to the priorities that have guided previous budgets , including the current budget for 2010 .
The budget needs to be at the service of policies that are distinct from those that led to 23 million people losing their jobs and put 85 million at the risk of poverty .
The objectives of the multiannual financial framework which reduced the structural funds to 0.37 % of the EU gross national income need to be reviewed , as these meant cuts in social and environmental programmes and in the fields of research , education and culture .
Future budgets must be instruments at the service of economic and social cohesion , rather than mere padding in the treaties .
They must be at the service of full employment with rights , investment in public services , protection of the environment , cooperation and peace .
They should not be an instrument at the service of the commercialisation of more and more aspects of social life , freedoms , lack of job security , structural unemployment , external interventionism and war .
The thrust of the amendments that we have tabled to the report is in showing that there is an alternative , and one that is not only possible , but also necessary .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to refer to heading 5 and to the buildings strategy in particular .
A medium and long-term successful buildings strategy is important .
It needs to be environmentally friendly , energy efficient and particularly cost effective .
We also need to have an open discussion about how sensible it is to have three working sites for the European Parliament .
The horrendous expenditure for the different sites can hardly be justified to EU citizens and taxpayers , particularly during the economic crisis .
It is time we had a detailed and thorough cost analysis carried out and made it available to every EU citizen .
The European Parliament should therefore concentrate on one seat , and , personally , I would prefer Strasbourg on account of its historic and socio-cultural bridging role and , in particular , on account of the fact that Brussels is sinking into crime , parts of the city are descending into anarchy and the police have given up .
Even municipal politicians like the Mayor , Freddy Thielemans , admit this .
( RO ) I urge the European Union 's 2011 budget to provide a better reflection of , and support for , youth policy .
Young people must be supported both at EU and national level .
In this regard , one of the projects which the Romanian Government is using to support young people is the construction of 100 000 homes for them in the next three years .
At the same time , I welcome the European Commission 's target of awarding 3 million Erasmus grants to students by 2012 .
However , it is also vitally important to increase the funding for Erasmus Mundus grants .
This will allow even more students and researchers from third countries - and in this case , I am thinking specifically of the Republic of Moldova as well - to study in the European Union .
As a young MEP , I support the Erasmus initiative , which is the first workplace providing young people with access to the labour market .
Finally , I would like to thank the European Commission for its promptness in approving the funding for the four energy projects which Romania is also involved in .
( LT ) Taking into account the complicated economic situation in the Member States , next year 's budget should be planned very thoroughly .
Job retention and creation should receive most attention .
Support for and the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises would be of service here , since these companies employ a large proportion of European Union citizens .
Financial support measures must be provided in a more flexible manner and must be more accessible if newly established companies or those that have experienced financial difficulties are to survive .
We also should not forget areas providing added value , not just to individual Member States , but to the Community as a whole .
Amongst these areas , we could mention transport , the priority of which should be the creation of a sustainable and safe transport system and the development of trans-European networks .
Suitable funding for energy link projects , ensuring energy independence , must also remain one of the priorities of the 2011 budget .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank Members for their comments , which have deepened and enriched my understanding of Parliament 's priorities for 2011 .
What was clear to me when listening - and I am in a listening mood this evening - was that many speakers stressed that we are shaping the budget for 2011 in the extraordinary environment of post-crisis Europe , with many countries struggling with real fiscal challenges .


This is putting a real pressure on the budgetary figures and is also putting pressure on sound management , on transparency in the budget - that was clear from Mr Van Orden , Mr Berman , Mr Fernandes , Mr Haglund - but , if resources are scarce , what is really needed is to set priorities properly .
My feeling after the debate , is that youth , i.e. heading 3b - upgraded by the rapporteur - has the support of younger and older members of this room so it seems that this priority for 2011 is rightly placed , according to a majority here in the Parliament .
What is also needed is quality and good implementation and we immediately - for example , Mr Godmanis and Mr Surján - think about cohesion .
Yes , that was low-level in 2009-2010 .
It should go at cruising speed by 2011 , as should anti-crisis delivery .
But we also have underspending on research and that deserves much more user-friendly financial regulation .
We should be disclosing it at the end of May-June this year .
What was also clear to me , when listening to your debate , is that Parliament is conscious of room for manoeuvre in the budget being very limited .
Mr Salvador Garriga Polledo , Mr Färm and others stressed the very limited room for manoeuvre , but the conclusion could be more flexibility in the shaping and implementation of the budget .
I can only share this conclusion .
As usual , Ingeborg Grässle is right in saying that no budget has been included as yet for the External Action Service , but to draw up a budget you need figures .
We do not have the figures as yet and without figures , it is very difficult to establish the budget .
But , of course , this should come this year if the External Action Service is to be operational .
I am really looking forward to tomorrow 's discussions in the informal trialogue and then to launching the real debate .
Let us hope also for a fruitful conciliation of the 2011 figures .

Madam President , Mr Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened with great interest to your speeches , and would like , most of all , to say I am very pleased that the priority related to the main change to the budget for 2010 , the priority related to youth , which I proposed and which the Committee on Budgets adopted , has also met with your support and interest .
I am very pleased and motivated by this .
I would , of course , like to stress once again what you rightly noticed in the discussion , that we have little room for manoeuvre .
This means there is all the more reason for the appeal to the European Commission to show ambition , imagination and courage in starting a review and possible revision of the Multiannual Financial Framework .
As you know , the year 2011 is the fifth year of the Multiannual Financial Framework .
Surely it is time we learned something from those four years .
The fifth ought to be decidedly better .
Of course , it is clear we are fighting a financial and economic crisis which , and this is obvious , is different in different countries .
Some countries are showing signs of coming out of the crisis , but this does not alter the fact that we should be ambitious , especially because , if we are looking at the budget of the European Community , funds designated for innovation , research , youth , realisation of the common market and realisation of the freedoms of the common market , are , in fact , a small part of the European Community budget .
So , any savings made should not , in my opinion , affect this part of the European Union budget .
Many of you said something which I agree with - that young people are the European Union 's future .
However , I would like to add that they are not only the future , because the young people are alive here , now , today .
They are in education today and they are looking for work today .
Young people are not only our future , they are our today .
Investing in young people is an investment not only in what will happen one day , but is about what is happening here and now .
We should keep reminding ourselves of this .
I would also like to say a few words on this extended thinking about the European Union budget .
It is not only about youth , but is also about a wider understanding , which includes , too , issues related to young people , as well as , in a broader perspective , issues related to education and training .
I think that , here , the European dimension , the European dimension of added value , is very clear .
We should not forget , however , that we are operating in a united Europe , where mobility of thought and the mobility of people is , in fact , one of our more important values , and we should look after it continually .
I would also like to say a few words to summarise the debate on the European Parliament budget .
It is true I am standing in , today , for the rapporteur , but I will permit myself to say a few words and to emphasise something which is already contained in the report of the Committee on Budgets .
That is , of course , that it is important to think about savings all the time , and always to think about whether those expenses which do take place are justified , if they are the best possible .
That process of reflection is continuous , and should concern us all .
This reflection is certainly to be seen in the report on the European Parliament .
I hope very much that this debate , which has taken place at such a late hour , has not been a waste of time for any of us .
I very much hope that Mr Lewandowski will listen to everything which has been said , here , and that he has not forgotten that not long ago , he was a Member of this Chamber , and I very much hope that this debate will be reflected in the draft budget which the European Commission has promised to present on 27 April .
I will , of course , gladly repeat this all again , and again , and again , throughout the spring and until the autumn , but , nevertheless , I would be very happy if some of the proposals which have already been raised , here , were now included in the draft from the European Commission , so that it will , after all , be necessary to repeat less . Once again , I would like to thank you for your attention .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - First of all , I wish to recall that , although the EU was able to react collectively to the financial and economic crisis by adopting a European Economic Recovery Plan , the overall economic situation in the EU is still not satisfactory .
It is inevitable that the following priorities for the budget guidelines 2011 have to be taken into account : the implementation of FP7 , which will have reached its maturity in 2011 , should be closely monitored ; the development of the newly established European space policy and the promotion of scientific and technological advance , supporting innovative technologies and sustainable development ; the challenges relating to sustainable energy and the fight against climate change must be reflected in the EU budget priorities ; these priorities will require additional budgetary resources , particularly for funding the ITER and the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan and promoting energy efficiency ; the importance of the Galileo project , of the GMES programme and of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ; the proper implementation and evaluation of ongoing pilot projects and preparatory actions should be the priority .
I trust that these key issues will be taken into account in an appropriate way during the forthcoming 2011 budget procedure .
This year , the budgetary procedure will undergo the biggest reform since the introduction of the Multiannual Financial Frameworks in 1988 .
While the budgetary procedure reform is going on , strictly speaking , the whole budgetary framework will have to be adapted to the new institutional realities introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , primarily to the European External Action Service .
However , I believe that the main objective of the future budget will be to support the policies from the new Europe 2020 agenda .
This project will only have a chance of success if we provide the necessary funding for it .
Otherwise , this agenda will end up just like the one before it too , the Lisbon Strategy , wide of the mark in terms of achieving any of the objectives set .
In this respect , I wish to share the sentiments of the rapporteur and emphasise how important the policies on young people , education , research and innovation are .
In my view , they provide the cornerstones on which we will have to build both the 2011 budget and our vision for the future .
The European Union budget for 2011 should give clear support to the main trends in the Community 's strategy for the next decade .
This includes technological innovation , sustainable development , combating climate change and care for biodiversity .
Support for the development of educational systems , with the assistance of interdisciplinary investment , is also strongly justified .
The money must be invested in enterprises which guarantee that graduates will find employment .
If we do not give our backing to youth , today , we will face the bleak prospect of a slowdown in economic growth , and perhaps even another crisis .
We do not need to be reminded of the need for intensive development of the information technology sector and that we must ensure that our citizens have access to digital technology .
This will facilitate education in the area of information technology , as well as making it easier to obtain information , especially for people who live in rural areas .
I would like to add my comments to those made by the rapporteur and fellow Members during the debates on the priorities for the 2011 budget .
As was also announced by the European Commission in January , ambitious plans are in the pipeline for the Galileo project .
The first services offered by this system will be launched in early 2014 : the open service , regulated public service and the search and save services .
Testing will also start in 2014 on the Safety-of-Life service and commercial service .
Let me remind you that Galileo is crucial to the future of high-tech industry in Europe .
It will create new markets and enable Europe to become a global competitor in the field of technology .
The TEN-T policy has supported the preparation of this major European project until now , and once it becomes operational , it will be possible to use the transport infrastructure much more efficiently .
In conclusion , I believe that Galileo must receive sufficient funds from the European Union budget in the future so that this ambitious project can become a reality .
The circumstances in which the 2010 and 2011 budgets will be adopted are exceptional and pose a particular challenge .
For these reasons , the ideal solution must be found for successfully implementing the Treaty of Lisbon , which is itself a major financial challenge .
Solutions also need to be found aimed at mitigating the effects of the financial crisis which are still being felt in many Member States .
Parliament must engage in an open discussion about the expenditure ceiling in heading 5 for 2011 .
We must find a balance between providing funding for all the requirements and maintaining budgetary discipline , even if it means restricting expenditure , in order to comply with the Multiannual Financial Framework .
Firstly , we need to standardise administrative expenditure by including it entirely under this heading and carry out a suitable , realistic review of the expenditure ceiling .
Above all , it is vital that interinstitutional cooperation is established to promote the exchange of good practices and to continue to explore the opportunities for making them more efficient .
In addition , particular importance must be attached to monitoring and analysing sets of areas with direct budgetary implications , and every way of distributing and saving resources must be identified .
Work on the 2011 budget is under way .
One subject of discussion is that Parliament could make amendments to the financial perspective 2007-2013 in areas such as ' competitiveness and cohesion for growth and employment ' .
In addition , we are in the course of work on the Europe 2020 strategy , which should concentrate on promoting innovation , supporting enterprise and investing in science , new technologies and regional development .
I would like to draw particular attention to the question of economic , social and territorial cohesion , which is the key to ensuring lasting economic growth in the EU and full integration of Member States .
Article 174 of the Treaty of Lisbon mentions policy with regard to mountain regions as a particular type of regional policy , alongside island and cross-border regions .
In order to promote its harmonious development , the Union shall pursue actions leading to the strengthening of its economic , social and territorial cohesion .
In particular , emphasis must be placed on reducing disparities in levels of development of regions which are characterised by specific natural and geographic conditions .
Mountainous and sub-mountainous areas make up almost 40 % of the territory of the EU and are inhabited by nearly 20 % of the EU 's citizens .
The specific economic and spatial problems of mountainous regions require supra-national legal regulations to be put in place governing the objectives and principles of pursuing specific mountain policy in Member States and , more importantly , they require that a suitable level of financing be ensured for projects and programmes for those regions in particular .
I think financial support for mountain regions should be included in the new financial perspective and the Europe 2020 strategy .
in writing . - ( HU ) Next year will be the first year in the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , which can represent a new phase in the development of the European Union .
As a result , the 2011 budget year will be extremely important from the perspective of financial planning for subsequent years .
The budgetary priorities must contain the European Union 's response to the challenges of the global crisis .
The Europe 2020 strategy is , from this point of view , a very important factor .
The priorities contained in the proposed budget for 2011 cannot , however , lead to a modification of the EU 's basic policies .
In the future , close attention needs to be paid to the cohesion and structural policies , as well as to the agricultural policy , and also to the support given to SMEs , since the capacity of Europe to become a sustainable and competitive economy depends on the latter .
We must not lose sight even for a moment of the fact that the policies mentioned are the expression of the solidarity that constitutes the fundamental value of European integration .
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Agricultural product quality policy : what strategy to follow ? ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Scottà , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on Agricultural product quality policy : what strategy to follow ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with market globalisation and the severe crisis now affecting Europe , including in the agricultural sector , one possible response on the part of the agricultural market is to place emphasis on product quality .
I believe that a good EU quality policy can enhance competitiveness and create added value for Europe 's regional economies , since , for many rural areas where production alternatives are few , it is often the one and only opportunity for development .
By supporting niche agriculture in these disadvantaged areas , we will create an economy and jobs there .
Furthermore , a future quality policy must also be linked to the major potentialities of agriculture which , as in the European case , is modern , dynamic , rich and diversified and can offer not only high quality food products but also services of great value to a constantly evolving society .
In my report , I emphasised the importance of keeping the three systems for registration of geographical indications separate , since they represent the link with European regions , representing their traditions , history , taste and unique knowledge handed down over time .
I therefore believe that , by keeping the two PDO and PGI systems separate , they take account of the specific differences in the nature and strength of the links between the products and their geographical area of production .
Consumers often confuse the geographical indication of where a food product was processed with the place of origin of the agricultural product as such , and are often not aware of how the food chain operates .
I therefore consider that only the compulsory indication of the place of production of the primary products can provide consumers with full information on the quality of the products they are buying , since products are subject to a production cycle which exerts considerable influence on their characteristics in terms of quality and food safety .
Let us remember that it is our duty to protect what our fellow citizens , who voted for us , produce and eat .
Another two issues that I considered important to include in my report are as follows : the importance of an intensive campaign of consumer education and information , which the European Union should undertake concerning the various European labels and the guarantees they represent , and the inclusion in international registries and international recognition through the WTO system of geographical indications .
This last point is vitally important if we want to protect against the counterfeiting of our high quality products .
I would like to thank Commissioner Cioloş for his attendance and remind him of the importance of sufficiently protecting quality systems , which are our future , and remind him too that the economy of disadvantaged rural areas can be boosted by agricultural sector aid , to safeguard all those niche products that are typical of these areas and that keep the people connected to the locality , which would otherwise be abandoned .
This would support respect for the environment and for the landscape and would create , where possible , a tourist and oenogastronomy economy linked to the various regional , cultural and historical differences in the European Union .
I would like to thank my colleagues for the support they gave me in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and I hope that the European Parliament will also give its support during the vote tomorrow .

Madam President , Mr Scottà , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the key element that gives stature to the European agricultural and agri-food model at international level is precisely its policy of quality and diversity .
That is why quality policy in the agri-food sector will be one of the priorities of my mandate , one of my main priorities straight after the common agricultural policy post-2013 reform .
Agri-food quality policy is not only proof that European farmers are responsive to the expectations of European consumers , but it may also pave the way for the European agri-food sector to assert itself on the international market .
If quality policy is to achieve its objective , we need a framework that is clear , comprehensible , well structured , easily identifiable by consumers and , as far as possible , comprehensive and sufficient .
My aim is to be able to structure the content of quality policy and to make it more accessible both to farmers , who must be the beneficiaries of it , and to consumers , but without sacrificing its substance or emptying it of all content .
Quality policy represents a guarantee for consumers , but it also represents added value for farmers ; I am in full agreement with Mr Scottà on that .
It can help to maintain the diversity of our agriculture , and can do so in a competitive way , because farms that can sell their produce are competitive .
If they can make a living from what they produce , they are competitive , and , if they can sell high-value-added products , they are even more competitive , even if , at times , they are small in size .
I therefore believe that , in some regions , quality policy can also help to make our farms more competitive .
In this way , quality policy and the development of local markets , the reduction in food miles , and direct and closer contact between consumers and producers can achieve good results precisely in order to increase the competitiveness of certain types of farming that currently have a relatively small share of the market .
European farmers are already making efforts to supply safe products , using techniques that respect the environment and animal welfare .
The debate on how to make this more evident by means of the labelling system is useful and welcome , and the report contributes certain elements and certain ideas along these lines .
I believe that these links between the standards maintained by farmers and labelling quality policy should also be the subject of debates that we are going to hold on the common agricultural policy post-2013 .
That is my intention , in any case .
I believe that we need to develop and evolve our instruments in relation to communication policy , communication both with European farmers and with European consumers , and , above all , at international level .
It is my belief that our quality system can be a good ambassador for our agri-food model , and even for our common agricultural policy .
Having said all that , I would like to conclude with the fact that Mr Scottà 's report comes at just the right time .
As you know , the Commission intends to present a legislative package on quality policy by the end of 2010 .
The report that Mr Scottà is presenting today and which will be debated includes certain questions , ideas and proposals along these lines , and I shall strive as far as possible to take account of these ideas when I come to present the legislative proposals to you .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and the members of the parliamentary committees who have worked on this report , and I shall be very happy to hear your views and your proposals .

Madam President , to be honest , the first thing I wanted to do this evening is to thank Mr Scottà for his excellent skill in negotiating this report .
It has been a real pleasure working with him and with the other spokespeople for the parliamentary groups .
We are proud of the position that will be demonstrated tomorrow in the vote in Parliament and on a report such as this , which defends quality and which commits to the development and enhancement of rural areas , not only as mere evidence of a traditional European culture , but as true wealth- and job-creation agents .
These are jobs that we currently need so much at this time of economic crisis and such a dramatic situation in terms of levels of employment in some Member States .
In addition , we are pleased with the protection maintained by Parliament and the position already maintained by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as it has made clear , in committing to quality of the highest standard .
With regard to that highest standard , moreover , we naturally commit to maintaining that differentiation between Protected Designation of Origin and Protected Geographical Indication .
Of course , we reject ideas of levelling quality downwards and we want EU production to receive attention and be valued .
I am delighted at what Mr Cioloş had to say .
It was , of course , pleasing to hear him speak about commitment to the future of the European farming environment .
We naturally hope he will listen to Parliament 's voice , which will be reflected tomorrow in the vote .
Finally , I would like to say let us hope that it never happens again that the European Commission gets ahead of Parliament by prohibiting things such as , for example , marketing standards for fruit and vegetables , that have caused such damage to European free competition .
We want the imbalances in the market corrected and we also want to commit to quality , variety , food safety and the right quantity of production .
In addition , we want EU production and the quality of that EU agricultural and food production to be defended in the World Trade Organisation .
We are , of course , also relying on the work of Mr Cioloş for that , because neither our European producers nor our European consumers can go on being defenceless .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Scottà , for the outstanding work that he has done , and I should like to emphasise how quality policies are not only of great external value because of what we are able to offer consumers ; they are also of great importance because of what they are able to give producers .

As you have all observed , competition can take many forms on the markets .
In a continent as large and as multifaceted as Europe , but which is characterised moreover by costs of production a good deal higher than those of the competition , it will be difficult to compete in terms of price , and we shall be able to compete only in terms of product differentiation .
It is exactly from the perspective of differentiation that we must view quality policy , which is capable of offering a product and of placing on the market a product that differs from that of the competition , a product that can also be sold without precise and specific reference to a price that is lower by comparison to the competition .
We are therefore in favour of continuing with the practice of Community marking , which is already under way , while emphasising the need to maintain the distinction between geographic indications and origin marking .
However , we should also still stress that , internationally and at the level of international trade negotiations , the Union must play its part by defending origin marking and origin-marking policies so as to avoid an inevitable policy of exchange of markings , which would cause damage to our products .
Before concluding , I shall take the liberty of making one final point , which concerns labelling .
We have already requested and shall request again tomorrow , via a specific amendment , that Parliament vote on the possibility of indicating the origin of raw materials , not only for fresh , non-processed products , but also for processed single-ingredient products ; that is , those in which the characteristic element is substantially the raw material .
Commissioner , fellow Members , on behalf of the group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats , we consider the report drawn up by Mr Scottà to be extremely important , and fundamentally we agree with it .
The report had four , or rather five points for debate .
First , the joint European Union logo .
Many people fail to understand that the joint EU logo is not some sort of step towards federalism , but demonstrates to the consumer that a product fulfils the EU 's specific food safety requirements , while at the same time differentiating it from the world beyond the EU boundaries .
I therefore ask that we support the specific EU logo .
The second point is the question of the place of origin .
It is a very good thing that the EU now has , in the person of Mr Dacian Cioloş , an agriculture commissioner who has understood and supports the importance of local markets , since this is the only way we can preserve local flavours , regional flavours , and the diversity of food in Europe , and it is also clear that a key role is played in this regard by food quality policy , the place and designation of origin .
There was an argument with the Commission , and I very much hope that the new commissioner no longer supports the earlier position that we should combine all Protected Designations of Origin with Protected Geographical Indication .
Occasionally , this causes concern , most recently in the case of Tokaj wine .
I thank the Commissioner that these problems have , in part , been remedied , while some of them await remedy .
The fourth element : the organic logo .
On this there is complete agreement .
And finally , the fifth element : that some members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development called for the reintroduction of the previous strict standards for vegetables and fruit .
I would like to return to the original form of Mr Scottà 's report .
Let us not go back to the days of overregulation , when we determined what the curve of a cucumber should be .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , can I , too , add my congratulations to Mr Scottà on his report .
There is much in it that is to be commended .
Unfortunately , I and my ALDE colleagues cannot support it as it currently stands without seeing one or two changes made to it .
We cannot support paragraph 19 , the so-called ' wonky fruit ' paragraph .
I believe it is nonsense for bureaucrats in Brussels to be telling consumers that they can buy only straight bananas or straight cucumbers .
Surely it is up to consumers to make these decisions as to what they want to buy , so I hope that Parliament will use its common sense and back the joint amendment that has been submitted by the Greens and the ECR Group to throw out the straight banana rules and leave consumers free to chose whether they want to eat bent or twisted fruit and vegetables or whether they do not .
It is surely a decision for consumers .
Marianne Fischer-Boel , the previous Commissioner , did decide to abolish the standards and I would hope that we would continue to support that decision .
I would also like to see some changes in paragraph 16 .
I understand the call for an EU logo but , unless it means something to consumers and adds value for farmers , in my view , it is a pointless exercise .
It has to resonate with consumers and give some sort of return to the farming community .
Otherwise , it is worthless .
It is not worth pursuing it and I see no evidence to suggest that European consumers are looking for an EU logo .
Finally , in paragraph 62 , there is some criticism here of private certification systems which , in Scotland , have been very successful .
It seems to me a good thing for farmers on a voluntary basis to add value to their produce through quality assurance schemes , and we should be supporting them , not discouraging them .
I hope we can see some changes to this report in the votes tomorrow , and if so , we will be able to support it with the changes voted through tomorrow .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would echo many of the comments of my Scottish colleague - albeit not Group colleague - George Lyon .
There is much in this report to admire and a couple of things where I think we could do a little better .
We have brought forward a number of points and I will focus on two of them only .
I and others believe that our consumers want to know where their food comes from .
We believe that the provision of that information should be compulsory , so Amendment 4 , on precisely that point , replaces some rather weak wording with a much stronger requirement that , where we can actually have information on ' place of farming ' labelling , it should be compulsory , because that is what our consumers want to see .
I would also pick up on Amendment 3 - as my colleague did - which deletes the attempt to reintroduce cumbersome and unworkable rules on the direct sale of fruit and vegetables to the consumer .
We agreed only last year to repeal those rules and , while the consumers have not noticed much of a difference , our producers have noticed and still notice .
Any attempt to bring those rules back would essentially be another stick for the processors , the multiples and the supermarkets to beat the producers with , and the consumers would not benefit directly .
So there is much in this report to like .
I would echo Mr Lyon 's comments on the EU logo .
I think that is more to do with the ambitions of this building rather than what our consumers want .
If it does not resonate with the consumers , we should not do it and we should replace it with a compulsory origin labelling scheme , which is what our consumers want .
The amendments are constructive ; I hope they will be successful and that colleagues will support them tomorrow .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , can I also express my appreciation to the rapporteur for a very good report .
I think there are very many good ideas in this report and I agree entirely with the rapporteur , Mr Scottà , when he talks about how important it is for European producers to add value and maximise the potential of their products .
We must always strive to achieve the maximum potential of Europe 's agri-food industry .
This will ultimately serve to increase our competitiveness and strengthen the economy in rural areas .
In this regard , I am happy to see that Mr Scottà dealt with the future of the PGI and PDO systems .
These instruments have proven popular with consumers and producers alike .
However , I agree with the rapporteur that their management and application must be simplified .
Also , if we are serious about their value abroad , we must ensure more protection from third countries .
I would like to see more products from my own regions applying for a PGI and hopefully , the Commission will take on board some of the suggestions to simplify the application procedure so we will see more applications from my own region of Northern Ireland .
However , I must point out that there are some elements of this report which I do not support .
I am against the introduction of an EU quality logo .
What I support is country of origin labelling .
In effect , I feel an EU logo would be meaningless , a waste of time and money and I feel the same way about the EU logo for organic produce .
Another concern for me are the amendments which were passed in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development calling for the reintroduction of the marketing standards of fruit and vegetables , which some MEPs are desperately trying to get back on the table .
The fact is these rules were dismantled by the Commission last year .
I wholeheartedly supported this move and now we can let the market set its own standards .
In this regard , I would urge colleagues to support the plenary amendments tabled by my own group and other groups , which are very clear and simple , and to delete these elements .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Cioloş , thank you for the encouraging words you have just spoken , and thank you to Mr Scottà for the sensitive work that he has done on this important report .
I consider that with the report that will be put to the vote tomorrow , the intention is to protect and to enhance the value of the crops and the produce characteristic of every region and Member State of the European Union .
Suffice it to say that I come from a country , Italy , that has 4 500 characteristic products , and these are assets from our land that we wish wholeheartedly to preserve .
We fully understand that the road to excellence is still a long one , but the message that we must convey is that it is only through the quality of European produce that our farmers will have the chance to compete meaningfully on the world market .
Bearing in mind also the widespread crisis that we are unfortunately experiencing , we can do nothing other than to sustain the quality , traceability and transparency of information associated with agricultural produce .
It is important to know what kind of processing is used for each crop , and where the crop originates .
It is important , because it is right that consumers know whether they are eating an apple grown , for example , in my region - Verona or in the Veneto - and that EU rules have therefore been observed throughout the entire production chain , or whether they are instead eating an apple produced in China , where the only thing that we do know is that , on many occasions , China has not even come close to observing the regulations and good practice observed by European farmers .
Madam President , thank you for the opportunity to speak on this very important point .
Consumers are , quite rightly , demanding that the food they purchase is safe , traceable and produced to a high standard .
I would support a country of origin labelling system which promotes such standards and I believe that this will be widely acceptable to most consumers and to most within the industry .
Obviously , promotion and marketing will be the hallmark of the success or failure of such a policy .
We must take firm action against the potential counterfeiting of products which are wrongly labelled .
I - like many colleagues in this Chamber - would be against an EU logo .
I feel it would be largely meaningless and would not be helpful to consumers .
Country of origin labelling , and even geographical indicators , are important because they promote locality , local heritage and conservation of local techniques , and they protect areas which rely on the production of a particular product .
I come from Northern Ireland , a net exporter of agricultural products .
Therefore , I want any labelling system to create a level playing field .
Anything that impacts on the export of products from countries like my own would have a detrimental impact on the industry .
Like other colleagues , I would support the quality assurance schemes that are available and encourage those as part of the general local indicator .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the production of high quality produce is fundamental to European farmers .
I am in no doubt that there has be to a link between the quality of the product and the origin of the raw materials .
I therefore consider mandatory quality labelling to be an important opportunity for our farmers .
Quality is a key issue for the entire food chain and an essential asset in supporting the competitiveness of European food producers .
The production of high quality foods has a long tradition and is often the only employment and sales opportunity in many rural areas with limited production alternatives .
In order to guarantee this high quality standard , controls and objective criteria are certainly needed .
However , the fact is that financial considerations on the part of the consumer also have an effect .
Quality costs , and farmers need a fair income .
Nevertheless , consumers have the freedom to opt for an attractively priced product , although they often decide on a product that is not of such high quality .
One thing must be clear , however , and that is that consumers must have this freedom and they must genuinely be able to make a decision on the basis of objective and transparent criteria .
We also need to raise the general awareness of consumers in this regard .
We need protected geographical indications and designations of origin .
We need the introduction of a regulated and protected designation for products from mountain areas and from GMO-free areas .
However , we also need the ' Traditional Speciality Guaranteed ' and ' Organic Farming ' indications .
Whatever happens , these must be retained .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a new phase of reflection has opened in Europe today on the issue of quality , which is intended not only as a guarantee for consumers but , above all , as a stimulus for our producers to be more competitive in a market that is far larger and far more competitive .
Our businesses need to gain market recognition of the distinctive and quality-related aspects associated with their products .
In this sense , as Mr Scottà 's report intends - and I , too , thank him for my part - we are making progress in guaranteeing , first of all , more information on the origin , composition and characteristics of production processes .
At the same time , Commissioner , it is fundamental that European regulations allow organisations designated for the protection and promotion of quality products to plan their product supply and to adapt their production potential to market needs on the basis of fair and non-discriminatory principles .
We hope that the approval of this report will signal the definitive establishment of quality as the lynchpin of the European strategy for the agri-food sector , and that the Commission will seriously consider our committee 's proposals , so that one of the principal strong points of European agriculture can be transformed into a precious competitive advantage .
Madam President , first , may I declare an interest ?
I am an egg producer .
Regulations must be honestly implemented to a common standard .
That is essential .
An EU-inspired crisis will shortly hit the UK egg industry .
From 1 January 2012 , the production of eggs in battery cages is banned .
The ban does not apply to eggs from Romania or Bulgaria , and perhaps others , who have a temporary immunity under their accession treaties .
As long as they are processed , these countries may legally export battery-cage eggs produced after the ban to the UK .
UK egg producers who have invested very heavily in alternative systems will be expected to compete at a disadvantage against imported products which can be produced far more cheaply .
I must insist first that these imported products are clearly labelled and secondly , and most importantly , that we introduce with immediate effect an additional number ' four ' , for eggs produced using colony systems .
Only then can consumers make an informed choice .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Scottà , I find it truly symbolic , Commissioner , that your first speech before this House should be on the very subject of quality policy .
I believe that we take the same approach to these quality products .
Yes , they represent an opportunity for our most fragile regions .
Yes , they are a means by which to make the operators of a region and , in particular , farmers , more dynamic .
Yes , they represent a strong signal sent out to European consumers , but also to consumers throughout the world , with regard to our agricultural model .
Burgundy wine , Parma ham , certain Spanish meats - they have meaning far beyond the borders of each of our countries , far beyond the borders of Europe .
The resolution that we shall no doubt adopt tomorrow offers you , Commissioner , a greater degree of ambition with regard to this policy of quality products , of products identified by different signs .
European policy must be clearer ; it must stop producers from being taken over by certain large industrial or distribution groups , which would clearly like to deprive producers of the benefit of the added value that these products give them .
During the hearing , I drew your attention to the need to give organisations that bear , in particular , designations of origin overall responsibility for managing their products .
Management of production rights is a fundamental part of quality production policy .
Moreover , almost all of our committee voted in favour of an amendment along these lines .
I should like to respond to our UK fellow Members with regard to paragraph 19 on the fruit and vegetables sector .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , we must not go backwards , but neither must we allow the huge vacuum in fruit and vegetable policy that means that , today , distributors are the only ones calling the shots .
Let us together interpret this amendment as a call to find a new middle way .
Commissioner , you can very quickly convince us of your enthusiasm for this specific policy , which gives consumers a different image of agriculture .
Now present us with a good text .
Do so quickly ; we have faith in you .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , the quality of agricultural production is a crucial factor in the food chain and represents a vital asset for supporting the competitiveness of European producers .
All this is reflected in the Scottà report , in which other considerations are also highlighted which the Commission will need to take into account when implementing this policy .
The EU quality logo , as an expression of the agreement of our producers on production requirements within the Union , must be reserved exclusively for agricultural products produced in the European Union .
It must grant greater protection to Protected Geographical Indications , both in the World Trade Organisation and in the bilateral agreement negotiations .
European legislation on integrated production must also be drawn up that affords visibility to this more sustainable method of production and harmonises the existing criteria in each Member State .
Finally , we must take into account the imbalances produced in the marketing chain , the importance of relying on sectoral marketing standards and the need to draw up EU guidelines for best practice for the operation of the systems related to agricultural product quality and their mutual recognition .
I refer , in particular , to the control of private certification systems which are often used as a requirement for accessing large-scale distribution outlets .
( FI ) Madam President , it is very important to go to the heart of this matter and say that agriculture based on farming families is local in nature , provides employment , strengthens regions , is humane and also takes account of animal protection issues .
The individual product resulting from this and the quality of the goods are what succeed in Europe and the world at large .
Where a product comes from is important .
Local specialities are of immeasurable value .
The region that I come from in Finland produces a delicious goat 's milk cheese .
I can recommend it to you all .
There are special products like this all over Europe .
We have to ensure that they find their way onto the market .
As we have a new Commissioner here , I would like to say to him that it must be possible to practise agriculture everywhere in Europe .
If we remember this , we will have an excellent future , with safe and pure food originating here .
( DE ) Madam President , many thanks once again to the rapporteur for his excellent report .
High quality agricultural products provide European agriculture with a major location advantage , allowing it to hold its own in the face of international competition .
As a result , they play an important part in the development of rural areas within the European Union .
The European Union 's agricultural products already meet high quality standards .
European standards have a global reputation for being very high .
Unfortunately , not all consumers are aware of this .
It is therefore important for the European Union to improve its quality policy and , at the same time , improve its information policy .
This will be an incentive for producers to focus more on quality and food safety .
Consumers have a right to enjoy agricultural products in the EU without concern and without compunction .
Voluntary ' Made in the European Union ' labelling and mandatory regional labelling , as well as mandatory proof of origin , are not mutually exclusive .
On the other hand , when it comes to packaging sizes and the geometric shape of agricultural products , we need to take a sensible approach .
The purpose of the European Union is not to be concerned about the curvature of cucumbers .
The same applies to the size of pizzas .
I would seriously warn against overregulation here .
If we want regional economic cycles , we need to focus on quality and not on degrees of curvature .
If the industry wants uniform cucumbers in uniform jars of uniform weight , that is up to the industry and not the European Union or the European Parliament .
Therefore , let us focus on quality and not packaging units .
In this regard , I trust in the common sense and wisdom of the European Parliament and of our new Commissioner for Agriculture , Mr Cioloş .
( RO ) Let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur for tackling this issue of agricultural product quality .
The demands of the market are diverse and are increasing all the time .
In the European Union , the majority of aspects relate to food hygiene and safety , health and nutritional value , as well as certain social requirements .
In addition , consumers are becoming increasingly more aware of the contribution made by agriculture to sustainability , climate change , food safety , biodiversity , animal welfare and the water shortage .
Faced with these new commercial challenges , the European farmer 's main asset is quality .
The European Union offers the benefit of quality , which is attributable to an extremely high level of safety , guaranteed by current legislation , throughout the entire food chain which not only farmers but producers , too , have contributed to .
However , there are a few aspects capable of enhancing quality .
I believe that it is the European Union 's duty to promote good quality products , along with taking action to protect them globally .
In this context , I think that tighter control must be exercised with regard to those organic products originating from third countries , thereby guaranteeing fair competition between organic products produced in Europe and those from third countries .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the quality of agricultural products constitutes a priority for consumers by increasing competitiveness for producers and by strengthening the area in which they are produced .
That is why efforts are being made to safeguard them , including with labelling .
Today , however , Community legislation restricts compulsory labelling of the place of production to just certain products , thereby vouchsafing them special treatment and leaving out agricultural products of major nutritional value and priority for consumers .
We therefore call on Parliament to adopt a more consistent and logical stand , in order to defend consumer interests by favouring compulsory labelling of the place of production for all agricultural products , including processed products containing just one ingredient , such as milk .
( RO ) The agricultural product quality policy may provide a solution for many farmers .
The focus on quality rather than quantity may entail long-term benefits for many households .
This is why the European Union needs coherent policies in this area , which , at the same time , will offer European farmers the opportunity to be competitive on the global market .
Against this backdrop , the Scottà report is welcome , as is the package announced by Commissioner Cioloş .
At the same time , we will also need something else to enable us to achieve the quality objectives , namely , a strong common agricultural policy in the future , along with a consistent budget .
An agricultural product quality policy and a reduction in the European agriculture budget are two incompatible ideas .
We also need to make sufficient instruments available to farmers so that they can develop their own quality policy and , last but not least , we need farmers from Member States in the West and East to enjoy equal opportunities .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when discussing quality logos and mandatory designations of origin for food , we must not forget that our political decisions need to be implementable in practice .
I cannot see how Amendments 4 and 5 can be implemented in practice and I will therefore be rejecting them .
Quality logos should , in principle , be viewed as beneficial if they are voluntary .
They give producers and processors of goods the opportunity to be successful in niche markets .
However , we need to take account of the fact that , through the market dominance of a few chain stores , many voluntary private logos are interpreted as quasi standards .
This robs producers and processors of their entrepreneurial freedom and also narrows the choice for consumers .
There is a similar situation with regard to the mandatory indication of the place of origin for agricultural products , such as milk .
Implementing this requirement in agriculture and in the processing industry would scarcely be possible from a technical point of view .
We need to be careful that good intentions do not descend into excessive bureaucracy .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to call attention to the pertinence of item 9 of the Scottà report , which emphasises that , in the WTO negotiations , the Commission must seek to secure an agreement on the ' non-trade concerns ' which will ensure that imported agricultural products meet the same requirements , in the areas of food safety , animal welfare and environmental protection , that are imposed on agricultural products produced inside the European Union .
The problem is that this is probably the 150th time the European Parliament has said that the same requirements should be applied to importers as those applied to producers within the European Union .
There has been no response , and we are still dealing with a situation in which our producers , farmers and manufacturers are having to comply with high , expensive standards , while importers do not meet these standards .
This leads to unfair competition .
As was rightly emphasised in the report , this has to change .
( DE ) Madam President , the control of foodstuffs is a utopian fantasy .
The pressure for control and the consequences are , too , it seems .
We are thus in a right old stew !
In the case of health risks , authorities should put out warnings , but they are not obliged to .
We have seen the result of this recently in the listeria-contaminated cheese scandal .
Food inspectors often have to battle with deficient labelling - and it is not only the inspectors ; consumers have the same problem .
They are completely overwhelmed by the labelling jungle .
For example , ' farmer ' can be stated on the packaging , even though the product has been industrially processed , or it might say ' of Austrian origin ' even though the ingredients come from all over the place .
Quality-conscious customers are prepared to pay more for high quality foods .
The question is for how long , if rogue traders are also operating in this area .
If control systems are geared to small holdings and hardly any attention is paid to what large eco-holdings are doing , then something is wrong with the entire system .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , you said today that products with a designation of origin are a spearhead for our industry .
You are right about that .
It is particularly true of products that are produced under difficult circumstances , for example , in mountainous areas , and which require higher margins .
The designation ' mountain produce ' is therefore particularly important .
I would like to address two points .
I think that , with regard to these products , we should give farmers the opportunity to organise themselves into inter-professional committees and support consortia where they can also take market decisions .
That would not contravene competition law and , if it did , it would , in any case , be a much smaller contravention than the concentration of chain stores we have seen over the last few years .
With regard to quality standards , about which much has already been said , I am aware of the discussion in the press and also the talk about curved cucumbers .
However , producers want and need these rules .
We should take that into account in our debate and also in the vote tomorrow .
( PT ) Certification mechanisms could constitute a contribution to increasing the value of farmers ' work , improving their income and promoting quality and food safety .
However , since the current certification procedures are complex , time-consuming and , above all , expensive , their results have been negative , especially for small and medium-sized farms .
Increased production costs and the distribution of income throughout the value chain becomes even more unfavourable to the producer with the inclusion of yet another business agent in that chain .
Given this , and as an effective guarantee of transparency , quality and security for customers , certification must be carried out by public bodies and must not incur a higher cost for producers .
Above all , however , if there is to be a good policy , there needs to be another agricultural policy , a profound reform of the common agricultural policy which supports local protection , the right to produce and the right to food sovereignty , which will protect farmers and consumers from the consequences of the deregulation of world trade and the unchecked liberalisation of the markets , locking them either within the framework of bilateral agreements or within that of the World Trade Organisation .
( LT ) The European Union 's agricultural produce is well known in the international marketplace and valued for its high quality .
In terms of the future prospects of the common agricultural policy , I am convinced that product quality must remain the essential goal in the future .
High quality agricultural products are not simply our business card on a global scale ; they are also a very important part of the economic and social life of the EU 's region .
Policies on quality should be developed by providing more clarity with product certification and labelling that can be understood by all European Union consumers .
In order to safeguard the production of quality agricultural products , we must lay down clear rules for labelling products that may contain genetically modified organisms .
This problem has become particularly relevant since the Commission 's decision to allow the use of genetically modified potatoes for animal feed .
Until we lay down labelling and certification standards for such products , there is a threat to future EU food quality policy and the health of us all .
( PL ) Madam President , thanks to the instruments of the common agricultural policy , the agricultural market in the European Union is characterised by the supply of agricultural and food items of high quality .
High standards , suitable food quality and sufficient supply are components of food security , something which is so important .
It is important that information on the quality of goods reaches the consumer .
We know that every product allowed on to the market must meet minimum standards .
Special quality which exceeds minimum standards must be detailed on the product to improve its competitiveness by drawing attention to its additional qualities , for which the consumer must pay .
Other important information which should also be on food products is the place of origin and processing of the raw product .
Consumers must know what they are buying and for what they are paying .
The absence of this information weakens the competitiveness of agricultural and food items produced and processed in Europe in comparison to imported goods produced without regard to animal welfare , environmental requirements or the social standards of employees .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Scottà 's successful report is very much in the interests of consumer protection .
The safety , including from the point of view of health , of agricultural products really must be a top priority .
I would like to point out the key importance of improving designations of origin for foods .
Every agricultural product in the EU must be clearly labelled with the origin of the raw materials .
Consumers must not be duped by fraudulent labelling .
Take China , for example .
Imported seeds arrive in Austria and then the so-called ' pressed seed oil ' is sold there .
Worse still , fattened animals are transported across Europe under deplorable conditions in order to produce so-called ' Tyrolean bacon ' , for example .
We therefore need to focus on regional supplies , and , in the interests of our consumers and our farmers , we need to support local farmers and small butchers .
Madam President , I do not propose to go over all the issues raised here , especially since there is going to be a vote tomorrow , but I would nonetheless like to highlight certain points that have been made repeatedly in the speeches .
With regard to the merging of the various geographical indication systems , I fully understand the concern of certain Members .
I can assure you that it is not my intention to destroy something that works , that functions , something to which consumers are attached .
We just need to make the quality protection system clearer and more consistent , all the more so given that we are trying , by way of international negotiations , to gain recognition for these systems .
Therefore , it is important that these systems already be clear and easy for our partners to understand so that they can be recognised .
It is therefore not my intention to merge for the sake of it .
The end result will be a system by which we can make simplifications , without touching things that are already easily identifiable by consumers .
As regards the European quality logo , we must also discuss and decide in this Chamber which objectives we want it to achieve .
Is the aim simply to reflect compliance with the basic standards that all European farmers meet and that imported goods also meet ?
Indeed - I wish to point this out - all imported agri-food products must meet minimum food hygiene and safety standards which are met by our own products .
We therefore have to see which is the best way to successfully differentiate our products from the others .
Do we need a European Union logo , or should we instead indicate the places of origin , the locations of production ?
The best mechanism needs to be identified , and we shall , in any case , give consideration to this .
With regard to geographical indications at international level , rest assured that my concern is to ensure that this system is recognised by our partners .
We are trying to ensure this in negotiations conducted by the International Labour Organisation , but also whenever we have an opportunity to do so when negotiating bilateral agreements .
We are therefore going to pursue this approach and , moreover , in my mandate , I want to be able to strengthen the policy for communicating and promoting these quality signs internationally , since quality is an asset and , as such , it can give us a greater presence on the international stage .
With regard to the reserved terms ' mountain ' , ' island ' and so forth , we are looking into the possibility of introducing these kinds of systems .
Here too , we need to decide how to proceed so as to ensure that they do not represent an additional cost for those farmers who want to introduce them .
As regards interprofessional organisations and their role in the management of protected designations of origin , or PDOs , it is our intention , particularly as regards milk - since the majority of PDOs and protected geographical indications ( PGIs ) are concentrated in that sector - to carry out a study to see what impact the ending of quotas will have on the smooth functioning of these quality protection systems , and I hope that , on the basis of this report , we shall see which measures will have to be taken should the need arise .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
Thank you , Commissioner Cioloş .
I should like to begin by talking very briefly about the land .
The land is that from which we harvest our products and which we must preserve for the future and for those who will have to do the same .
That is why , taking this simple thought as a starting point , I should like to move on to producers , to those who work the land , who must be recognised also by those who subsequently enjoy the commercial produce they find in the supermarket or some other shop .
It is therefore only right that we respect first the land , which yields the produce , then the processor , if any , but above all the consumer .
I should like to make a proposal for the benefit of consumers , and I am not sure whether it will be welcomed or not : why not ask consumers what they want to know ?
In this way , we will know which potential label consumers are able to read and to understand , and thus perhaps make it much simpler than the complicated labels we have today .
Why must consumers not know that they have the choice of drinking a litre of milk from Europe or a litre of milk from Brazil ?
It will be for them to choose whether a litre of Brazilian milk is better than a litre of milk produced in the European Union .
Be that as it may , I consider and I hope that this report will be useful for Commissioner Cioloş by providing further details to help grow that thread I referred to earlier : the land , the producer , the processor , if any , the consumer , safety and , above all on the issue of safety , quality .
We have all spoken about quality , and I believe that we are all in favour of raising the quality of our produce even more if it means eating well and eating healthily .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The issue of an agricultural product quality policy has found an authoritative and unanimous response from the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , thereby making the existing legislation more complete .
European agricultural producers have finally gained recognition in European legislation on the quality of their produce linked to the region of production .
This represents a guarantee for sheltering them from market globalisation and for ensuring that the ' informed ' consumer can reject produce that does not bear the obligatory geographic indication of origin , that is not certified clearly , and that does not comply with marketing and anti-counterfeiting rules .
Consumers will be able to make their purchasing choices in full knowledge of the rules relating to their desired product .
The European Parliament will continue to fight for the protection of both farmers and consumers .
The health of the latter depends on the quality of the produce of the former .
An amendment of mine on the protection of product characteristics , which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has approved , recognises that the regions have an essential role as producer partners , in particular , of the producers of traditional and organic products , and calls for regions to be involved in the recognition and promotion of products with a geographical indication , traditional products and organic products .
I am pleased to note the recognition of this indication .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of the quality of agricultural produce is of fundamental importance when it comes to informing the purchaser and the consumer of the characteristics of products and as regards continuing to guarantee that purchasing products from the European Union is synonymous with high quality derived from the various regional traditions within the Union .
Over the years , agricultural product quality policy has evolved in a fragmented way , characterised by a succession of sectoral instruments .
Market globalisation and the economic and financial crisis that has struck Europe have not spared the agricultural sector .
To emerge from this , we need to focus on the quality and safety of our produce .
The continuing search for quality must form an essential component of the strategy pursued by the EU 's agri-food sector on the world market .
I believe , furthermore , that serious consideration must be given to the Commission 's proposal to introduce a European quality logo for products originating and processed wholly within Europe .
This logo would , in fact , represent formal recognition of the efforts made by European farmers to maintain high standards of production .
Finally , it is definitely a good idea to simplify legislation in order to reduce the bureaucratic burden on businesses while , at the same time , guaranteeing that the quality standards achieved by European producers are maintained .
The agricultural product quality policy is not a static policy , separate from the other policies connected with agriculture .
On the contrary , the reform of the common agricultural policy should also include policies dealing with adaptation to climate change , the preservation of biological diversity , secure supplies of energy or water , ensuring decent living conditions for animals , and European fisheries .
The product quality policy can help to increase the competitiveness of European farmers and to maintain economic profits in rural areas in a time of crisis precisely by targeting the quality of agricultural products and high quality foodstuffs .
It must continue to apply without exception that purchasing products from the EU means purchasing high quality products , which are produced on the basis of various European regional traditions while following the highest production standards in terms of food safety .
I support the Commission proposal for introducing a European quality logo , which would be used for products coming from and also exclusively processed in the EU .
Consumers confuse the designation of the place where food is processed with the place of origin of the agricultural product .
It is necessary to emphasise that the production process itself can dramatically influence the quality and characteristics of a product in a negative way .
I also welcome the retention of the systems of registering geographical indications and traditional specialities , as these indications are significant for European agriculture not only from an economic perspective , but also from an environmental and social perspective .
G20 labour and employment ministers meeting ( Washington , 20 / 21 April ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the G20 labour and employment ministers meeting ( Washington , 20 / 21 April ) .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the latest projections from the ILO and the OECD show that unemployment rates in the industrialised countries are still rising and will not reach their climax before 2011 .
In turn , more than 200 million workers in developing and emerging countries are at risk of being pushed into extreme poverty .
This would result in nearly 1.5 billion working poor worldwide .
These figures speak for themselves .
Indeed , the current crisis highlighted the most painful weaknesses of our increasingly interconnected global economy .
There is now a clear consensus on the need for global actions to solve global problems .
Last year in Pittsburgh , leaders of the G20 pledged to ensure that when growth returns , jobs do too .
Accordingly , the G20 leaders agreed to build an employment-oriented framework for future economic growth .
This is all very welcome .
The Commission lends full support to any framework for actions that put quality jobs at the heart of recovery and help people back to work worldwide .
This approach reflects the unmistakable reality that employment is the bottom line in the current global economic crisis , and that a jobless recovery is not an option .
In Pittsburgh , the leaders invited the US Labour Secretary to convene a meeting of G20 labour and employment ministers .
Their mandate will be to assess the global employment situation and discuss the impact of policy responses to the crisis as well as the possible necessity of any further measures .
Moreover , ministers are to consider medium-term employment and skills development policies , social protection programmes and best practices to ensure workers can benefit from advances in science and technology .
This unprecedented meeting will take place in Washington DC on 20 and 21 April .
The Commission and the Spanish Presidency will also participate .
The Commission is working closely with the ILO on the preparations for the meeting which will offer us , in particular , an opportunity to promote decent work worldwide on behalf of the European Union .
The application of the ILO 's internationally recognised core labour standards and efforts to achieve the objective of a basic social security flow are crucial here .
Moreover , the G20 mandate includes the development by the ILO and other international organisations of a medium-term global training strategy .
The Commission is making a significant contribution to these efforts through the New Skills for New Jobs initiative .
This is part of the Europe 2020 flagship initiative on an agenda for new skills and jobs .
The key challenge here is to move forward with a strategy to reskill and upgrade the global workforce and facilitate transitions between jobs , and from education to work , for young people .
Social partners ' involvement can bring tremendous added value .
We all know here how effective the European Social Dialogue can be when it comes to improving the design of various measures in the employment field .
The Commission is ready to share this experience with the European Union 's international partners .
The Commission will keep Parliament informed about the progress made at the Washington DC meeting .
The G20 Labour Ministers ' meeting will be an opportunity for us to develop new measures which will shape the post-crisis policy framework .
These new measures and policies can contribute to a balanced exit from the crisis in putting jobs at the heart of the recovery and can overcome the legacy of the crisis .
The aim is to give the necessary input and orientation to the G20 leaders ' summits in Canada and in Korea later this year .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , against the backdrop of the current economic and financial crisis , this G20 summit forces us to conclude that the first objective that we must achieve is that of making workers more employable .
This is a necessity , because there can be no social integration without integration via the workplace .
Therefore , today , as we prepare for this G20 , the only motto and the only objective that we can share is that of combating unemployment .
As you said just now , Commissioner , unemployment has risen significantly in the European Union and the world , but it is quite clear that inequalities are increasing and that they are increasing even more sharply among young people , temporary workers , migrants and women .
Thus , when we see today that 21.4 % of young people are unemployed , compared with the 14.7 % - an already substantial percentage - that were unemployed two years ago , the speed of the increase is very worrying .
We therefore need to build together , within European and globally - since the response can only be global - convergence and integration strategies that explicitly recognise the fact that dynamic social and cohesion policies are the foundations for the development of our society .
I would also like to remind you of the World Trade Organisation 's Global Jobs Pact , which offers an appropriate series of strategic options to enable us to emerge from the crisis .
Where do we stand with regard to the European Commission 's proposal to base the framework of the new post-2010 strategy on the social market economy , integration and transparency ?
I hope that our European ministers for labour and employment do not forget , during this summit , that they will have to account for the rise in unemployment to all the millions of people who , one after another , have lost their jobs in recent months .
Commissioner Andor , the European Union therefore expects you to act so that we can reassure our fellow citizens and get them back into work .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , am very glad that we are able to have an opportunity to have this debate this afternoon , in preparation for the summit that will bring you all together in Washington on 20 and 21 April .
This meeting we are having today owes much to the Chair of the Committee on Employment , Mrs Berès .
An act of God prevents her from being here today .
I am going to speak on behalf of us both .
I shall speak in her language , French , using the papers she had prepared , because I am sure you will be very interested in hearing her own words :
( FR ) That is why , Commissioner , at a time when the unemployment rate in Europe is going to exceed the 10 % mark , when there are more than one and a half billion poor workers in the world and when the crisis is hitting a further 200 million poor workers , it is time for the leaders to focus on the social consequences of the crisis and to give priority to employment .
We commend the preparatory work that you have carried out in close cooperation and in a spirit of dialogue with the social partners .
The meeting sought by the Heads of State or Government gathered together in Pittsburgh has the virtue of finally reconciling macro-economic issues with the social dimension .
In order to avoid a repeat of the mistakes that led to the crisis , we absolutely must ensure that the crisis does not further increase the social inequalities within our countries , between EU Member States and at international level .
We must ensure that a hasty strategy to end the crisis does not result in the dismantling of our social model , for the origins of this crisis - which we have been going through for three years now - are well and truly social .
It is not enough to regulate financial products ; we must get to the very bottom of the wrongdoing .
Unfortunately , we fear that , in spite of numerous reports by organisations such as the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) highlighting the worsening social inequalities , there is still a lack of political will where the social dimension is concerned .
Proof of this is the very poor visibility of social issues , which are not even mentioned on the G20 's official website .
Similarly , the recent decision by the ECOFIN Council to put a stop to the exceptional employment support measures designed to restore public finances quickly is unacceptable .
A dangerous game is being played between ministers for finance and ministers for employment and social affairs .
Commissioner , we are counting on you and on the Spanish Presidency to go against this short-term approach and to place social issues at the heart of European and international action .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , it is absolutely crucial that the G20 employment and labour ministers put quality jobs at the heart of their economic recovery plans .
For many workers - as you are aware , Commissioner - the picture is a dismal one , with unemployment increasing , working hours reduced , substantial pay cuts , the working poor you spoke of , and inadequate or non-existent training opportunities .
At the same time , workers see the banks being recapitalised , while small and medium-sized businesses - the drivers of economic growth - are being starved of funds and jobs are being lost .
Fiscal discipline and retrenchment must not take the place of a job stimulus plan , yet that is happening in many countries , including my own , Ireland .
The Commission praises our fiscal discipline but we are haemorrhaging jobs .
We are balancing the books but our workers are paying the price .
The G20 ministers have to make a firm commitment to supporting decent work and prioritising job growth , alongside minimum income , social protection and training or re-training for those who do not have work .
Finally , I agree with you that they must commit to implementing policies consistent with ILO fundamental principles and rights and they must not allow the current economic crisis to be used as an excuse to weaken or disregard internationally recognised labour standards .
It is high time that the leaders of the European Union recognised the part that they , too , played in the serious social crisis that is happening all over Europe and the world .
This is a consequence of the financial and economic crisis which they facilitated by deregulating financial and trade markets , and pushing through free trade agreements with third countries , without heeding the interests of workers or the public .
The rise in unemployment and precarious and poorly paid work increases poverty and is a direct consequence of neoliberal policies and the crisis of capitalism .
The International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development believe that unemployment has not yet reached its peak in industrialised countries , and that soon , more than 200 million workers could be thrown into extreme poverty .
This means that the number of poor workers could reach 1.5 billion , with women and young people worst affected .
It is time to put an end to the regression of social and labour rights that we are seeing .
Quality jobs with rights need to become a priority and made to comply , at the very least , with the ILO conventions .
Without the creation of new jobs with rights , there can be no way out of this crisis .
( HU ) I think we are all pleased that ministers for employment and social affairs now meet in the G20 gathering , and that they have thus become equal in rank to the finance ministers , which had hitherto not been the case .
It seems that it took an economic crisis for it to be possible to speak of global economic measures , not only with regard to the economy and finance , but also with regard to social and employment issues .
This is especially important now , when it seems that the economic pressures of the crisis are receding , while unemployment and poverty continue to grow .
We know that this will have long-term social as well as political consequences .
Around the world , this goes hand in hand with extremism , which poses a long-term threat as well .
It is important for ministers for employment and social affairs to develop sectoral policies that can remedy the employment situation and reduce poverty .
Let me give a concrete example , which was mentioned at the G20 summit , that of the instrument of micro-finance , which not only increases social cohesion , but also self-sufficiency , and can be important for this reason as well .
It is regrettable , however , that Parliament cannot adopt a position and submit it to the G20 meeting , but can only send our verbal messages .
However , I believe that even this is more than anything we have done in the past .
Madam President , as we are all saying , the financial crisis has hit ordinary people very hard .
That is why we have to make sure there are positive outcomes from the G20 Employment Ministers ' meeting , the first to be called , as has just been mentioned .
I just hope we do have those positive outcomes .
I am glad they are not going to concentrate just on the financial sector but will look at the social impact on people as well .
We know there is record unemployment in many countries across the world .
We have got to look at the real way of getting people into work - into real jobs .
Training programmes , for instance , have to be adequate to actually cover the needs at the moment .
We ought to be looking at identifying best practice from countries that have already brought in various measures , and trying to roll that out to other countries , to try to help the most marginalised in society .
Work has been done in those other countries , so why are we not learning from them ?
We must make sure the core ILO conventions are actually implemented .
We must make sure the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is implemented .
We must make sure that those who are not protected at the moment are protected in the future .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the G20 summit in Pittsburgh provided a good model .
It demanded economic recovery plans in order to promote decent work , which will contribute to security and the creation of jobs , and it made the growth of employment a priority .
I therefore call on Europe 's labour ministers to press the G20 members , firstly , not to go back on their economic recovery packages , but to work harder and to a greater extent to create jobs ; secondly , to work to provide financially secure short-time work to prevent the loss of jobs ; thirdly , to promote public investment for the creation of jobs and sustainable ecological growth and , fourthly , to strengthen and extend social security measures to enable access to these measures .
That will also safeguard purchasing power within the internal market as well as employment and will help to combat poverty .
Cooperation with the social partners is apparently very important to Europe 's labour ministers in order to strengthen the social dialogue to an even greater extent than desired by the Commissioner .
( EL ) Madam President , Commission , there will be a premiere in Washington on 20 April : for the first time , the Ministers for Employment of the 20 wealthiest areas on earth are to hold a conference .
The voice of Europe needs to be heard loud and strong there .
Four-and-a-half million jobs are in danger of being lost in Europe over the next three years and this will impact on growth , damage social cohesion and cause social unrest .
Creating jobs must be a priority for Europe .
Realistic , specific , quantifiable targets , both long-term and immediate , urgently need to be set .
We urgently need to be able to safeguard decent work for the citizens of Europe .
We urgently need to be able to safeguard the employment and pension rights of workers .
We are close to forgetting the obvious : that work is a lever for growth .
I think that we ultimately need to understand that we cannot talk of economic policy without keeping the employment parameter constantly in mind .
I should like to close by saying that , otherwise , instead of talking about a Council of Ministers for Employment , we shall be talking about a Council of Ministers for Unemployment .
( FR ) Madam President , in my view , there will be no lasting solution to unemployment and underemployment unless we reverse the current approach , which prioritises capital over labour , and unless we introduce a new form of wealth distribution that includes an increase in pay , in social protection levels and in minimum benefits .
This is what will create the conditions for a sustainable recovery that provides a wealth of jobs .
Social progress is a prerequisite for ending the economic crisis , not the other way around .
The G20 should act as an incentive to mobilise the international banking sector in favour of selective credit that would help employment , job-creating investment and promoters of a new , environmentally friendly economy .
At the same time , speculative capital flows should be taxed so that they can be redirected to the fight against poverty .
I propose that we examine and trial a vocational and training-related social security system for the jobs of the future , at the same time as developing public research , which is crucial to a new lasting and sustainable economy .
( RO ) The G20 leaders established in Pittsburgh in September 2009 that the main priority in the economic recovery plans must be to preserve existing jobs and create new ones .
In spite of the International Monetary Fund 's forecasts for 3 % economic growth , the OECD and ILO forecasts indicate that the unemployment rate will continue to rise rapidly right until the first half of 2011 .
The economic and financial crisis has hit European companies hard , not to mention , by implication , Member States ' budgets .
The G20 labour and social welfare ministers should ask for the support granted to companies in difficulty , as a result of the economic crisis , to be extended until when the unemployment rate starts to fall again .
In addition , I believe that these ministers must find measures to support both civil servants and employees paid from public funds , such as teachers and doctors , who are losing jobs as a result of the reduction in the budgets allocated to public institutions .
( LT ) We must welcome the fact that for the first time , labour and employment ministers are meeting at the G20 .
At the 2009 G20 leaders ' summit in Pittsburgh , the countries ' leaders agreed that the emphasis in national economic recovery plans should be on the retention and creation of jobs .
However , since this summit , the situation has worsened , both in the European Union and on a global scale .
In some Member States , the number of unemployed that grows daily has reached a critical level and some national governments ' crisis management plans are making people 's situation significantly worse , since pensions and other important social guarantees are being reduced .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are shutting down en masse .
I think that the main emphasis of the G20 summit should be agreement on concrete measures to stabilise the unemployment level , since the disillusionment and fear of the people will not contribute to the speedy economic recovery of our countries .
( LT ) First of all , I really welcome the fact that for the first time at the G20 , ministers of the world 's most powerful countries , labour and employment ministers , will meet to discuss the most important problems , in other words , how to overcome unemployment and increase employment .
In fact , this meeting will take place in a very difficult environment , as in the European Union alone , around 5.5 million young people are out of work .
The number of long-term unemployed is also growing constantly .
This week , in my country , Lithuania , 300 000 people were registered unemployed .
My country has never experienced this before in the 20 years since it became independent .
Therefore , it is very important that , once they come together , the ministers of the most powerful countries set out concrete measures that should be taken so that people in EU countries do not just have any work , but suitable work , quality work , decently paid work , from which they make a living and not live in poverty .
Therefore , I hope that such concrete decisions are taken at this meeting .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am glad this discussion on the labour and employment ministers ' meeting in Washington DC took place today because it is not going to be the only summit where the voice of the Members of Parliament will be heard on such an important subject .
There is another summit coming soon that should also get to hear what you said today : I have in mind the summit tomorrow in Brussels , which has the opportunity to support the Europe 2020 agenda with a strong inclusive pillar and flagship initiatives to boost employment and reduce poverty and with serious targets included in this strategy .
It has to be appreciated how serious a crisis the world economy has faced in the last two years and it is not only about deteriorating statistics .
I fully agree with Mrs Göncz that we also have to appreciate the political risk , the risk this crisis poses for European civilisation .
And I hope that the leaders who meet tomorrow will understand this and draw very responsible conclusions from this situation .
Without that , it would be very difficult to represent European values worldwide ; it would be very difficult to represent with credibility the commitment to addressing unemployment and poverty in the G20 context .
It is a major step forward that labour ministers are meeting in the G20 context .
Whether we are emancipated to include finance ministers is still to be seen but it is very important that this step has been made and there is the opportunity to exchange experience and exchange views .
It is true that the financial crisis has been first addressed by the governments and the fiscal power of the state has been directed to the stabilisation of the banking sectors .
The banks have been recapitalised and financial stability has enjoyed priority .
Now we have to prioritise job creation .
We have to prioritise an exit strategy that does not harm existing jobs and does not undermine the capacity to invest .
Therefore , we first have to make a decision to create financial order , to restore stability and to eliminate the pressure on Member State governments to make unreasonable cuts that affect the social sector and employment .
I fully agree that the ILO is the cornerstone in producing ILO standards and making reference to them in the international discussion is of key importance .
This is a sound standard for us in moving forward on employment and social relations .
The G20 context is a great opportunity to link up with discussions in the outside world and they are connecting us not only to discussions on labour relations , but also on financial regulation and on issues such as transaction tax that are more boldly discussed in other corners of the world and sometimes deserve more serious attention inside the European Union .
So I am grateful for the comments I have heard and for the messages I can convey to other partners in the G20 group .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( HU ) In my view , it is essential to recognise that the decision makers of today are not keeping pace with developments in the world , the economy and technology : soon , even an energy company will be able to plan farther ahead than international political actors .
Unfortunately , a failure to recognise this reality is evident in the current EU 2020 strategy .
The European Union should look farther and should also be willing to make sacrifices in the interest of a more sustainable society .
We need to concentrate increasingly on infrastructure and on job creation rather than on a growing consumption that relies on imports .
Unconditional free trade dishonourably takes away jobs , ruins the environment , endangers consumer health and increases obstacles to accessibility , solely in order to guarantee the price of a product or service .
We cannot go back to the extremes of the days of rampant capitalism - the world of Oliver Twists !
Otherwise , the EU 2020 strategy , just like the Lisbon Strategy , will end in failure .
Fight against tuberculosis ( debate )
The next item is the statement from the Commission on the fight against tuberculosis .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome this opportunity on World Tuberculosis Day to underline the Commission 's commitment to addressing the challenges caused by this disease .
We had believed that our successes in past decades had eliminated the threats related to this serious public health concern .
However , for too long , we have mistakenly lowered the guard against tuberculosis .
In 2008 , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control reported around 83 000 cases and close to 6 000 deaths due to tuberculosis in the European Union and EFTA countries .
This amounts to about 16 deaths a day .
This is simply unacceptable and requires action by all concerned sectors and stakeholders .
It is unacceptable because tuberculosis is a preventable and curable disease that should not lead to such dramatic consequences .
Tuberculosis is a cross-sector issue and it is linked to many of the public health challenges we face in the European Union , including the spread of anti-microbial resistance , the lack of new effective tools to diagnose and treat tuberculosis , the steep rise of co-infections such as with HIV , and the inequalities , with tuberculosis disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable groups .
The Commission has launched a number of initiatives over the past years to strengthen capacities to tackle tuberculosis .
In 2000 , tuberculosis was included in the list of priority diseases under EU-wide surveillance .
In this context , the Commission supported several projects that have helped coordinate the surveillance of tuberculosis in the 53 countries of the WHO European Region .
This has improved our shared knowledge and monitoring of the epidemiological situation .
In addition , through its research framework programmes , the Commission supports the development of new treatments , vaccines , drugs and diagnostic tools against tuberculosis .
Since 2002 , more than EUR 124 million has been allocated to these efforts .
But , as tuberculosis is not constrained by borders , we have to support countries beyond the European Union .
The Commission supports developing countries in their tuberculosis control programmes through the European Programme for Action to Confront HIV / AIDS , Malaria and Tuberculosis through External Action ( 2007-2011 ) .
The main channel for financing this support is the Global Fund to fight AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria , to which the Commission has contributed EUR 870 million since 2002 , with an annual contribution that amounts to EUR 100 million since 2008 .
In addition , it supports clinical trials and capacity building in sub-Saharan Africa through the European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership ( EDCTP ) .
Finally , the setting up of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has enabled us to raise our efforts against tuberculosis to a new level .
In March 2007 , following a request from the Commission , the Centre developed an action plan to fight tuberculosis in the EU .
This addresses the key cross-sectoral challenges we are facing today in tuberculosis prevention and control and strengthening epidemiological surveillance : ensuring prompt and quality TB care for all , developing new tools for diagnosis and treatment , decreasing the burden of tuberculosis and HIV co-infection , and addressing the threat of multi-drug resistance .
However , the Commission cannot succeed in this challenge alone .
The contribution from civil society to reach out to the most vulnerable , and the Member States ' commitment are key towards achieving our objective to support the global fight against this disease .
' The cause of death in the age of antibiotics ' is what a group of researchers called tuberculosis , a word which many of us thought had disappeared from everyday usage , but a disease which still kills a huge number of people .
Tuberculosis is the seventh most common cause of death in the world .
Unfortunately , the current situation is highlighted by the rise in the number of cases involving a strain of tuberculosis resistant to standard drug therapy .
Globally , there were 9.4 million new cases of tuberculosis in 2008 and 1.8 million deaths .
A person is infected by tuberculosis somewhere in the world every second .
We need to hear these figures stated as clearly as possible in an important forum of the European Union so that we can all realise as much as possible that this disease is still ravaging our societies and killing a large number of European citizens .
I come from a country which , unfortunately , features among the top places in the European Union in the dismal ratings for tuberculosis cases .
Although we can talk about a slightly downward trend in recent years and an increase in the percentage of people cured of chemo-resistant tuberculosis , the absolute figures remain alarming and they reflect a tragic reality .
We need to wage a consistent , integrated battle , based on the best possible planning , in order to keep this scourge under control .
We have to continue at European Union level the work we have done so far to ensure that in all Member States , we raise the level of detection of diseases , the level of access to adequate treatment , the quality of treatment monitoring and the quality of medical care given to patients .
We also need all governments to realise the importance of this battle and to work alongside social partners as effectively as possible in order to reduce the number of Europeans suffering from this disease which we thought had been banished in previous centuries .
Above all , we need to wage this battle together , as a family , without considering the differences between us , but helping each other to overcome this problem .
Ultimately , we are the European Union and our strength lies in unity .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , in this day and age , no one should be dying from TB .
( SV ) That is what Ban Ki Moon said today , on World Tuberculosis Day .
He is right , of course .
Nevertheless , very many people around the world are still dying of tuberculosis today , particularly the young and the poor .
We therefore need to increase our aid to the global fund that is responsible for a very large proportion of the work to combat tuberculosis , malaria and HIV in the poorer areas of the world .
However , as the Commission pointed out , people in Europe are also dying of tuberculosis .
We need to increase our cooperation to stop the spread of multi-resistant TB and to find effective treatments which reach all of the vulnerable groups in society .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , based in Solna in Sweden , has a very important role to play here and I am pleased that the Commission has made it a priority to come here and hold a debate on this important subject today .
Mr President , medical progress has not yet overcome tuberculosis .
Consequently , it is wrongly considered to be a disease that affects only poor countries .
This underestimates the way in which it is spreading , especially in Central and Eastern Europe .
In truth , no country is safe from this dreadful disease , which has been around for many thousands of years .
Furthermore , the multiple-resistant strains offer little hope of an end to this scourge in the short term .
The need to fight on several fronts by means of prevention , medical supervision , research and the dissemination of precautionary and hygiene measures encourages us to act in a coordinated and determined manner .
In short , we must be able to rely at all times on the best possible strategies in this area .
When it comes to financing the measures , it is advisable to distinguish between two scenarios .
Firstly , the social security systems in our countries should , in principle , be able to guarantee sufficient medical cover .
However , patients in developing countries still rely on solidarity which , since 2002 , has materialised in an exemplary fashion under the Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria .
If the aim is indeed to halve the number of cases of tuberculosis between 2000 and 2015 , one of the three scenarios put forward by the President of the Global Fund , Michel Kazatchkine , will have to be endorsed .
I should like to ask the Commission which of the three scenarios it is using as a basis for making proposals to our Member States regarding the future financing of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria .
( PT ) World Tuberculosis Day , which takes place today , is an occasion to call for the strengthening of political dialogue and the involvement of governments and civil society in this cause .
The number of cases of tuberculosis has been decreasing within the EU .
There has also been a marked reduction in Portugal , but the incidence rate is still above the EU average .
This reduction is linked to the success of the National Plan to Fight Tuberculosis .
In some countries , however , it has recently been shown that the disease is resurgent .
The various action plans promoted by the European Commission are steps in the right direction .
I would like to highlight the partnership between Europe and developing countries in carrying out clinical trials .
The support of the Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development is also important in the field of life science .
Strengthening the role of clinical and scientific research is vital in the fight against tuberculosis .
This makes it crucial that work continues to discover new and better instruments to combat tuberculosis and which promote innovative diagnostic technologies , along with medicines and vaccines .
I therefore call upon the Commission and the Member States to join forces and ramp up the fight against tuberculosis in order to succeed in controlling and eradicating this disease .
( LT ) We must combat tuberculosis , since every year , many people in the world die from this disease and almost one in three inhabitants of the world are infected by it .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that tuberculosis is the most widespread infectious disease in the world , which is closely linked to social and economic problems , in other words , poverty , unemployment , alcoholism , drug addiction and HIV / AIDS , as well as the inadequate state of health care systems in poor countries and delayed diagnosis .
In order to overcome these factors causing tuberculosis , the European Commission and the European Union Member States must take concrete and swift action with the aim of establishing joint measures to combat this terrible disease , find joint political dialogue on financial support and adopt a joint action plan to combat the disease .
In spite of the fact that tuberculosis is included in the list of priority diseases , the fight against tuberculosis still receives insufficient funding and therefore , we must review the European Union budget allocations in this action programme .
I also call on you to encourage greater investment in scientific research in the fight against tuberculosis .
( CS ) Today is World Tuberculosis Day and it provides an opportunity to mention that , despite the successes achieved so far in the battle against this disease , tuberculosis remains a serious global problem .
More than 2 billion people are infected with the tuberculosis bacillus and one in ten of these people fall ill with the active form .
The incidence of tuberculosis and , in particular , the varying levels in the treatment and monitoring of the disease , are connected with the varying socio-economic conditions in different regions and also in different social groups .
The early diagnosis of tuberculosis and the thorough and fully-monitored treatment of the disease , in other words , treatment that is uninterrupted and of sufficient duration , are the basic pre-conditions for reducing the risk of extensive treatment resistance and multi-resistant forms of TBC developing , the treatment of which is extremely expensive and difficult to obtain in many countries .
Of similar importance is the adaptation of health systems and everyday practice , including monitoring the disease in high-risk groups and providing qualified health workers and adequate supplies of equipment .
WHO estimates talk of the need to spend USD 44.3 billion at the national level over the next 10 years on the fight against tuberculosis , yet barely half of the resources required will be available .
The EU 's task is therefore to join forces with the WHO and individual countries , together with their national health systems , and to make the battle against tuberculosis one of the priorities of development aid to third countries .
I took great pleasure and interest in listening to the speeches of the honourable Members .
I would like to assure them that the Commission is treating this disease very seriously and also gives significant weight to what has been said today .
We are determined to achieve our targets in order to control the tuberculosis disease .
These kinds of discussions are of particular importance in order to concentrate all attention and focus on this disease .
Parliament 's contribution and support is essential in contributing to our endeavours in fighting this disease within the European Union as well as in other countries .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - While tuberculosis is viewed by many in the past tense and seen as a 19th century affliction , it continues to have a serious impact , both directly and indirectly , on the lives of hundreds of thousands of farmers across the EU each year .
Though TB in its human form has been contained in most EU countries since the middle of the 20th century , it continues to spread aggressively among livestock and affects 5 % of cattle herds in my Ireland East constituency each year .
I recently received correspondence from a dairy farmer in County Westmeath , whose herd of prized dairy cows has been all but obliterated since he first discovered TB on his farm less than a year ago .
The badger-spread disease was first discovered on the day he was due to leave on a two-week holiday last June , and he has since lost 64 of his 82-strong herd .
Though TB in humans has been rightly tackled with full force by the EU in recent times , the bovine form of the disease , which results in millions of euro of lost revenue each year , should be seriously considered as we draft TB legislation for the future .
The effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Enrique Guerrero Salom , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation -
Mr President , Commissioner , the financial and economic crisis is producing the bitterest , severest effects on emerging and developing countries , especially on the lower income ones .
This crisis has slowed down the sustained growth that has been occurring in many of these countries over the last decade : economic growth that was creating jobs , helping to straighten out their public accounts , making it possible to bring down their foreign debt , encouraging the expansion of their business activity and , in addition , helping them to obtain more official development aid .
These countries had already been suffering in the years prior to the crisis , however : firstly , the food crisis , which endangered the survival of hundreds of millions of people ; then , the energy crisis , which used up many of the resources of those that did not produce oil or gas ; finally , the climate crisis , the effects of which on harvests and infrastructure harm the poorest countries most of all .
The financial crisis added to this fragile situation in which these countries found themselves .
As the European Commission itself points out , having affected the developing countries and emerging countries , the third wave of the financial crisis damaged the poorest countries , turning this crisis , in theory an economic one , into a development , social and humanitarian crisis .
In fact , all areas of activity in these countries have been damaged .
Economic growth , which will be much lower in 2009 than in previous years , has been damaged .
Trade has decreased , which will weaken these countries ' current account balances .
There is less foreign investment and little access by these countries to international funding , and we are seeing a growing protectionist reaction from the developed countries .
At the same time , emigrant remittances have fallen and Official Development Assistance has also been reduced .
As a result , hundreds of millions of people have been added to the list of the poorest and hundreds of thousands of children will die at an earlier age on continents such as Africa .
In the face of this reality , the European voice must make itself heard by requiring us to uphold the Official Development Assistance undertakings made ; by requiring new sources of additional resources to help these countries ; by requiring charges and taxes on emigrants to be lightened ; by requiring that attempts at protectionism should be resisted and support for a Doha Development Round to be held ; by requiring action against tax havens and tax evasion ; and also by working for a debt moratorium or debt cancellation for the poorest countries .
As rapporteur for this report , I wanted to obtain the greatest possible consensus and I agreed , in negotiation , to amendments by all the parliamentary groups , but I am still willing to submit an oral amendment to Section 34 of this report tomorrow , with the aim of adding further votes .
This would be further authority for something I believe to be vital : that the European voice should be united and strong as regards aid to developing countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate the rapporteur for this very comprehensive report .
As rightly emphasised in this report , developing countries have been affected by the crisis much harder than initially expected .
In fact , they have been hit through several transmission channels , such as volatile commodity prices , declining export revenues and tourism earnings , as well as falling capital flows and remittances .
One common feature is the increase in the financing needs of many countries .
Many developing countries were often obliged to cut social expenditure ( notably in nutrition , health and education ) , entailing severe social and political consequences and threatening not only the achievement of the MDGs by 2015 , but also undermining past progress observed in recent years .
Despite some first signs of global recovery , developing countries , particularly in sub-Saharan Africa , will certainly lag behind .
The EU has shown leadership and unity through a joint EU response to the crisis framed within the global response , namely within the United Nations , the G20 and G8 .
We have acted quickly and efficiently to translate pledges into concrete commitments to help developing countries cope with the crisis .
Last spring , the EU adopted a set of comprehensive , timely , targeted and coordinated measures to cushion the human impact of the crisis , boost economic growth in developing countries and protect the most vulnerable .
The EU response comprises not only the Community response but also the EU Member States ' response ( their respective bilateral responses as well as their contributions to the resources of the international financial institutions as called upon by the G20 ) .
Moreover , close collaboration with the World Bank and the IMF has enabled us to ensure the consistency of our respective analyses and the complementarity of our assistance .
As highlighted in the report , the Commission has set up and is currently implementing a very concrete and short-term ad hoc mechanism , named the Vulnerability FLEX , to support the most vulnerable countries with poor resilience capacity , with a view to enabling them to maintain priority spending , notably in the social sectors .
Other measures include reallocations following ad hoc country reviews and the advanced Mid-Term Review of the 10th European Development Fund , which is currently ongoing , support under the traditional FLEX instrument , frontloading of aid where feasible , etc .
Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) has played , and will continue to play , a critical role in supporting our partners ' efforts in coping with the crisis .
In this context , the Commission welcomes your support in urging Member States to stay committed to achieving by 2015 the 0.7 % ODA / GNI target .
Other donors should take similar ambitious targets for ODA increases , and we must call upon the entire donor community to live up to their commitments in terms of aid volumes and effectiveness .
On 21 April , the Commission will publish its yearly spring development package of proposals to Member States .
This year , the focus will be on the actions that remain necessary to achieve the MDGs .
The package will adopt a comprehensive approach and define an action plan for accelerated progress towards the MDGs .
It will also provide an opportunity to make an ambitious EU contribution to the forthcoming UN High-Level MDG Review in September .
In doing so , the EU will remain credible about its commitments and continue to play a leading role in international development .
( RO ) The economic and financial crisis has also hit Moldova , a developing country , very hard .
This country 's economy declined by 9 % last year according to IMF estimates , and the unemployment rate has passed the 6 % mark .
Direct investment needs to be encouraged .
I should point out that Moldova has employed for a period of one year nine senior European advisers who will provide assistance to the main ministries in Chişinău .
Bearing in mind that we speak the same language , our neighbours from across the River Prut can benefit from Romania 's expertise in absolutely every area .
The cost of money transfers made by emigrants from the countries they work in must be reduced .
The commitment made by the G8 leaders to cut these costs from 10 % to 5 % in the next five years is a first step in this direction .
I would like to welcome today the record financial support amounting to USD 2.6 billion which has been granted to Moldova for the 2011-2013 period .
The agreement was reached today by Prime Minister Vlad Filat during the Donor conference .
( ES ) Mr President , although the epicentre of the crisis is not located in the developing countries , they are the ones that have been seriously and deeply affected by its huge wave .
The credit crunch , the uncertainty produced by the depression and the fall in international trade , investment flows and remittances from emigrant workers have been the main channels for the spread of a crisis preceded by a great deal of volatility in the prices of basic products and foodstuffs , and generated in circumstances of massive global imbalances .
A concerted response to the crisis must take the developing countries into account and their agenda must form an essential component of global economic cooperation .
Through the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we have asked that the International Monetary Fund consider the burden that the crisis has produced on the public finances of the developing countries in the report it is to prepare for the forthcoming G20 meeting , and that the Commission issue a communication in which an assessment is made as to how a tax on financial transactions might help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , correct the global imbalances and promote sustainable development .
I am glad that Mr Guerrero has taken up these proposals and I congratulate him on his splendid report .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his important report .
I am convinced that the best way to counter the crisis is with more free trade and globalisation , not with protectionism .
Europe must therefore keep its markets open in order to combat the recession , stimulate growth , both in Europe and worldwide and , in so doing , combat poverty .
In a few days ' time , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly will meet in Tenerife .
My colleagues from the ACP countries always tend to point out the problems that the EU 's subsidised agricultural products create on their markets .
They need trade , but our policy counteracts the establishment of healthy markets for agricultural products in developing countries .
The EU has shown leadership says the Commissioner , but we can do much better .
It is a matter of fair trade , Commissioner .
( PT ) The food , energy , climate , financial , economic and social crises referred to in the report are nothing more than different incarnations of the same structural crisis that has been dragging on for decades .
In some regions , such as sub-Saharan Africa , wealth per capita has been continuously diverging from that of other regions in the world over decades .
Despite the disparities that exist at present , developing countries tend to have certain characteristics in common : dependence on exports of a few raw materials , a lack of economic diversification , a strong focus on agriculture , the energy and extractive industries or tourism , and a strong field of foreign capital .
A progressive export and liberalisation model for trade has been pushed on these countries , if necessary , by resorting to blackmail .
As shown by the negotiation process for economic partnership agreements , this leads to the exacerbation of the dependency of these countries , thwarting any possible indigenous development .
Yet it is foreign debt that continues to be the principal drain on the resources of developing countries .
It is paid many times over , yet as it is always growing , the debt has reached a colossal amount and self-perpetuates the overexploitation of these countries , thus maintaining the tenor of their relationship with the countries of the northern hemisphere .
Cancelling the debt is simply a matter of justice .
Keeping to the speaking time , too , is a matter of fairness .
( DE ) The biggest financial and economic crisis since the 1930s has , as we know , not only hit Europe hard .
The developing countries are suffering particularly badly from the effects of the crisis , and they are least able to do anything about it .
Irresponsible speculation , greed for quick profits which are completely unrelated to the real economy , particularly in the Anglo-Saxon countries , and a financial system that is coming apart at the seams have brought the world to the brink of a financial abyss .
Another cause of the crisis is a globalisation concept that has made complete deregulation its highest priority .
The countries of Europe are getting themselves ever deeper into debt in order to restart their economies .
However , in many cases , it is not possible for developing countries to do this because of their poor financial situation .
Therefore , they must be given the opportunity to protect their own national economies more effectively against imported goods which are sold at dumping prices and which destroy local markets and local people 's livelihoods .
We must give the developing countries the chance to emerge from the crisis under their own steam .
Traditional development aid can probably be considered to have largely failed in its purpose .
Ultimately , we have to tackle the root of the problem and impose strict regulations on the financial markets , prohibit speculative practices and quickly introduce a tax on financial transactions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 March 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The EU has a duty to help developing countries overcome difficulties linked to the global economic crisis and poverty , which came about through no fault of their own .
It is very important that the European Commission determinedly strives for the implementation of international development cooperation reform and that together with the Council , it improves the coordination of bilateral and multilateral development cooperation , since gaps in this area are the main reason why the effectiveness of aid for development may suffer .
Developing countries need aid to reduce poverty and isolation , measures that contribute to development and measures necessary to exit the crisis , especially in this difficult period .
We will be able to implement the broad commitments adopted by generally having better coordination and action that is administered more effectively and transparently , striving for broad agreement between the main aid providers , partner countries , financial institutions and civil society .
By implementing these actions , the European Union must be the leader and act more resolutely .
To that end , all European Union institutions must make greater commitments and on this matter , Parliament has undoubtedly made its opinion very clear .
The developing countries have ended up the main victims of the financial crisis , in spite of the initial predictions which maintained that the developed countries would be hit hardest .
The theory suggesting that developing countries are not tied in strongly enough to the global economy to be seriously affected by the crisis on the financial markets has been disproved by reality .
We are seeing the crisis deepening in many developing countries , with unprecedented unemployment rates and exponential growth in government debt and budget deficits .
While all this is going on , developed countries which have not felt the impact of the crisis very strongly or have had available effective instruments for mitigating its impact have experienced economic growth , albeit tentative .
The economic crisis is already affecting the population directly , while unemployment is on the rise in developing countries .
The efforts being made to bring about economic recovery by the states which continue to feel the effects of the crisis could affect whole social groups , as the recovery measures can only have a painful impact .
EU funding programmes are the most comprehensive and inclusive among the financial aid schemes available globally .
The Member States affected must benefit as appropriately as possible from the money allocated for tackling situations which restrict economic activity and have social ramifications .
in writing . - The global financial and economic crisis has hit the developed world so deeply that we are now struggling with a social and unemployment crisis .
But in the least developed countries , such problems , for which they are not responsible , are compounded by the consequences of food and climate crises , with dramatic implications for a sixth of the world 's population who suffer from hunger .
As the largest combined aid donors , the EU Member States must fulfil their Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) commitments , improve aid effectiveness and coordination and strengthen their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 .
The extent of the damage caused by speculation in the financial sector highlights the importance of preventive measures such as taxation of financial transactions and warrants considering compensation from the sector for the costs of the crisis .
As tax havens and off-shores deprive developing countries of multiples of the amounts raised through ODA , inaction in this field is unacceptable .
Although today we can already speak of an improvement in the economic and financial crisis in some EU Member States , we should recognise that for the developing countries , this crisis , with all its cruel effects , is still in full swing .
Without a doubt , we should consider economic development to be the key phrase for resolving the current global crisis .
However , while undertaking the revitalisation of our own economy , we should not forget that the continuation of the crisis in the developing countries also hinders global economic growth very significantly , and therefore also hinders our own development .
I think that the Member States of the European Union must continue to give aid to reduce poverty and exclusion in the developing countries , continually adapting this to new circumstances and conditions .
Considering the severe effects of the global crisis on the developing countries in particular , I support those who say that , despite the crisis , all the EU Member States could increase their collective development aid by 0.7 % of their GNI by 2015 .
It is important to take measures to promote development and to get us out of the crisis today - in 2010 .
Therefore , I support those who say that , in the current situation , highly-developed countries both within and outside the EU should take steps to reform international development cooperation .
We cannot allow a lack of intervention on our part to cancel out previous achievements in the areas of poverty and exclusion , and we cannot allow a situation to arise in which , instead of the current hundred million people living in extreme poverty , we have a billion people in such a position .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23.15 )
Opening of the sitting
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , sad news has reached us of the recent shooting of French policeman Jean-Serge Nérin by ETA .
This makes us aware that the problem of terrorism in Europe has not yet been solved .
On behalf of Parliament , and for my own part , I would like to offer our condolences to the family of the murdered policeman .
I hope the Spanish and French police will bring to justice not only the killers themselves , but also those who ordered the killing .
There is a second piece of disturbing news : the arrest in Cuba of 30 participants in a demonstration by the ' Ladies in White ' group .
The ' Ladies in White ' are mothers and wives of imprisoned opposition activists .
In 2005 , the European Parliament awarded the ' Ladies in White ' the Sakharov Prize .
We join today with those heroic women , and we are thinking about them and their difficult situation .
ECB annual report for 2008 - Report on the 2009 Annual Statement on the Euro Area and Public Finances ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mr Scicluna , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the ECB annual report for 2008 , and
the report by Mr Giegold , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2009 Annual Statement on the Euro Area and Public Finances - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the last two years have certainly been the most challenging for the ECB , in its role as guardian of financial and price stability , since its inception .
My report on the ECB 's 2008 annual report was drafted in this context .
The report focuses on the ECB 's continued response to the crisis , its exit strategy proposals , the increasing imbalances within the eurozone , the reform of the EU 's financial architecture and , finally , issues related to the governance and accountability of this institution .
I hope that a good balance has been found .
The financial and economic crisis has seen the worst global economic decline since the 1930s .
After a relatively benign period of economic growth enjoyed across most of Europe , most Member States have had their economies stress-tested , not through a simulated model but in real time and with painfully real consequences .
The result has been GDP growth of a meagre 0.7 % in 2008 , followed by a 4 % contraction in 2009 .
Meanwhile , Member States across the EU have forecast a very sluggish and uneven return to growth in 2010 and 2011 .
Most Member States are experiencing rising budgetary deficits and debts .
The Commission 's economic forecast in autumn 2009 predicted average budget deficits across the eurozone of 6.4 % and average government debts of 78.2 % , figures which , in turn , are both expected to increase in 2010 .
It will take years for these figures , brought about by the financial and economic crisis , to return to the pre-crisis levels .
I believe that the ECB has responded fairly well to the crisis .
The primary function of the ECB is to maintain price stability .
Although inflation was far above the ECB 's self-imposed ceiling when it peaked at 4 % in June and July 2008 , inflation rates have since tumbled .
The ECB has also steadily cut interest rates from a peak of 4.25 % in June 2008 down to the current rate of 1 % in May 2009 , in a bid to reinvigorate lending and to kick-start the European economy .
The ECB 's additional role during the crisis has been to expand liquidity provisions through the use of non-standard measures .
Without such financial life-support , many financial institutions holding the savings and pensions of many European citizens would undoubtedly have collapsed .
Of course , it could be suggested that the ECB 's interest rate cuts were not as radical as those taken by the likes of the US Federal Reserve or the Bank of England .
Similarly , while the ECB 's massive cash injections have kept many institutions from collapse , the reality is that many banks have not passed on the liquidity to customers , particularly to the detriment of the small and medium-sized businesses on whom economic recovery rests .
Instead , many banks have used the liquidity to buttress their own position .
To justified public revulsion , it has allowed them to make bonus payments as well .
I also cannot avoid making a quick reference to the policy responses needed to the current fiscal imbalances , a subject which is surrounded by a lot of confusion and which requires timely and decisive action .
However , I will leave it to my colleagues here perhaps to amplify on this .
Like previous rapporteurs , I believe that the dialogue between this Parliament and the ECB is constructive and is developing positively .
This is something to build upon .
I believe that Parliament should be more closely involved in the appointments of the ECB Executive Board members - including the next President of the ECB - by following the precedent that has recently been set by the procedure taken for the appointment of the new Vice-President of the institution .
The ECB is accountable to the citizens of Europe through the European Parliament .
We must strengthen that accountability .
Above all , the crisis has demonstrated that markets left unregulated do not always self-correct and are prone to systemic risk .
For this reason , it is important to support and complete the comprehensive set of reforms to the financial architecture of the EU and , in particular , the establishment of a European Systemic Risk Board , a body designed to act as a watchdog , giving an early warning of any systemic risks of instability in the financial ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the report on the 2009 annual statement on the euro area and public finance was drafted during a period when the euro area was facing huge challenges and this period has not yet come to an end .
The economic situation is a matter of major concern for the citizens of Europe and for all of us .
At this time , the report was adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in a highly cooperative spirit and by a large majority .
I would like to present the report against this background .
On the one hand , it is very clear , both from the relevant Commission proposal and from the recommendations which Parliament and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs are presenting here in the plenary session , that the economic situation must be stabilised .
On the other hand , the crisis , which has achieved a certain level of stability as the growth figures have recovered slightly , has entered a second phase represented by huge public budget deficits .
This is the price which we have to pay in order to emerge from the crisis .
The report 's message in this respect is very clear .
We must return to the path taken by the Stability and Growth Pact as quickly as possible .
We cannot pass on this level of debt to our children and grandchildren .
However , the report also states very clearly that the rules in the Stability and Growth Pact are not enough .
There are no corresponding measures for improved coordination in the euro area and it is important to resolve the imbalances within the euro area and increase the coordination of budgetary and fiscal policy .
Those with responsibility for these areas in the euro area are now faced with the significant challenge of finding a responsible solution for these problems .
This means that it is out of the question for every country to continue to insist on its individual privileges against a background of parochial politics .
The Commission , in particular , and also the euro area countries , have a huge responsibility for introducing the necessary measures in this situation .
I would like to summarise briefly our proposals in this respect .
Firstly , we need effective instruments for economic coordination .
Secondly , the structural dependency of the euro area on finite resources must be brought to an end .
We cannot afford to slip back into recession the next time that there is a rise in oil and resource prices , which is already under way .
Thirdly , it is essential that the financial markets are effectively regulated after this crisis .
However , we are currently seeing individual Member States ensuring that sensible proposals are not even being made by central authorities , such as supervisory bodies .
Fourthly , it is unacceptable that in a crisis of this kind the focus is not on the objective of social cohesion , contrary to the values of the European Union .
Instead , individual Member States are expected to use ridiculous interest rates in order to finance their debts .
This is why we are calling in the report for eurobonds or similar measures to be applied , in order to help the weaker Member States by means of solidarity .
Most importantly , the necessary changes to fiscal policy must not be made at the expense of mass purchasing power .
The simplest solution which would allow us to make good progress in this area is effective cooperation in the field of taxes .
At long last , the Commission must quickly come up with some proposals for a common consolidated corporate tax base .
The report also calls for the implementation of a country-by-country reporting system for corporate income .
We are asking you to submit a corresponding proposal .
In general , the principle of tax cooperation must take priority over tax competition , in particular , in the context of the work done by Mr Monti and the reinvigoration of the internal market .
We need you to come up with effective proposals so that we do not come out of this crisis with even higher debts .
Strong economic cooperation between the Member States will help us to ensure that we do not leave behind debts for our children , but instead a euro area in which the countries cooperate with one another rather than being dragged down by competition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be here with you on the occasion of the debate on the resolution concerning the European Central Bank annual report for 2008 .
As a result of the parliamentary elections last year , this year 's debate has been postponed for a long period .
However , this gives me the opportunity to discuss the current situation at the end of the debate .
( FR ) Mr President , as you know , the European Central Bank welcomes the very close links with Parliament , which incidentally go far beyond the obligations provided for by the treaty .
Over the years , we have established very fruitful dialogue , and I would say that the excellent reports that we have just heard from Mr Scicluna and Mr Giegold are further evidence of this .

Today , in my statement , I will briefly review the economic developments observed in the past and the monetary policy measures taken by the European Central Bank .
Then I will address a few points that were raised in the proposal for a resolution and I will say a few words about the current situation .
First , on the economic developments and monetary policy over the past year .
In 2009 , as was said very eloquently by Mr Scicluna , the European Central Bank was operating in an environment that future economic historians are likely to describe as the most difficult one for advanced economies since the Second World War .
Following the profound intensification of the financial crisis in the autumn of 2008 , 2009 started with a continued synchronised freefall in economic activity worldwide .
Until around April last year , economic activity was declining , month after month .
During this period , the trade-mark which was vital for maintaining confidence - and it was the trade-mark of the ECB - was the ability to take the immediate and exceptional decisions that were necessary whilst , at the same time , remaining inflexibly attached to our primary objective of maintaining price stability in the medium term .
Overall , our non-standard monetary policy measures , which are known collectively as enhanced credit support , have served , we trust , the euro area economy well .
They have supported the functioning of the money market , contributed to improving financing conditions and allowed for a better flow of credit to the real economy than could have been achieved through interest rate reductions alone .
By and large , banks have been passing on the sharply lower key ECB interest rates to households and businesses .
The guiding principle is that , to the extent that the situation returns to normal , keeping these measures in place for longer than required risks changing the behaviour of financial market participants in an undesirable manner , and we do not wish to breed dependency .
This is why , in December 2009 , we began to gradually phase out some of our extraordinary liquidity measures , taking account of improvements in financial markets .
In particular , we scaled back the number , frequency and maturity of longer-term refinancing operations .
At the same time , we have committed to maintaining fully accommodating liquidity support to the euro area banking system until at least October this year .
The Governing Council is of the opinion that the current monetary policy stance is appropriate , and that the continued firm anchoring of inflation expectations bodes well for price stability in the medium term .
Let me now turn to some of the issues you raise in the resolution and which were mentioned in the report .
On the issues of accountability and transparency , we very much appreciate the regular dialogue with the European Parliament and the constructive spirit with which this exchange is conducted .
I therefore welcome the repeated support by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for our quarterly monetary dialogue .
I think , as it was said again very eloquently by the rapporteur , we are accountable to the European people , which means to Parliament .
We consider the ECB to be one of the world 's most transparent central banks .
Our practice of holding a press conference immediately after the Governing Council meeting on monetary policy each month remains a pioneering initiative that has not yet been replicated by our major sister institutions .
With the publication of our comprehensive introductory statement in real time , we explain policy decisions and their underlying rationale .
During the crisis , as you know , we have further intensified our communication efforts and thereby helped to smooth financial market reactions , to build confidence and lay the foundations for recovery .
You have also requested the views of the ECB on the establishment of a clearing house for instruments such as credit default swaps ( CDSs ) within the euro area .
I would like to say that the robustness of euro-denominated CDS markets is of direct relevance for the Eurosystem as regards control over its currency and financial stability in the euro area .
Central counterparty clearing is very important , not only for delivering transparency , but also for diversifying and sharing risk exposures and reducing the incentives to take excessive risks .
Certain financial instruments which were introduced for hedging should not be misused for speculation .
Regulators should be able to undertake effective investigations into possible improper conduct , and there it seems to me that we are very much in line with Parliament 's concerns .
Let me say just a word on the outlook for EMU during challenging times .
An economic recovery is in progress , but this does not mean that the crisis is over .
For one thing , we know that the pace of recovery will be uneven and we cannot rule out setbacks .
For another , we are still facing numerous challenges regarding the reform of our financial system .
Finance must play a constructive role , and not a destructive one , in our economies .
The litmus test for a constructive role is that finance serves the real economy .
To ensure such a role , we still need to improve the functioning of financial systems considerably further .
Thus far , a great deal of attention has been focused on the banking sector .
Effective reforms also have to look very closely at non-bank financial institutions and at the set-up and functioning of financial markets .
We have to devise mechanisms and incentives to ensure that finance does not spiral out of control in the destructive way that it did just prior to the crisis .
We have to contain systemic disruptions that lead to economic hardship for the people of Europe .
Setting up the European Systemic Risk Board , legislation for which is currently being considered by the Parliament , is part of the correct response to this challenge .
There are other challenges facing the European economy , and they are associated with public finances , as was again stressed by the rapporteur , and sovereign financial health .
Within Europe 's economic and monetary union , there is a clear allocation of responsibilities .
With respect to that allocation of responsibilities , everyone can count on the commitment of the ECB to maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole over the medium term .
Based on our last projections for this year , we will have at the end of this year , after 12 years of the euro , inflation at a yearly average of 1.95 % .
That is in line with our definition of price stability : less than 2 % , but close to 2 % .
The commitment of the ECB , the strategy of the ECB and its track record are consistent .
The smooth functioning of Europe 's economic and monetary union does not rest only on monetary union but also on economic union .
Policy makers at the national level must keep public finances sound and their economies competitive .
In the current circumstances , where Europe faces pivotal decisions , it is more important than ever to recognise that a prosperous union requires determined action by all .
Monetary union in Europe is far more , in my opinion , than a monetary arrangement .
It is a union of shared destiny .
( The speaker added in French and German : ' We share a destiny in common . ' )
This destiny is for our common good , and it is the vision of our founding fathers .
Monetary union is not a matter of convenience .
It is part of an overarching process of advancing the integration of the people in Europe that began after the Second World War .
I believe we often play down the achievement that Europe has attained .
We are often too quick to criticise our institutions and processes .
But they have generally worked well , even in the most difficult times .
I trust that European institutions and processes have remained effective during the financial crisis .
On this side of the Atlantic , we have avoided dramatic events that could have triggered a new intensification of the crisis , which started in the United States in September 2008 .
It is within this present context that I appreciate the commitment of euro area Member States , made on the occasion of the last European Council meeting , to take determined and coordinated action , if needed , to safeguard financial stability in the euro area .
I would also take advantage of my presence in front of the European Parliament to lay out what I have already mentioned at the hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on Monday .
It is the intention of the ECB 's Governing Council to keep the minimum credit threshold in the collateral framework at investment grade level ( BBB- ) beyond the end of 2010 .
In parallel , we will introduce , as of January 2011 , a graded haircut schedule , which will continue to adequately protect the Eurosystem .
I will provide the technical details when reporting on the Governing Council decisions of our next meeting on 8 April .
Let me conclude .
The introduction of the single currency just over a decade ago represents the greatest achievement , in my view , in the history of European integration to date - a process that has ensured peace and prosperity in Europe .
The global financial crisis has brought fresh challenges to which we in Europe have risen .
Our monetary union and our very close ties , inside the single market , with all EU Member States ' economies have prevented the crisis from being compounded by currency crises , as was the experience in the early 1990s .
Today , Europe faces further pivotal decisions .
Our common task is to continue to ensure peace and prosperity , to make our union an even more attractive place to live and work in .
For this we need strengthened surveillance as again was said by the rapporteurs , and strengthened cooperation .
We also need to revive the sense of common purpose , the shared ideals that motivated our founding fathers .
Their endeavour was visionary and all that we see in today 's world confirms their lucidity .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank you for the chance to discuss the 2009 Annual Statement on the euro area .
When we prepared our Annual Statement , we knew that the selected issues would be topical .
They might , however , have become somewhat too topical recently .
Let me congratulate both rapporteurs , Edward Scicluna and Sven Giegold , for their excellent reports .
In order to respect the independence of the European Central Bank , I will focus on the Giegold report , which makes a very substantive contribution to the current debate on economic coordination and economic governance within the euro area .
In my view , the broad support the Giegold report enjoyed within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is indeed a testimony to the relevance and balance of his approach and issues .
I fully agree with Mr Trichet that the euro is not only a technical monetary arrangement but is rather the core political project of the European Union , which must be defended and developed in this European spirit , not least today and tomorrow , as the European Council is convening at a very critical moment .
Since 1999 , the euro area has mostly been an area of economic stability .
It has shielded our citizens from economic turbulences .
However , since the end of 2008 , the euro area has been hit hard by the global financial crisis .
Despite the economic recovery policies and strong fiscal stimulus , financial markets still remain volatile and the degree of uncertainty remains exceptionally high .
Recent waves in the market have seriously tested financial stability and economic governance in the euro area , especially in relation to Greece .
I would like to say that Greece is now on track to meet the 4 % target of deficit reduction this year , following the bold and convincing measures that the Greek Parliament decided earlier this month and which are now in force .
This moment may indeed be a turning point in Greek fiscal history and economic development .
However , neither Greece nor the eurozone are completely out of the woods yet as there are still concerns regarding financial stability in the euro area .
Therefore , the Commission has strongly encouraged the euro area Member States to take a political decision on a mechanism to ensure financial stability in the euro area as a whole , a mechanism which could be swiftly activated if needed , in conformity with the treaty and its bailout clause , and without any automaticity built into this mechanism .
On our side , I can assure you that the Commission is ready to put such a European framework in place for coordinated and conditional assistance , which could be used if needed and if requested .
We are working closely and intensively together with all euro area Member States and the ECB in order to reach such a solution this week in the context of the European Council .
However , in addition to the immediate crisis management , we need to look at how similar situations can be avoided in the future so that we never again have cases similar to the Greek case now .
The Greek crisis has demonstrated the need for enhanced economic governance .
This was already recognised and the legal base provided in the Lisbon Treaty .
Therefore , we are currently preparing proposals for the implementation of Article 136 of the Lisbon Treaty and the Commission will make a proposal for enhanced economic policy coordination and reinforced country surveillance in the coming weeks .
Like you , Mr Giegold , in paragraph 28 , we regret the lack of binding commitments among governments to enforce coordination in the euro area .
Therefore , an integrated and forward-looking approach focused on policy action and clear operational arrangements is needed .
First and foremost , we needed to prevent unsustainable public deficits and therefore we need to be better able to monitor the mid-term budgetary policies of the euro area Member States .
We need to be able to issue broader and more stringent recommendations to the Member States to take corrective measures .
I also count on your support in this matter .
We can also make better use of existing instruments .
It is possible for the Council to address recommendations to a Member State whose economic policies risk jeopardising the proper functioning of economic and monetary union .
This has been used in the past , probably too rarely .
With the new Lisbon Treaty , under Article 21 , the Commission can issue similar early warnings directly to a Member State .
This is something we must do in order to help Member States to address emerging economic problems at a much earlier stage .
As I seem to be running on injury time , I will continue on macro-economic imbalances in my concluding remarks .
That is the second core element of reinforced economic governance .
By and large , I share the views of the rapporteur in this regard .
I just want to conclude by saying that the financial crisis has harshly demonstrated that the continuous economic growth of past decades cannot be taken for granted .
Today , the worst may be over .
The economic recovery is now in progress but it is still fragile and not self-sustaining .
Unemployment has not yet changed for the better .
The same applies to the consolidation of public finances , which is a prerequisite for sustainable growth .
No matter how important fiscal stimulus was for the economic recovery , the two years of the crisis have wiped out over 20 years of consolidation of public finances .
These clouds will overshadow our economic landscape in the coming years .
We must do our utmost to clear the sky and bring back growth .
Therefore , this is indeed no time for business as usual .
Instead , this is time for a change in step to promote sustainable growth and job creation .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me firstly congratulate and thank the rapporteur , Mr Giegold , who has proposed a work of high quality and has shown himself ready to listen to the rapporteurs from other groups .
This report , the European Parliament 's response to the European Commission annual statement on the euro area and public finances , is rich in analyses and proposals .
Of course , it is , to a great extent , marked by the big event of 2009 , the economic and financial crisis , which is without any doubt the most serious crisis the European Union has faced since it was created .
I have learnt two main lessons from this crisis .
On the one hand , the Economic and Monetary Union has shown how useful it is .
The euro , a stable common currency , has played the part of a real monetary shield .
Belonging to the euro area has enabled more than one country to avoid a devaluation of their national currencies , which would have further exacerbated the consequences of the crisis .
The euro area has therefore become more attractive , as the case of Iceland shows .
Moreover , the active and flexible monetary policy conducted by the ECB , increasing its injections of liquid funds into lending establishments , has played a significant role in keeping European banks afloat .
The first lesson then is that while we often say that Europe was built on crises , this one has shown that economic Europe is both effective and necessary at the same time .
From this I draw the second lesson , which is that we should strengthen European economic governance .
Today , the only genuine European economic policy is monetary policy .
There is limited coordination of budget policies .
However , the euro area , which - as mentioned again by this report - is intended to integrate all the Member States of the European Union , must establish effective governance in every aspect of economic policy .
It must begin with macro-economic as well as financial monitoring , something we are busy working on in the European Parliament .
It must be carried forward within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact as a real instrument of fiscal coordination .
At this time of crisis , the considerable drop in revenue , the tax incentive measures taken within the framework of the recovery plan and the operation of economic stabilisers have led to a deterioration of the budget balances of the Member States .
Reducing public debt remains a fundamental commitment , as it concerns our children 's future .
Let us be austere , but let us also be inventive .
Let us think about a new European fiscal policy , let us think about eurobonds , and let us be bold in European economic governance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Giegold 's report is particularly significant given the current macro-economic debate .
This report is all the more relevant given the fact that its author is a German MEP who wanted to draw the attention of Europeans to the distorted effects , for the countries of the euro area , of the German strategy of reducing labour costs in the single currency system .
The German Government is , in fact , about to drag the euro area and the whole of the European Union into generalised wage deflation with damaging macro-economic consequences .
Particularly in the absence of consistent structural funds and sufficient budgetary resources , and faced with the impossibility of devaluation , Member States with current accounts in deficit are condemned , in order to resist , to trim their wages and reduce the perimeter of their social security systems .
The result is firstly a slowdown in internal demand which , since the second quarter of 2008 , has led to negative growth , and this was even before the start of the liquidity crisis .
Secondly , we are seeing a rise in the personal debt of households with modest incomes and means , whose purchasing power is no longer increasing .
Their debt to acquire homes was fed by the whole deregulated financial machinery , in Spain , in the United Kingdom and in Ireland , with the disastrous consequences we have observed in the subprime crisis .
Ladies and gentlemen , listening to the debates in committee , a significant number of MEPs would seem to be forgetting the lessons of this crisis .
This crisis is far from behind us .
The current recovery is all the more fragile given the fact that Europe is continuing with wage deflation and the Commission , but also the President of the Eurogroup and the President of the European Central Bank - whom we heard on Monday - are calling on the Member States to prematurely adopt exit policies that are comparable to real austerity plans .
These policies risk nipping growth in the bud when it has barely become positive again , even though capacity utilisation rates remain low .
These policies will fail to reduce the deficits in Greece , in Spain and elsewhere , because the expected tax revenue will fail to materialise also .
They will exacerbate unemployment and will fuel social tensions .
The Giegold report has the merit of drawing attention to some of these macro-economic imbalances .
Unfortunately , the final version , amended by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , refuses to condemn wage deflation .
However , on the whole , the debate opened by Mr Giegold may be beneficial at a time when neoliberal dogma thrown into doubt by the crisis is back in force in Parliament , in the Council and in the Commission .

Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs Mr Scicluna - who knows a great deal about central banks - and Mr Giegold .
We held long discussions with them and in the end , agreed on many compromise amendments .
I would like to talk to you today about the euro .
I would like to point out to you all that I am new to politics : until nine months ago , I was giving classes on macro-economics at the University of Barcelona .
In the autumn of 2008 , my family and I were living in London for academic reasons and I was a direct witness of the pound sterling 's sudden drop of 30 % over the course of a few weeks .
All of a sudden , all my English colleagues had become poorer , and the pound has still not recovered today .
In light of how much the pound has dropped , I do not even want to imagine what the value of the peseta would be today if we still had that in our wallets .
These two years of terrible global economic crisis have shown that the euro has firmly anchored us to stability .
It is , in fact , the only major Western currency that has not made its users poorer .
The euro has been a secure port against the huge waves of the global financial storms , to borrow the evocative image of the British financier David Marsh .
A convinced Eurosceptic for many years , 12 months ago , this respected public financier published a book praising the euro , acknowledging it as a success and as the future global currency .
The euro is not in crisis today : it is the fiscal crises of certain Member States that are causing the single currency difficulties .
The euro is a shining example of monetary union that is being studied and admired by the economic elites of China , India , Brazil and Russia .
The euro poses no risk to the Mediterranean economies .
The euro is the opportunity for their economies to be permanently integrated into the good , reforming and advanced practices of the countries of Central Europe .
The report that we are debating today includes severe criticism of the practice of state intervention in the Chinese currency .
Its artificial devaluation has contributed to the creation of the huge global imbalances that are one of the causes of this crisis .
We in the euro area must not penalise the countries that export the most .
The history of financial crises shows us that , once financial health has been achieved , economic recovery comes hand-in-hand with exports .
It is true that Germany needs to begin consuming again and do more as the motor for European economic growth .
Nevertheless , under no circumstances must its export strength be weakened .
I am a liberal Member from Catalonia , and my region - which is the source of 28 % of Spain 's exports - also has a very high ratio of exports to gross domestic product : almost 30 % .
Those who do best cannot be penalised .
Finally , the euro now has a great deal of prestige worldwide , but it needs to make a little more effort to be transparent .
Mr Trichet , the verbatim records of the debates of the European Central Bank should be published , as is the case in the United States , Japan and Sweden .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , since I would like Commissioner Rehn to understand me loud and clear , I will speak in English .
I would like , starting from where we are today , to take a look forward .
Where are we ?
We have huge and unsustainable public deficits and , mind you , the Greens do not support this kind of deficit .
Second , we cannot ignore the fact that we already have huge and deepening social inequalities .
16 % of Europeans below the poverty level is not a small figure ; 40 % of young Spaniards under 25 unemployed is not a small figure , and I could carry on .
Then we are facing climate change and resource scarcity , and all this means there is a need for investment in infrastructure , in education , in research and innovation , etc .
So what we believe is that we should really switch gear .
Herman Van Rompuy said , after the February summit , that coordination of macro-economic policy needs to be considerably increased and improved .
Of course .
What does that mean ?
It means , of course , that in terms of budgetary expenditure , we need to have more peer review , more ex ante control .
Greece has 4 % of its GDP going to military spending .
They have got an air force that is as big as the Luftwaffe .
I mean , how come ?
It is such a tiny country and they are arming themselves like hell .
But if we just look at the expenditure side , we will not succeed .
We need to look , and to take a hard look , at coordinating our tax revenue because , what do we need to do ?
We need to rebalance tax income away from labour income towards other forms of income , including capital income .
We need to make sure that we have an effective corporate contribution - effective , not just on paper - and that means CCCTB country-by-country reporting , etc .
We need to implement the financial transaction tax ; we need to implement the carbon tax , both to shift behaviour and to provide income .
And we cannot do that just by asking countries to coordinate their policies .
We need more integration .
If we do not do that , our governments will prove incapable of reconciling the need to balance budgets and to meet social needs and investment needs .
So I believe that Europe is now at a critical juncture .
The choice is between a higher degree of integration , not just coordination , and decline .
The lesson that I take from Copenhagen is not just that we missed the climate agreement .
It is that Europe has proved to be irrelevant if it is not acting together .
We spend too much time coordinating , too little time acting together .
So that would be our contribution to this debate .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , coming from a non-eurozone Member State , I am not sure whether my opinion holds much weight with my colleagues in this debate .
Currently , many would claim that the eurozone problem is one which should be solved by eurozone members .
However , the euro does not sit in isolation .
It sits in the global market and has been affected by the global financial and economic crisis just as those outside the eurozone have .
How we manage our states ' finances during the good years entirely affects how we are able to react and recover today .
As many have pointed out , there is a reason why Germany faces a very different government deficit to Greece .
While they may be united by a common currency , attitudes towards saving and spending vary considerably .
Joining a monetary union did not unite completely different cultures and traditions of fiscal policy .
The UK perspective has a lot to say on differences in fiscal policy .
We also bloated our public sector , spent and spent in the good years , borrowing more and more to create debts we could not even admit to when it looked as though the good times were gone forever , and creating a culture where a supposedly respected economist from the UK even last week stood up in front of one of our committees and claimed that governments can magic money .
Fundamentally , money to fund the public sector does not magically appear .
It comes from tax receipts from the private sector .
Germany realises this .
Its policies in the recent past have focused upon using government spending and incentives to help stimulate the private sector .
Hence , it is now in a strong position for recovery .
Ultimately , the public sector has done its job in the crisis .
It bailed out the banks and stepped up when the private sector failed .
Now it is the turn of the private sector to replenish the coffers .
The downside of austerity measures , which will put hardworking people out of public sector jobs , must be turned into an upside for start-up companies , taking advantage of entrepreneurial spirit by reducing start-up costs for businesses so that they can create the profitable private sector that is required to dig all of our countries out of the holes we now find ourselves in .
All of those countries that have practised unsustainable economic policies for the past few years - including my own - need to realise that change is essential and inevitable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make use of this opportunity to take another look at the situation in Greece , because I believe that the crisis in Greece gives us an insight into the political status of the euro area .
Firstly , however , I would like to make a remark about the calls from the German Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , to exclude Greece from the euro area , if necessary .
My group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , believes that this proposal is absolutely absurd .
On the one hand , we are talking about a community with a common destiny .
If we mean this seriously , then we cannot call , on the other hand , for a Member State to be excluded during the first large or moderate crisis that we have encountered .
That is preposterous !
Most importantly , this would be an admission of failure which would amount to kowtowing to the financial sector .
The financial sector has shamelessly allowed itself to be bought out of the crisis by taxpayers , but we are now being asked to deny help of this kind to Greece .
It will be difficult to explain to the pensioners and the workers in Greece and also in the other countries affected - according to the media , Portugal is the next country to come under scrutiny - why they are now being asked to pay up , having already supported the banks with their taxes .
Taking this route would be the equivalent of driving the EU project into a wall .
Despite all the justified criticism of Greece - and the Greek Members will realise that there is much to be done in their country - the crisis is by no means solely the responsibility of Greece .
I would just like to point out that the majority of decisions on financial policy in the euro area have been handed over to the European Central Bank .
The euro cannot provide the answer to the different levels of productivity in the individual economies .
Major exporters such as Germany are forcing Greek economic policy to its knees .
Therefore , this also represents a crisis in EU economic and competition policy .
This is why we are calling for the ban on financial assistance for EU Member States to be lifted .
The Member States in the euro area should make euro loans available , the European Central Bank should buy up debts in the same way that the Federal Service in the USA has done and credit default swaps should be banned .
This is what we are calling for .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , 25 March is the birthday of both Europe and Greece .
On 25 March 1957 , the European Union was born under the Treaty of Rome .
On 25 March 1821 , Greece was born .
Today , on their birthday , Europe and Greece are being tested ; Europe on cohesion and Greece on its economy .
Everyone in this House knows that , of the 15 countries in the euro area , 6 have high public debts and financial deficits .
Everyone in this House knows that all 30 countries which belong to the OECD have debt of over 100 % of GDP and 30 % higher than in 2008 .
Even the United States of America is trying , in this huge economic crisis we are experiencing , to resolve its problems primarily by printing money .
We also know that Greece has introduced severe austerity measures to the point at which it has exhausted its citizens .
Many people will say it serves Greece right and it should pay for its mistakes .
Yes , certain people must be called to account for this .
However , we must not forget that Greece imports EUR 15 billion more products from other European countries , especially Germany , than it exports .
I would therefore ask the leaders of the European Union to bear in mind that addressing speculation will create a geopolitical situation in the wider policy .
Thank you , sir .
Your time has run out .
I would respectfully ask that you abide by the speaking time allotted to you .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
The Members want to vote on this later and we will be in serious difficulties if we do not keep to our speaking times .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , firstly , I would like to congratulate you on what you have achieved in recent years .
However , at the same time , you must be aware that hundreds of millions of people are currently holding their breath because they are worried about the euro , which is something that we did not expect to see in this generation .
Firstly , we are worried about what will happen next with the six-monthly and yearly refinancing operations and whether you will succeed in withdrawing from this package of extraordinary liquidity measures .
Only those people with a masochistic tendency when it comes to financial policy could fail to wish you luck in this respect .
However , inflation is also a cause for concern and you are making good progress in this area .
As an Austrian , I would like to advise against the Germany-bashing that has been taking place here .
Everyone should be aware Germany has been the source of a great deal of stability in the past .
It should not now be punished because it has achieved better results in many areas than other countries .
It is not possible to show solidarity with people who have been responsible for mismanagement , waste and excessive administrative measures .

( DE ) Mr President , as the shadow rapporteur from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the European Central Bank annual report for 2008 , I am very happy with the report that is in front of us now .
As a result of the close and effective cooperation with the rapporteur Mr Scicluna and , above all , with Mr Tremosa from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I believe that we have produced a very balanced commentary on the ECB annual report for 2008 .
Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn were of the same opinion .
I think that the ECB was faced with particularly difficult tasks in 2008 , which was the first year of the crisis .
Given these challenges , in my view , the ECB has acted effectively and , above all , very prudently .
Mr Scicluna 's report reflects this approach .
However , the ECB is not in a simple situation and this is not likely to change in the near future .
On the one hand , we are very far from having overcome the crisis and , on the other hand , the planned regulatory measures present new challenges and problems for the ECB .
It is important for the ECB to continue to ensure the stability of the euro area in the months and years to come .
Like a tanker on the high seas , the ECB must stay on the correct course .
On the other hand - Mr Trichet , I have already mentioned this in the last but one discussion on monetary policy - the independence of the European Central Bank must be maintained , in particular , given its future inclusion in the European Systemic Risk Board .
This is of paramount importance because you , as President , and other members of the ECB will become heavily involved in this area .
This should be an important criterion for future assessments of other measures taken by the central bank .
It is essential for us to bear this point in mind when considering other reports in the next few years .
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the king has no clothes !
The gravity of the situation has been accurately described .
Now it is useful to concentrate on the treatment , and the first step of this treatment can only be European economic governance , in the absence of which the economic system will not grow and the debt will become even less sustainable .
Greece must be supported and helped , and a potential domino effect must be avoided in the case of those European countries with economies characterised by a weak level of competitiveness and elevated levels of debt .
Real European governance must guarantee three objectives : 1 ) a policy of growth ; 2 ) financial instruments suitable for sustaining that growth ; and 3 ) a policy for managing emergencies .
This morning , I have heard so many speeches exalting the virtues of the euro .
Very well , I am obviously in agreement , but why not think of the euro as a currency that saves us not only from inflation but , by means of a little virtuous and guaranteed debt , also secures us greater liquidity to launch a major European investment programme by issuing Eurobonds ?
As far as managing emergencies is concerned , I agree with the idea of establishing a European Monetary Fund , which would be a sensible solution .
Ladies and gentlemen , what I should like to say in conclusion , and say it clearly , is that at this stage it is no use temporising , drifting , waiting for the long night to end .
A ' Don Abbondio Europe ' is of no use to us .
If Europe does not show courage today , when will it have to show courage ?
Mr President , we have had a heavyweight week in committee with the President of the ECB , the President of the Euro Group and the nominee for ECB vice-president .
We all agree that stronger surveillance of Member States , with accurate statistics to enable early intervention , is a key requirement .
Work on this has started , including audit powers for Eurostat , and the committee is impatient to assert its enhanced role to help .
But there are indicators beyond the Stability and Growth Pact that need respecting too .
Greater fiscal coordination linked to macro-economic stability is an option .
But this has been tried , of course .
Remember the row in 2001 over the Ecofin warning to Ireland during a time of fiscal surplus .
So we know the lesson : exerting discipline in times of surplus is even harder than policing deficit .
And , just like in the financial markets , failure to do so ends in crisis .
On imbalances between Member States , the focus should be on loss of competitiveness , often hand in hand with foot-dragging on the single market and failure to address structural reforms , including pensions .
This , too , does not necessarily have a deficit trigger .
And finally , as Mr Scicluna said , liquidity provision by the ECB has been a valuable tool through the crisis , but it has not been passed on to the real economy .
Often , it has simply been reinvested in assets bearing higher interest .
And I dare say some of these were even recirculated on repo to the ECB .
No doubt in some quarter , such activity is even viewed as deserving of a bonus .
So I say : should we really listen to the pleas of such banks on new capital adequacy implementation dates ?
( EL ) Mr President , may I start by saying that this is an important report , which strikes a worthy compromise between the tensions in the European Parliament .
It identifies elements of social cohesion which are not present in similar debates in the European Parliament .
We should also like it to signal an important turning point in the policy of the European Union as a whole .
Of course it refers to 2009 , while in 2010 , important developments are taking place which , of course , concern my country , Greece .
One might conclude that , apart from monetary union , we also need economic and political union , as many have said .
The euro should be accompanied by a minimum social security indicator for social cohesion .
That is clear from the various things being said in Greece , much of which is inaccurate .
For example , I cannot but highlight the fact that productivity in Greece was not much lower than the average of the EU of the 27 .
That is clear from Eurostat statistics : it was approximately 90 % in both 2007 and 2008 .
The increase in the budget deficit and public debt in Greece over the last two or three years was the result of the collapse in incomes , the reduction in income from abroad , such as tourism and shipping , due to the crisis , and the increase in public spending .
Of course there is wastage , but people are also being recruited to the public sector in various forms .
Certainly all this needs to change ; we also need to request this social protection indicator and not content ourselves with general calls not to do anything that will overly affect low incomes .
Spending and arms need to be controlled , as does everything that has increased significantly over the last two years , but especially incomes , which have decreased equally significantly .
The income of large sections of the population , who are on the verge of poverty , must not fall .
Obviously , there are matters which also concern the summit under way today here in Brussels .
However , the Giegold report must also signal a more general change and the incorporation of these positions in the Stability Pact .
Above all , we do not need to take any recourse to the unacceptable policy of the European Monetary Fund which , apart from anything else , also has a viability deficit .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Rehn and Mr Trichet were quite right to talk about the situation today .

The Greek position in the euro area is very shaky and , as far as I can see , the answer lies with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
These days , the IMF is the right organisation to help Greece out of the crisis .
If that does not work , then we need to be decisive and cut the Gordian knot .
Countries that are not playing by the rules of the euro area must leave the game .
Mr President , let us try and learn from this situation .
When it joined the euro , Greece was as unpredictable as the Oracle at Delphi .
The figures it submitted were unclear and unreliable .
It is not right for the Greek Government to keep on insisting that other States in the euro provide the solution because they were supposedly partly responsible for the current crisis in Greece .
That is turning the world on its head .
Anyone who submits unsound figures cannot point accusing fingers at anybody else .
Allow me , therefore , to ask Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn a specific question : were you aware of the fact that the figures Greece submitted when joining the Euro area were inaccurate and incomplete ?
If not , should you not have known that ?
I hope you can give me a straight answer to that question .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by wishing my fellow countrymen the very best for 25 March .
The capitalist crisis has resulted in a spiralling deterioration in the living standards of the workers .
At the same time , it has given capital an opportunity to step up the application of anti-labour policy choices .
Under state terrorism of the workers , the plutocracy started a real war against fundamental wage and social rights , in a bid to increase the profits of capital .
The basic pillar of the anti-grassroots policy being exercised by the European Union and the governments of the Member States is the ECB .
It is a harsh policy exercised solely on the basis of the criterion of the profitability of capital .
The constant calls since it was founded for wages to be cut and capitalist restructurings to be speeded up found fertile soil in the capitalist crisis .
The ECB has acted as the bourgeois assistant of the plutocracy in shifting the burden of the crisis on to the workers ' shoulders .
It has channelled over EUR 1 trillion to the banks and monopoly groups .
Today , however , it is calling on the workers to pay for the damage and to repay that money .
That is why the anti-imperialist fight needs to be stepped up , the fight to get out of the European Union , the fight for people power and a people 's economy , the fight for socialism .
Mr President , I appear to have been living in some sort of parallel universe here , hearing about the success of the euro .
Let us bring it all down to earth just a little bit shall we ?
Unemployment , youth unemployment in the Iberian Peninsula and many eurozone countries is chronic .
It has been at 30-40 % for years .
Nothing to do with the crisis at all .
A complete disaster .
GDP per capita in the USA is miles ahead of the European Union .
GDP in the Pacific Rim is miles ahead of the GDP in the Union .
No , the euro has not been successful at all .
It is already failing .
It is already crumbling before our eyes .
Just look at some economic basics .
There is no lender of last resort , which is why we have this Greek crisis and a Portuguese crisis round the corner .
There is no lender .
This is impossible in global , in currency management , whether it is an optimal currency zone or not .
There is no coordinated fiscal policy so it is doomed to failure and it is failing as we speak .
Let me just remind everybody here about something else if I may .
There are two sorts of people : wealth creators , those people that go out and work in the private sector and create wealth , and there are the others who spend wealth , which are politicians and bureaucrats and there are too many of us .
Far too many of us .
We are the monkey on the economies ' back and , until these currency zones start cutting down public sector spending , it is going to get worse and worse and worse .
( RO ) The mafia is the major cause of the crisis .
I will give you a few examples from my own country , Romania .
Believe you me , as a writer and historian who runs a daily newspaper and a weekly magazine , I know very well what I am talking about .
Since 1990 , approximately 6 000 companies valued at EUR 700 billion have been privatised fraudulently .
Unfortunately , only EUR 7 billion , or 1 % of this money , has been received so far .
In many cases , it was not even privatisation being carried out , but the transfer of assets from the ownership of the Romanian state to the ownership of other states , in other words , nationalisation .
This is no longer a market economy , but a jungle economy .
This situation is being repeated in several Balkan countries where the local mafia has joined forces with the cross-border mafia to form an organised crime cartel .
Just like 100 years ago , the Balkan Peninsula is sitting on a powder keg .
The flame of social protest may quickly spread from Greece to the other countries in the region .
While in the 20th century , we spoke about exporting revolution , in the 21st century , we can talk about exporting bankruptcy .
Starvation is the most powerful electoral factor in history .
We must switch the focus from the fight against corruption , which is some abstract notion , to the fight against the corrupt .
The population 's mood is becoming increasingly gloomy and if we fail to put an end to the fraud in our countries , the European Union 's noble project will collapse like a sandcastle .
However , there is one hope of salvation : radical solutions are required at such an historic crossroads .
It is not under control the mafia needs to be , but under the ground .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the President of the European Central Bank , Jean-Claude Trichet , warmly for his very successful work over the last six years .
Of course , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs for submitting a report that has been given majority support .
Mr Rehn , I would like to remind you that you have some huge tasks ahead .
I hope that the Commission finally has the courage to look at the deficiencies of the Stability and Growth Pact in a new proposal .
The model of economic governance led by the finance ministers is not a possible solution in this case , because these finance ministers have failed in the past .
We need a more automated system .
We do not need economic governance under the control of finance ministers .
Instead , we need an automatic system that responds in the case of violations , with the support and leadership of the ECB and the Commission .
This could be the result of the summit .
I would like to make two remarks about what Mr Trichet has said on the euro area .
I very much welcome the fact that you have referred to the need for us to be competitive throughout the world .
This is not just about one euro country competing with another , but about us being able to hold our own against the USA and Asia .
Secondly , the EU has largely succeeded in balancing its accounts , thanks to the countries in surplus .
If that had not been the case , the ECB would have had to put much stricter policies in place .
Thirdly , there are no examples in economic history of countries with a falling population generating long-term growth in the internal market .
They have to export their goods .
As far as Germany is concerned , it made a poor start in the Economic and Monetary Union , but it has caught up and is now an example to many other countries .
That is not sufficient .
We have enough to do ourselves with the budgetary consolidation .
It is important not to underestimate the work involved .
Who came up with the idea of punishing those countries that have largely succeeded and excluding those that have not fulfilled their obligations ?
This is not a true European policy .
Therefore , I would like to wish the Commission courage and give my warm thanks to the ECB .
( Applause )
( EL ) Mr President , allow me to start by congratulating the two rapporteurs on the excellent work they have done at a particularly difficult juncture .
The work of one of the most crucial summits is due to start shortly and there is still much talk raging around the so-called Greek issue and around if and to what extent we shall adopt a European mechanism that will operate , in times of need , as an economy protection indicator needed for the stability of the euro area as a whole .
Without doubt , the basic responsibility for this situation lies with Greece and it has fully assumed it .
However , there are other - collective - responsibilities .
The common currency has provided a great deal , but it also has serious weaknesses .
In 11 years of EMU , we did not want to see and to acknowledge that the competitiveness divide and the significant inequalities and imbalances between the economies in the euro area are not compatible with either the viability or the stability of the euro area .
The speculative attacks which , so far , have been directed mainly at Greece - but which also resulted in Portugal 's credit rating being downgraded just the other day and which have already been directed at other countries , such as Italy and Spain , and no one knows what the consequences will be - have made that much clear .
If , therefore , we want to show that we can deal with the situation , we should immediately move towards a new , enhanced model of economic cooperation and economic governance which , Mr Langen , respects the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact , but which , at the same time , will be able to go beyond financial coordination in the narrow sense to economic coordination with additional criteria attached and attain the objectives of the EU strategy for employment and sustainable development .

( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Trichet , the euro is ten years old and it has largely passed its tests , even though the current turbulence is not over yet .
I am certain that , already today , we will see the first important step towards a European solution , with or without the International Monetary Fund .
We share a common destiny , as Mr Trichet so rightly said .
The alternative , if it fails , would , of course , be a frightening prospect .
The ECB has been a bastion of strength when the financial storms have hit .
It is worth repeating that the euro has been a success during the financial crisis and it has been an anchor in Europe , including for countries outside the euro area .
The euro has provided stability and the conditions for creating millions of new jobs , and that must not be forgotten in these days when everyone is talking of a crisis . Greece 's problems and those of other euro area countries cannot be blamed on the euro .
Careless expansion of public expenditure will result in problems regardless of the choice of currency .
On the contrary , the economic crisis would have been considerably worse if we had not had the cooperation that the euro involves .
We would have had to deal with speculation and competitive devaluation among more than 20 national currencies .
Many of us have experienced this and I myself sat on a Swedish finance committee with a 500 % interest rate .
The crisis in Greece naturally demonstrates the fact that the pact for keeping the budget deficit at a low level must be tightened up .
The deficit is still extremely large .
We need better supervision and coordination of economic policy at EU level , in other words , financial coordination that is worthy of the name .
I would like to finish by saying something about speculation .
Sometimes , when countries are subject to speculation , as my own country was in the 1990s , it actually provides us with a good opportunity to organise the measures we take .
When we were in a difficult situation , as a result of George Soros , among others , we knew what to expect and so we took the necessary measures .
That is something that those of you in the countries that are currently experiencing difficulties will have to think about .
( PL ) Mr President , I shall avoid the military language which the previous speaker used .
The language of war does not suit the style of banks .
I am a representative of what is probably the only political group in this Parliament which has attracted the majority of its members from outwith the euro area . Only two are in euroland .
My point of view , therefore , will be different .
Mr Trichet 's speech can be summed up by the number 36 , because this is how many Members of the European Parliament were listening to his speech .
Does this mean we are lazy ?
No - it means , in fact , that MEPs do not really believe the European Central Bank can be a solution , a remedy , to the crisis , or that it can be a lifebelt .
Mr Rehn said the euro area is something of value in itself , and then spoke about the crisis in Greece .
There is a certain contradiction here .
Greece is currently going through a crisis because it entered that oasis of stability too soon .
We should avoid such inconsistency .
( EL ) Mr President , I agree with my fellow members who said that the crisis is not over .
The economic situation in numerous countries is clearly negative .
Unemployment is increasing in most countries .
The measures being taken to address deficits are exacerbating the crisis .

Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn - and I am speaking institutionally - did you not see the crisis coming ?
The signs were there .
When the crisis broke , you hid behind the perception that everyone had to resolve their problems on their own .
Now , here you are repeating monotonously the words ' monitoring deficits ' and ' austerity in the Stability Pact ' .
In my opinion , the problem in the European Union and in Greece is not one of sound finances .
You know that , in order to cover borrowing , countries such as Greece are prey to speculators but , at the same time , they reveal the institutional and political gaps in EMU .
As such , I would say to you that what is needed is a change to the Stability Pact .
Insisting on the application of the Stability Pact , especially in a recession , will clearly increase and exacerbate regional and social inequalities , increase unemployment and wipe out any prospects of growth .
( NL ) Mr President , the situation in which Greece and the euro area have deservedly found themselves is regrettable .
Financial assistance for Greece should come primarily from the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
The IMF has itself said that it is in an excellent position to help Greece .
The establishment of a European Monetary Fund ( EMF ) seems to be motivated by political considerations , in particular , that is , to save Europe 's face in case Greece appealed to the IMF .
However , let us not rush headlong into establishing a new body as a remedy against non-compliance with the existing rules .
The necessity and desirability of setting up an EMF are dubious .
The penalties provided for by the Stability and Growth Pact must be implemented more actively in order to enforce compliance with the rules .
It is really up to the Council now to make a move .
Eurostat needs to be given the scope to carefully inspect the budget figures of the Member States of the euro area and thereby monitor compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report has one serious flaw : it does not name those responsible .
And yet , we will not be able to put an end to the economic crisis in Europe until those responsible have been identified .
Let us finally tell it like it is : the crisis was not caused by people living off their wages or salaries , but by those banks , multinationals and insurance companies that milked European societies dry .
At the moment , if a multinational company wants to establish itself in Hungary , the way to proceed is as follows : it receives free land from a local municipal government , is given a reduction on taxes and contributions , employs people for minimum wage and does not even allow them to unionise .
These are the conditions that have led to a crisis for job seekers in Europe .
We demand that multinationals , banks and insurance companies play their part and shoulder the task of solving and putting an end to the economic crisis .
( ES ) Mr President , the crisis through which we are struggling is the worst in eight decades and the most significant since the launch of the Community project .
It started with the North American subprime mortgage crisis and , following the collapse of Lehman Brothers , it is now in its third phase , after leaving Europe with a 4 % drop in GDP in 2009 , more than 23 million unemployed and a sharp deterioration in the state of the public finances , with debt in excess of 80 % of GDP .
The European Central Bank played a decisive role in maintaining liquidity in the system , using non-conventional mechanisms to counteract the credit restrictions and cooperating closely with the main monetary authorities .
Now that a moderate recovery is expected and there is no inflationary pressure , it must continue to contribute to the reestablishment of credit and avoid compromising the economic recovery through the early or indiscriminate withdrawal of the extraordinary measures .
The crisis has shown us that the monetary and economic pillars - the basis of monetary policy - need reinforcing .
One eye needs to be kept on the progress of the prices of the principal financial assets and private debt in order to guarantee the stability of prices and the economy in general .
Twenty Member States currently have excessive deficits .
The true meaning of consolidating public finances - an unavoidable task , that must be done in a coordinated and intelligent way - is restoring demand , promoting investment , and favouring reforms that will allow the economy to be revived , increase the potential for sustainable growth and create jobs .
Greater economic union may make the difference .
Global imbalances need to be corrected .
The European Union is one of the most balanced regions .
That could come under threat unless its competitiveness is strengthened and there is greater international monetary cooperation .
We will only improve our ability to compete globally if we strengthen internal economic cooperation in the areas of competitiveness and the balance of payments , in order to correct the imbalances and differences within the euro area .
The efforts and courage of Greece deserve clear and resolute support .
It is a question of common interest and uncertainty harms all Europeans .
Subsidiarity and solidarity are two sides of the same coin : the European currency .
As Mr Trichet said in English , French and German , the euro is more than just a currency : it is our common destiny .
I have repeated it in Spanish , which is one of the European Union 's global languages .
I will finish by saying it in Greek , which is the language that best expresses our universal vocation : Το ευρώ είναι το κοινό μας μέλλον .
( GA ) Mr President , the economic crisis has had a negative impact on Member States all over the European Union .
Unemployment rates have increased dramatically all over the Union , and it is young people that are suffering the most .
The public funds of many Member States have declined as a result of this crisis .
To deal with this issue , the Irish Government took decisive action in the years 2008 and 2009 .
Unchecked , Ireland 's deficit was heading towards 14 % of GDP .
The government 's action stabilised the deficit at 11.6 % of GDP in 2010 .
The action taken by the government has gained recognition in international markets .
Since its last budget , in December of last year , the cost of Irish borrowing , relative to benchmarking , has stabilised .
In fact , I understand that at the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs this week , the President of the Central Bank recognised and praised the actions of the Irish Government .
In many ways , Ireland is ahead of many other countries in its fiscal adjustment .
Countries such as the UK and the US , both with deficits in excess of 10 % , will have to undergo significant adjustment in order to restore sustainability to their public finances .
Can I say in conclusion that Ireland is still a good location for business as the fundamentals of the Irish economy are in place and we will retain our 12.5 % ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , the widening crisis in the euro area shows the dangers which may face economic projects that are not backed up by economic calculation , but are based on ideological assumptions , especially when integration includes the economic integration of different Member States which have different economic conditions .
We have to ask whether some states should have entered the euro area as early as they did .
At a certain point , the euro project became , primarily , not so much an economic project as a political one , aimed at accelerating European integration .
European taxpayers in many countries may , today , pay a great deal for this haste .
It would be good if we could draw some conclusions from this lesson for the future .
The euro is not an answer to the structural problems of individual economies , or to excessive debt or a lack of financial discipline .
It is the Member States which are responsible for the state of their finances , and these problems should be solved in the countries where they arose .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have read the reports with some surprise , and the speeches I have heard this morning only strengthen my beliefs .
With a few exceptions , it is still a matter of budget restrictions , containing inflation , and the Stability and Growth Pact , even though 20 of the 27 countries no longer meet all the criteria .
It is true that many are demanding economic governance .
However , we want a political Europe that ensures control of both its economic and its social choices and that is able to intervene with regard to monetary choices .
The Greek crisis is telling : it is Germany that has control and is imposing its demands .
In the United States , the central bank has just intervened directly to finance the state budget by buying treasury bonds .
In Europe , the European Central Bank flew to the banks ' assistance , but in terms of Greece and more generally of the PIGS , it is still the same ones who have to pay , in other words , employees , civil servants and pensioners , even though their countries have also been victims of financial speculation .
It is not minor reforms that we need , but a different Europe , an economic and social Europe for the benefit of the majority , not just of a few .
( SK ) The report on the annual management of the euro area and of public finances in 2009 analyses in detail the management of the EU during the global financial and economic crisis .
The decline of economic output in various EU countries has led to a dramatic rise in unemployment and a growth in the debts of European countries .
The impact of the crisis on individual countries has varied and the measures through which individual countries have tackled the crisis have consequently differed from one another .
Despite the efforts of EU bodies to adopt coordinated and collective measures , it appeared that in certain countries , populist governments with no proper sense of responsibility for the administration of public finances were courting disaster .
That is why the European Union as a whole has found it harder to deal with the impact of the crisis than other major economic centres , such as the United States , China , Japan and India .
It has become apparent that the European economic environment as a whole may be diverse and extensively regulated but , compared to competing economies , it is very cumbersome .
In the forthcoming period , we must therefore , along with efforts to consolidate the public finances of the euro area , also strive to restructure and greatly simplify the rules of the internal environment .
We should not forget that it is the productive sector alone that generates the resources on which the whole of society lives .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , in the course of its activities in 2008 , the European Central Bank was faced with unprecedented challenges as the world economic crisis wound its way into Europe in September 2008 .
The financial crisis turned into a crisis of the real economy as the capital markets froze up due to mistrust , and financial institutions would not extend credit to each other or to businesses .
The ECB reacted quickly and , in my judgment , appropriately to these financial events , but when we evaluate the crisis relief measures , we cannot overlook one deplorable fact , namely , the discrimination towards countries not in the euro area .
I am convinced that the ECB acted contrary to the spirit of the European Union when , at the height of the crisis , in October 2008 , it did not set equal conditions for drawing on liquidity facilities .
The ECB arranged currency exchanges with the Swedish and Danish national banks in order to ensure proper euro-liquidity for the banking systems of these two countries .
By contrast , with the Hungarian and Polish central banks , it was prepared to do the same only against collateral .
This course of action on the part of the ECB contributed , unfortunately , to a growing uncertainty on the markets , further aggravating these countries ' situations .
Now , when we are in the process of designing a new financial system , we have to take measures to ensure that in future , similar inequalities will be eliminated .
We cannot , therefore , introduce regulations that treat certain parts of the Union less favourably than others .
I would carry this idea further , when talking about the creation of the European Systemic Risk Board that we are all working on now .
The ECB will have an important role in this area .
The presidency of that Board will be held by the president of the ECB , and we will need to ensure that countries within the euro area - as well as those outside it , such as the Central and Eastern European states - receive equal voting rights in the new organisation .
There is a danger that if we do not raise our voices against the discrimination we have already experienced during the crisis , inequality will become the practice in the new financial supervisory bodies , and this is something to be avoided at all costs .
The ideal of reunification must not be allowed to be whittled away by replacing the former political disunity with economic division .
( RO ) It comes as no surprise that the exceptional measures which had to be adopted by the European Central Bank at a time of crisis feature at the heart of its annual report .
Against this backdrop , I think it is appropriate for the European Central Bank to continually increase liquidity provisions to banks in the euro area .
However , we must not forget that Member States outside the euro area were also themselves among those hit hard by the crisis and that intervention is required from the European Central Bank in this area as well , in the form of liquidity-enhancing measures .
In addition , an increase in budget deficits , government debt and the unemployment rate among young people under 25 is being seen in most European Union Member States .
The Stability and Growth Pact is going through an identity crisis and losing credibility , thereby making it impossible to apply its principles effectively .
I think that what is required is a less automatic and uniform implementation of the pact and an approach which takes into account the circumstances of each Member State where the emphasis is placed much more on the long-term sustainability of public finances and less on the government deficit .
The pact 's main aim was prevention .
It was meant to provide multilateral supervision of budgetary development using an early warning system .
This is why , in keeping with the spirit of Mr Scicluna 's report , I feel it is absolutely necessary to set up a European Systemic Risk Board , which will meet the objective of providing a rapid warning against systemic risks or imbalances threatening the financial markets .
The current financial crisis and its recent deepening in general must produce a prompt explanation of the mutual support mechanisms available at EU level , while also strengthening the coordination instruments between Member States in support of common economic governance .
One of the main lessons of this crisis is the need for greater fiscal responsibility and , by extension , for economic monitoring procedures for maintaining budgetary balance .

( LV ) Thank you , Mr President and Commissioners , last December , in Strasbourg , Mr Almunia , who was then Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , said that barring any significant developments , next summer , Estonia would be invited to join the euro area , with effect from 2011 .
Well , there have been some significant developments , not only for Estonia , but also for the euro area .
Estonia is practically the only EU Member State that currently satisfies the Maastricht criteria .
What sort of signal will it give if Estonia is not accepted into the euro area , in accordance with the rules ?
To my mind , it would signal to the financial world that the malaise in the euro area is so deep that it is incapable of accepting a small but fiscally responsible country .
In other words , a sign will be put on the euro area club door , saying : ' The club is closed for major refurbishment ' .
What sort of signal would it be , however , for the new Member States , such as my country , Latvia , which is under an IMF programme and maintains a fixed rate of exchange against the euro , and which , in order to introduce the euro , devalues its economy with a double-digit fall in GDP and extraordinarily high unemployment ?
The signal would be why should we do our utmost to repay private debt with a high exchange rate for our national currency , when this debt has been issued as euro loans by EU banks against , for example , immovable property ?
Thank you .
Mr President , 2008 was an extremely important year for the European and indeed the global economy .
It was the year that was characterised by a great deal of uncertainty as regards the extent of the crisis , which only seemed to worsen .
A great deal of uncertainty was also present with regard to the time it would take for the European economies to recover as well as the tools that we should use to stimulate such a recovery .
This was no easy year for the ECB , which had to face a number of challenges .
During 2008 , the ECB engaged with other major central banks to form a coordinated approach in order to provide the banking system with plenty of short-term liquidity , and this approach by the ECB proved to be extremely successful .
In this respect , I must support my colleague in the conclusion he has come to concerning the performance of the ECB .
I agree that 2008 was instrumental and that those responsible have risen to this occasion .
I also share some of the rapporteur 's concerns with regard to the lack of transmission of interest rate cuts from the bank to the consumer and I feel that this should be further looked into , so please take note , Mr Trichet .
All in all , I feel that this is an extremely well-balanced report , an excellent piece of work by my Maltese colleague , Edward Scicluna .
( FR ) Mr President , unfortunately , due to another engagement President Juncker is unable to join us as usual .
Quite clearly , I am sorry to hear this .
Here we have two very good reports that enable us to go more deeply into our discussion at a critical moment for the euro area .
Mr Scicluna 's report allows us to lay the foundations of a number of elements of the debate , in particular , relating to the conditions of appointment of your successor , Mr Trichet .
In terms of democracy , the monetary dialogue is an important element , but also with regard to the very functioning and running of the European Central Bank .

The report by our friend , Mr Giegold , asks questions of you , Mr Rehn , which come under your responsibility and not that of the European Central Bank .
The risk we face , as regards the functioning of the euro area , is the dismantling of our social model .
When your predecessor , Mr Almunia , gave an assessment of the euro area 's 10 years of operation , one factor was blatantly obvious , namely , the increasing divergence between the Member States of the euro area .
That is where we are and that is what the very authors of the treaty and the authors of the Stability and Growth Pact underestimated .
This is what we must take into account .
We must take this into account for two reasons .
Firstly , to understand that , even if the sustainability of public finances is a key element , it is not enough .
Faced with national competences , the Member States do not have a natural appetite for sanctions and therefore their coordination , their cooperation is not good cooperation .
This is the spirit that we have to discover .
This is the magic panacea that we need .
The second pillar which cannot be overlooked and which we cannot do without is the matter of fiscal harmonisation .
As you know , I deplore the fact that , from this point of view , the 2020 strategy does not even mention the work in progress on the harmonisation of the tax base for corporate taxation , which we absolutely must continue with determination .
( FI ) Mr President , in the wake of the financial crisis , public debt has become rapidly worse , even if , in many countries , they are beginning to turn off the taps of recovery .
Having dealt with an acute economic crisis , we need to focus very closely on the long term and serious imbalance in public finances .
We have had the Stability and Growth Pact , but the problem lies in the fact that the Member States have not complied with it , and so we now have acute deficits in public finances to deal with .
Attention has been given to incorrect statistical information in the case of Greece , but the core of the problem is a badly managed economic policy .
We politicians are faced with very difficult decisions , amid slow growth , an ageing population and an employment situation that is improving only sluggishly .
There are only a few cures for public finances : to increase revenue from taxation , to boost economic growth or to cut expenditure .
In the search for remedies , key indicators are the sustainability of public finances and the deficit .
The sustainability deficit is a reflection of how much the tax rate should be raised or the rate of expenditure lowered for public finances to be on a sustainable basis over the long term .
To achieve a balance , we have to continue to recognise that accrued debt will increase by the difference between interest rates and the growth in Gross National Product , and an ageing population will cause the cost of pensions and care to rise substantially in the years to come .
In order to boost income in public finances , it is absolutely essential to have growth and employment , increase the productivity of public services and implement the structural measures that can guarantee the sustainability of pension schemes , for example .
In the long term , an increase in the birth rate and preventive health care will be of significance for the balance in public finances .
In the midst of the economic crisis , we called for better coordination of public finances , and I would like to ask how Commissioner Rehn intends to bring this about .
I believe , however , that this economic crisis cannot be used as a way out of the back door for the economies of the Member States to be brought under control .
We just have to observe strict budget discipline in public finances .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to highlight three main points in the reports that we are discussing .
Firstly , we should not devote the debate on public finances to issues relating to austerity alone .
We also need to focus on what we can do to initiate growth and combat unemployment .
In many countries , cuts in public expenditure are needed .
At the same time , however , it is also important to increase revenue via positive growth , by getting more people into work and paying taxes .
Secondly , I appreciate the fact that Mr Scicluna takes up the issue of increased transparency in the financial sector in his report .
There is still much to do in this regard .
Transparency is not only an excellent way to counter harmful risk-taking behaviour on the financial market .
Enhanced transparency is also necessary for supervision to be effective and for the public financial institutions to have the public 's trust , which is extremely important .
The ECB should lead the way in this area and take immediate measures to make its work more transparent .
A good first step would be to begin to publish the minutes of the ECB Council meetings .
Openness should also be a key principle in the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board ( ESRB ) .
In order for the Systemic Risk Board 's recommendations to have an impact , the guiding principle should be that they be made public .
Thirdly , I am pleased that , in his report , Mr Giegold emphasises the importance of having a clear environmental and climate perspective , even in times of crisis .
We must not allow the financial crisis to slow down the switch to a green economy .
We should instead promote economic recovery by investing in renewable energy sources , environmentally friendly transport systems and the development of green technology .
Only by making these kinds of investments can we create growth that is sustainable in the long term .
( FR ) Mr President , 2009 was , without doubt , the most difficult year for the euro since its introduction , but it was also the most useful .
Without the euro , the European Union would have sunk into a war of competitive devaluations against the backdrop of the crisis .
In 2009 , monetary instability could have weakened the political solidity of the European Union .
Thanks to the euro , we have been spared the pain of a continued imbalance of exchange rates and monetary policies .
But for how much longer ?
Today we are hoping and praying for better governance of the European currency - more restrictive , more visible and more responsive governance .
The fact is , the attempts by countries to take back control of the euro 's ground rules do not contribute whatsoever to the emergence of proper European economic and monetary governance .
Only solidarity can curb the speculative activities of which Greece is a victim today and which may hit other countries in the euro area at any moment .
Solidarity goes hand in hand with solidity in the emotionally charged context of sovereign debt markets .
The political prevaricating of recent weeks has not only damaged Greece . It has seriously shaken confidence in the euro .
Non-assistance to countries in danger is undermining the monetary stability of the whole of the euro area .
Beyond emergencies , let us finally give the euro the instruments it needs .
We need a coordinated European bond market to avoid bottlenecks with too many sovereign debts in too many countries coming to maturity at the same time .
We need representation outside the euro area at all levels , in all bodies , including international financial institutions .
Why is the President of the Eurogroup not in the G20 ?
Let us also accept that the new members want to join the euro area as quickly as possible .
We must welcome them with enthusiasm , not with petty-mindedness .
Contriving to exclude euro area members amounts to abandoning the ambition of a strong Europe in the world .
The expansion of the euro area must go hand in hand with the implementation of the instruments needed for genuine economic union : coordination of budget policies and harmonisation of economic and fiscal policies .
This is the price of the euro 's continued success .
( PL ) Mr President , a crisis is a disease which usually ends not only in recovery , but also strengthens and creates mechanisms of resistance .
It may also lead to what are known as complications , and even to certain kinds of permanent impairment of the body .
Let us think about how this illness , which we call the crisis , arose .
In most cases , an illness is the effect of the various ways in which we neglect our bodies , or it has an external origin .
The cause of the crisis was activity which was contrary to market principles - speculative activity .
The market itself is not able to reject , counteract or limit these factors if there is not suitable supervision and monitoring of the progress of processes , particularly in situations which are not typical for the market .
Until now , financial markets were monitored and supervised mainly by state and national institutions .
Globalisation has led to the establishment of world financial institutions and a global finance market .
However , adequate world , regional and , in our case , European institutions for supervising and monitoring these markets have not been established .
The market is not guided by values , but , above all , by the need to achieve profit at any cost .
The crisis did not begin in 2008 with the collapse in the financial markets , but in 2007 , with the crisis in the food markets , as well as the undermining of the energy market , which is controlled by political instruments .
The situation in the European Union is the sin of not observing the universally established and accepted principles of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is a pity that the warnings from the Commission were too gentle .
Some Member States were allowed to get away with more , because , after all , they were not going to let some Commission or other lecture them .
Some Member States behaved like children , hiding their misdeeds .
This kind of behaviour cannot be the basis of Community or our integration .
It is important to admit the mistakes which have been made , to tell our citizens , to apologise to them and to ask for understanding and cooperation as we emerge from the crisis .
We must take action so that the costs of the crisis do not fall on the weakest and poorest .
European Union solidarity obliges us also to support the countries which have been worst hit by the crisis .
Recovery will not come from outside , if the body , or the state , does not take up the fight .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Trichet , I would like to thank you very much , not only for what you have done in recent years , but also for your approach in recent weeks .
You have been competent , independent and consistent .
You and your staff have been a calming influence in troubled times .
Mr Rehn , you have made some very encouraging statements over the last few days .
We should do everything possible to continue on the path that you have taken .
The euro is a stabilising force , even in times of crisis .
We must put an end to the myth that the euro and the Stability and Growth Pact are the cause of the problems experienced by Greece and other countries .
Last week , the Greek Prime Minister said very clearly in this House that the euro is not to blame .
On the contrary , it is part of the solution .
There can be no reform without the euro .
There can be no appropriate restrictions on the objectives that we can set ourselves without the euro .
We must not make the euro weaker , if those countries which are affected feel that the euro protects rather than weakens them .
I would also like to add that Greece is not begging for money , which is the impression often given by the daily press .
It would be a good thing if many members of the Council stopped focusing on popular opinion on the domestic political front when they talk about this subject but instead worked with us to find common European solutions .
Greece cannot be given subsidies , but it wants support for implementing its reform and savings plan .
The President of the European Central Bank , Mr Trichet , has also stated very clearly in a three-step plan what is possible and when the measures can be taken .
No one has said that nothing could be done .
We have a monetary union , but we do not have an economic union .
To achieve an economic union , we need the political will of the Member States rather than advice .
The economic union includes the coordination of budgetary policy , the harmonisation of taxes and the coordination of education , economic and social policy .
This is what we are calling on the Member States to do and we expect them to show commitment .
We must continue on this route in the interests of the euro .
( PL ) Mr President , last year was an extremely turbulent one for the euro area .
It began with Slovakia 's entry to the Eurogroup , and ended with huge economic and financial problems in Greece .
During this period , the world experienced its biggest economic crisis for years .
Discussions are currently under way on how to cope with the new challenges , what direction the global economy should take and what European Union policy should be .
The resolution we are considering at the moment is part of this debate .
I would like to draw attention to one aspect of it .
Ladies and gentlemen , the economic crisis , the problems in Greece , and also the current debate on assistance for Greece , show that the division into the new and the old Europe is still a reality .
Last Friday , the head of the European Commission , José Manuel Barroso , referred to the idea of creating a mechanism of support for countries in the euro area which are struggling with financial problems .
According to the head of the Commission , the principles and conditions which would govern the use of this instrument should be established only by members of the euro area .
I would like to take the opportunity of this debate to give my strong support to the position of the Commissioner for Financial Programming and Budget , Mr Lewandowski , and Professor Jan Rostowski , the Polish Minister for Finance .
I would like to add my voice to their appeal , and also to the opinion of many fellow Members , that all Member States , including those which are outside the euro area , should now , already , take an active part in measures to strengthen the euro area and create aid instruments for its members .
Poland , which is one of the countries outside the euro area , will soon adopt the common currency , and we would like , today , to be responsible for the future form of the Eurogroup .
Therefore , let us not exclude the new Member States from such an important debate .
We have had the ' two-speed Europe ' slogan .
Let us not now divide Europe into a Europe in the euro area and a Europe outside the euro area , because we are a single Union .
Finally , I would like to give my wholehearted support to all parts of the resolution which call on the European Central Bank , the European Commission and members of the Eurogroup to support the process of euro area enlargement - enlargement based on the current criteria .
I would also like to thank the President of the European Central Bank , Mr Trichet , for his good work , especially this year , which has been such a difficult one for Europe .
( HU ) I am grateful to the Commissioner , to the President of the ECB and to the rapporteur for having taken an open and highly professional approach to this problem that concerns us gravely .
Indeed , it is alarming that despite all our efforts , the rate of unemployment and the level of state indebtedness keeps rising in almost all Member States of the European Union .
My country , Slovakia , is no exception to the rule .
Unemployment has risen above 13 % .
Slovakia was the last state to join the euro area , on 1 January 2009 , and this had positive repercussions on economic as well as political and social areas .
The vast majority of the population still feels positive about the euro .
We think it is important therefore to maintain the strength and prestige of the euro .
Parliament must help the Commission and the ECB in their efforts in order to avoid failure in this endeavour .
The first thing to do is to bring the integration of the European economy to a higher and sustainable level .
This is , however , a strategic question , in which the Council 's committed support is indispensable .
( LT ) The way out of the complicated economic and financial crisis was not as effective as we had hoped .
When the crisis began , the Member States ' programmes of support for banks were not coordinated with joint conditions set down at European level and some banks used additional funds allocated from the European Central Bank to cover their losses .
Support for economic activity , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , was not coordinated either .
The impact of these actions is clear : when they failed to receive loans from the banks on time , small and medium-sized businesses folded en masse .
It was easier for the countries of the euro area to overcome the difficulties , as the European Central Bank ensured the provision of liquidity to these .
If we believe in European solidarity , if we operate in one open market with the same competitive conditions and the main goal is to exit from this complex situation as soon as possible , I think that the European Central Bank should have ensured and must ensure the provision of liquidity to Member States not in the euro area that were hit particularly hard by this crisis .

Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Scicluna , said that the ECB had tried to expand liquidity , but that liquidity had not been passed on by the banks to their customers .
That is true outside the eurozone as well as inside it .
My party is pleased that the UK remains outside the eurozone .
A state 's currency must reflect the condition and needs of its own economy and not the average needs of 27 different economies .
However , keeping our own currency is only part of the answer .
The central problem is that credit creation and distribution is in the hands of private companies - the commercial banks - and that is true outside , as well as inside , the eurozone .
The function of credit creation - in effect , money creation - must be removed from the hands of private companies .
Extra spending power , when it is needed - either to distribute existing or imminent growth or to finance large infrastructure projects - must be created by the government and spent into circulation , not created by the banks and lent into circulation .
( RO ) We have been able to observe during this crisis that the fluctuations triggered by interest and exchange rates have come up against a single currency which has properly shielded the euro area .
The single currency has not provided a solution to all the internal and external imbalances which have occurred .
However , the benefits provided through allowing national financial institutions to have access to the European Central Bank 's liquidity and the elimination of the risk of exchange rate fluctuations have increased the interest shown in it by the Member States outside the euro area .
The efforts made by these states through improving their own economies and fiscal policies in order to adopt the single currency must be welcomed .
I call on the Commission and European Central Bank to further encourage the expansion of the euro area as quickly as possible in order to provide them with greater protection against the effects of the economic and financial crisis .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , I would like to thank you very much for the part of the report which warns against excessive cuts in wages with the aim of reducing deficits , because low incomes result in a fall in economic growth .
I want to thank you for this paragraph , because I believe that this not only slows down economic growth and reduces the competitiveness of Europe , but also restricts the opportunities for European citizens to play a full part in society .
It is essential for us to draw up our budgets according to the guidelines , but it is equally important for the Member States to have room for manoeuvre in an economic and social context .
If we have a Europe where there is no longer any investment in education , health and research , we will also have a Europe that is unstable and cannot compete with the rest of the world .
Those groups which are not responsible for the crisis must not now be made to bear the cost .
If we do not invest in people , we will not have a future in Europe .
This is why I am calling for the emphasis to be put on the social aspect in future .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current economic and financial crisis , which is also a structural crisis , is forcing us to impose long-term controls and to introduce cautious budgets .
Globalisation is compelling the euro area to play an effective role with regard to financial policy .
However , this must not happen at the expense of the ordinary citizens and I would like to remind everyone that caution and responsibility are needed .
Mr President , I have to say that I have been addressing Parliament for six and a half years now , and this is the first time that I have noted so many speeches , so many analyses , so many suggestions and so many proposals .
I am very impressed by the wealth of what we have just heard and very impressed also by the diversity of views that have been expressed .
I will try , if I may , to summarise my main points after hearing these remarks , which were all interesting and relevant , and to which the European Central Bank will , of course , attach the utmost importance .
First of all , I would say that I have heard a lot on the challenges the ECB faced and praise for the ECB for having been able to react in real time in very difficult circumstances .
Let me tell you that I think my colleagues and I tried to do our best in very exceptional circumstances : the worst since World War II , and it would have probably been the worst since World War I if we had not acted promptly .
The challenges were faced by all ; many of you have said that the challenges existed for other central banks in Europe and in the rest of the world .
So we all had to face up to enormous responsibility and I fully agree with those who have said that we cannot say that the difficult times are over .
We are not over the difficult times .
We are not going back to business as usual .
We have to remain extremely alert .
I also got the message on growth and jobs , which is a very strong message from Parliament . I fully agree with that .
By delivering stability , by being credible in delivering stability in the medium and long run , we trust that we are contributing to sustainable growth and sustainable job creation .
But you know that our message is structural reforms ; structural reforms to elevate the growth potential of Europe and the job creation capacity of Europe are absolutely essential .
A firm message coming from you , which we fully share in the ECB is - and I do not want to respond in the place of the Commissioner - governance of Europe of the 27 , governance of the 16 members of the euro area is of the essence .
We call for the utmost level of responsibility from countries , whether members of the 27 or of the 16 , to exert their responsibility , to exert surveillance on the peers .
We absolutely need full and complete implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Surveillance of fiscal policies is at the heart of EMU , and I must also include surveillance of structural reforms and implementation of structural reforms , and surveillance of the evolution of the cost competitiveness of the various economies , particularly , members of the euro area .
This is a key issue .
I do not want to elaborate more on Greece and the various issues at stake .
I have already had occasion to respond to many questions in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and in front of Parliament .
Let me only say that Greece has a role model , and the role model is Ireland .
Ireland had an extremely difficult problem - this was said by one of the MEPs here - and Ireland took its problem very seriously ex ante , with extreme determination , professionalism and capacity , and this has been recognised by all .
I want to stress that .
That being said , I repeat : the judgment of the ECB on the new measures which have been taken by the Greek Government is that they are convincing and , I would add , courageous .
A word on the long-term situation inside the euro area : during the next 10 or 20 years , we will deliver price stability in line with the definition we have delivered since the inception of the euro .
You can trust us .
We can prove that .
This is not theory .
These are facts ; these are figures .
( FR ) And I must stress this : all the members of the euro area know that average inflation in the euro area will be less than 2 % , or close to 2 % , in the medium and long terms .
They must draw consequences from this nationally .
They benefit from belonging to the euro area .
They must not put themselves in a national context , in terms of national inflation , since that would be far from what we guarantee , because that has been asked of us , because we are faithful to our remit and because it is a contribution to the prosperity and stability of Europe .
Mr President , allow me to conclude - if I can , in a few words - on the matter of transparency .
As I have often said to MEPs , we are the most transparent in the world when it comes to the immediate publication of our studies , the introductory statement .
We are the most transparent in the world when it comes to the press conference that immediately follows the Governing Council .
The only area where this decision does not stand - and we have a good reason - is that we are not giving the names of those who are voting for this and of those who are voting for that , because we consider that our message is that we are not a collection of individuals .
We are a college .
The Governing Council is the pertinent entity .
It is the Governing Council which counts .
I have already said that it is not business as usual and we must absolutely reform the financial markets in a very profound way , in order to be sure that we do not start another crisis of the kind that we have had to cope with .

A last point on Poland and Hungary : one MEP mentioned Poland and Hungary and told us that they were not treated as they should be by the ECB .
I think the MEP is not well-informed ; I would encourage her to go to the national central banks of the two countries and it will be demonstrated to her that the ECB has a very intimate cooperation with those two central banks to the benefit of all of us .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first , I would like to say thank you to the Members for a very serious and substantive debate .
I have listened to your views very carefully . I can conclude from them that there is strong and broad support for an effective reinforcement of economic governance in the euro area and in the European Union as a whole .
In my view , today 's debate has been a very worthy and valuable setting of the scene for the European Council today and tomorrow .
I also welcome the opportunity to continue discussions on economic governance soon in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , preferably as soon as possible after Easter .
I would like to consult you and move forward soon with concrete proposals .
There are two lines of action in reinforcing economic governance which are of the essence .
First of all , its cornerstone will be a truly credible and better preventive fiscal and budgetary surveillance that is stronger and more rigorous , also covers the mid-term budgetary policies , and uses recommendations and , if needed , warnings to the Member States .
Its second building block will consist of more effective preventive and more systematic and rigorous surveillance of macro-economic imbalances and divergences in competitiveness between the Member States of the euro area and of the European Union .
Binding policy recommendations will also be used in this regard .
This is needed to prevent an accumulation of imbalances .
It is self-evident that without a doubt , the most pressing and urgent need exists in the countries with large deficits and weak competitiveness - not only in Greece , but , of course , starting in Greece .
It is equally self-evident that we cannot - and will not - mean by this that anybody would weaken the export performance of countries with current account surpluses .
In other words , the aim is not to make Bayern München play worse against Olympic Lyon but to improve both export competitiveness where needed and domestic demand where needed and possible , thus making both Bayern München and Olympic Lyon play better as a European team by making both offensive and defensive strategy ever stronger .
That is what the euro area - and , in the final analysis , the European Union - is all about .
rapporteur . - Mr President , a few points first .
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the ECB for its cooperation and availability in responding to my various queries .
Secondly , I would like to thank my fellow shadow rapporteurs for their joint team work in agreeing to amendments to this report and thus widening the agreement on it .
We have seen that the recent recession is proving to be a challenge .
However the tensions in the euro area are not new and are well known .
We know we are not yet an optimal currency area .
However , that is why we have to be innovative .
We have to follow sensible economic principles and policies .
Of course , they must be couched in line with European social cohesion principles .
Some observers have stated that the ECB cannot help Greece because this is forbidden by the ' no bail-out ' clause of Article 103 of the EU Treaty .
Nevertheless , it is one thing to implement a bail-out and another , very different thing to provide temporary financial assistance .
We know that there are several options before us .
Some can be executed in the short term and others in the medium term .
As my colleagues before me pointed out , and as Europeans , we all look up to the euro and we all want it to succeed .
We can make it succeed , so let us all - Parliament , Commission , Council and the European Central Bank - put our heads together and find a successful path forward .
Finally , we must restore public confidence in financial institutions through measures which include greater transparency , better risk management and appropriate regulation .
We need to ensure that a crisis of this magnitude does not occur again .
rapporteur . - Mr President , following this debate , I would like to make three quick points .
Firstly , looking at the different opinions here in the House , we do not have the same opinion on the question of imbalances .
There were differences which were quite clear and I think we have to be careful .
In particular , I would like to address that to you , Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn , and ask you not to be blind in one eye , because the central problem , as we agree in principle , is that costs should grow according to the inflation target plus productivity .
Some countries had cost increases which were too high , and it is good that you are acting .
On the other hand , there are several countries which use tax policy as well as their wage-setting arrangements to ensure they fall below this threshold .
If you do not act on those - and I know that some in the Ecofin do not agree with this approach - then we will be setting fire to the economic basis of the eurozone and that is very dangerous .
I urge you not to be blind in one eye and I urge my colleagues likewise .
Look at Greece and the stability programme , which was praised .
I would like to stress that there is a major problem , and I refer to what I learnt during my visit to Greece last week .
Most people in Greece feel that during the last 10 or 20 years , a lot of people became very rich under circumstances which were not just .
If you praise the Irish efforts , you cannot compare it to the situation in Greece .
People in Greece feel they should not suffer because of things they have not caused .
Therefore , I urge you , Mr Rehn , also to put pressure on the Greek Government to get serious on illegitimate wealth which has been accumulated in the past .
Otherwise , the programme will be not accepted and it will also fail for economic reasons .
We have to make sure that the programme is socially just - and it is not yet socially just .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 March 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - There are lessons to be learnt from the current eurozone crisis .
The economic crisis is also responsible for the eurozone difficulties , but I believe there are also structural weaknesses of EMU that we should address in order to avoid future crises .
For the ECB to be able to take efficient action supporting employment and growth , we have to provide it with the necessary tools .
The ECB does not have the same tools as the Fed , which is why it could not have an active monetary policy supporting growth .
The ECB is bound by its main objective of ensuring price stability , which prevents it from efficiently stimulating growth .
I also believe that we need greater coordination of economic and fiscal policies , so that we avoid unfortunate situations like the Greek one .
Better coordination would enhance euro area stability .
The SGP needs to be respected strictly , but I think it should be revised .
The preventive arm should be strengthened .
The punitive arm is not an efficient one since paying fees only increases budgetary deficits and prevents compliance with the rules .
On the other hand , sanctions should not be decided by the Council , because Member States will always be reluctant to punish each other .
in writing . - We should proceed from one central fact - during the most severe economic crisis that Europe has known , the euro has been an anchor of stability and credibility .
Without the functioning eurozone , overcoming the crisis would have been much slower and uneven .
This applies also for those Member States which have not yet joined the eurozone .
Now it is especially important to realise that the European common currency is a common value for which every member of the eurozone bears individual responsibility .
There is a general agreement that the economic crisis was a logical outcome of a widespread crisis of values .
Those who have joined the eurozone are expected to bear higher responsibility for balancing their expenses and incomes .
It does not make sense to take the role of supposed victims of financial speculation or economic mafias .
Almost all European economies have sinned against the principles of sound and balanced fiscal policy .
The lesson has to be learnt - we need much tougher supervision and better coordination of financial policies with the establishment of a European Monetary Fund .
But , first of all , each and every member of the eurozone must slow down in living at the expense of tomorrow .
The activities of the European Central Bank have , since its inception , been a subject of constant criticism from the left , and not only throughout the EU .
The first cause of this justified criticism is the objectives of the bank .
Since the main objective of the bank is to ensure that inflation does not exceed 2 % and the budget deficits of the EU Member States do not exceed 3 % of GDP , then everything is clearly fine in times of growth , when unemployment ' falls by itself ' , the liquidity of the banks is ' secured by itself ' and the ECB is able to ' press governments ' in individual Member States to reduce their debts .
From the moment when an economic crisis erupts , however , it is a very different story .
The badly formulated objective of the central financial institution has the effect of making fundamental divergences from the objective necessary .
The report , which is concerned with assessing the ECB 's annual report and performance in relation to solving the financial crisis , nonetheless stubbornly insists on this badly-formulated pivotal objective .
The report also states , among other things , that it is necessary to draw back from the policy of stimulation packages and from securing the liquidity of the banks , which was the main so-called unconventional measure for overcoming the crisis .
The report does not concern itself at all with the critical state of the finances of at least five EU states , and it seems that the authors of the report are also indifferent to the meteoric rise in unemployment .
All of this only confirms the harmfulness of the current concept of the European Central Bank .
The report must therefore be rejected .
The European Union as a whole and the euro area in particular are in a grave situation .
Greece is on the verge of bankruptcy and Spain and Portugal are also in difficulties .
Because of the seriousness of the situation , new proposals are constantly being made .
On the one hand , people are talking about giving the European Monetary Fund extensive rights of intervention .
On the other hand , the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Policy , Mr Rehn , is calling for Brussels to be involved in the budgetary planning of the Member States .
The European Union obviously wants to use the current crisis to strip the Member States of their financial autonomy , which is one of the last core areas of national sovereignty remaining to them .
However , taking another huge step towards a centralised European superstate will not solve the existing problems .
On the contrary , it will further exacerbate them .
The alarming state that the monetary union finds itself in and the fact that the euro has become a high-risk currency are a result of countries such as Germany , the Netherlands and Austria , on the one hand , being brought together with states such as Greece , Italy and Spain , on the other , with a deliberate disregard for the existing differences between them concerning their economic development and the ethos on which their financial policy is based .
These historical differences , which not only relate to the economy , must be taken into consideration , instead of further tightening the existing centralist constraints on the European nation states .
In the context of the European Central Bank annual report , I would like to highlight the disturbing change in financial policy which has resulted in far too many dollars being printed without it being possible to come anywhere near covering their value .
The accompanying current or forthcoming devaluation of the dollar by the United States as part of its currency reform programme would have a severe negative impact on the European market .
In order to avoid this risk , the European Central Bank and other European institutions should seriously consider moving away from the dollar as a key currency .
The euro is much stronger , and famous economists , such as Nobel prize-winner Joseph Stiglitz , have said that the leading role played by the dollar has been the cause of many financial crises .
The European Union should stop exposing itself voluntarily to the problems of US financial policy .
Mr President , the debt crisis in Greece has raised questions about our ability to maintain the stability of the euro area .
I am convinced that the strength of the single currency will be guaranteed if the rules we have agreed upon are followed in every single Member State .
It has been said that , as well as Greece , there are other European Union Member States which can expect serious financial difficulties .
In addition to the soaring national debt , some Member States have also reached almost dangerous levels of government spending , something which the European Central Bank was already concerned about a couple of years ago .
The euro is an anchor to which the Member State economies are tied .
Actions by any Member State which weaken the euro are unacceptable .
I consider it essential that every country fulfils the conditions set up for the euro area .
At the same time , I support the collective approach to looking for solutions , including compiling an aid package for Greece , tightening the regulations concerning the single currency and carrying out stricter supervision .
The idea of the possible creation of a European Monetary Fund , which was raised as a result of the Greek crisis , is an approach which could prevent potential problems , but we should not forget the overseas factors operating in a globalised investment market , which necessarily have an impact on the euro area .
It is , therefore , clear that at a national level , we should henceforth concentrate more on creating legislation which would protect the euro from the influence of dangerous factors , both internal to the European Union and outside it .
Second European Roma Summit ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
* * *

( FR ) Mr President , through a ruling given on 19 March , the Court of Justice of the European Union has just declared that the majority of our Parliament violated a clear rule of law by refusing to defend my immunity on the basis of Article 10 of the international protocol , as requested by my foreign colleagues , led by Mr Romagnoli .
This request was made when I was the victim of violent political , professional and legal persecution for the crime of ' telling journalists who were interviewing me on revisionism and the history of the Second World War that these questions were a matter for historians to debate ' .
This is in paragraph 108 of the ruling .
The Court states , and I quote : ' Since the aim of the protocol is to grant rights to the Members of the European Parliament , it follows that by failing to give a verdict on the basis of Article 10 , Parliament violated a rule of law in a sufficiently clear manner ' .
It is true that the Court is not complying with my request for indemnity because it believes that the French Court of Appeal and its 11 judges found me totally and definitively innocent .
Consequently , it believes that I can no longer cite prejudice .
The fact remains that it is ordering our Parliament to pay two thirds of the legal costs .
This decision therefore constitutes a scathing rejection of the partisan tactics that deprived me of parliamentary immunity .
Under pressure , the rapporteur resorted to a crude procedural trick .
This decision sets a precedent of which members of the national right in the European Parliament , whose freedom of expression is constantly under attack , will be able to take advantage in future .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
A list of third countries , or parts of third countries , and animal and public health and veterinary certification conditions for importation into the Community of certain live animals and their fresh meat (
2 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Lithuania / Manufacture of furniture (
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Lithuania / Manufacture of wearing apparel (
4 .
Report on the 2009 Annual Statement on the Euro Area and Public Finances (
5 .
Appointment of the Vice-President of the European Central Bank (
6 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Milan Martin Cvikl ( SL ) (
7 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Ms Rasa Budbergyt ( LT ) (
8 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Ms Kersti Kaljulaid ( EE ) (
9 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Igors Ludborzs ( LV ) (
10 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Szabolcs Fazakas ( HU ) (
11 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Ladislav Balko ( SK ) (
12 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Louis Galea ( MT ) (
13 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Augustyn Kubik ( PL ) (
14 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Jan Kinst ( CZ ) (
15 .
Nomination of a member of the Court of Auditors - Mr Eoin O 'Shea ( IE ) (
16 .
Recommendation to the Council on the 65th Session of the United Nations General Assembly (
17 .
Second European Roma Summit
Before the vote :
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to move an oral amendment which would become paragraph 7a ( new ) .
It is signalled on the voting list and my understanding is that it has the support of the political groups co-signing this resolution .
It becomes the consequence of paragraph 7 .
So the new paragraph 7a would read : ' Hence , calls once again on the Commission to develop a comprehensive European Strategy for Roma Inclusion as the instrument for combating social exclusion and discrimination of Roma in Europe ' .
Mr President , thank you very much .
We have two amendments , one of which is an amendment to the amendment .
I would like to introduce both of them .
We would like the words ' the Council and ' to be deleted .
The final result of the amendment which is currently under discussion would then be :
' calls on the Member States to refrain from forced repatriations of minorities if they face homelessness and discrimination in the areas of education , social protection and employment once they have been forcibly returned ' .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have also rejected a previous amendment because it was worded rather too strongly .
However , there is a problem with some countries where Roma people are being repatriated and where the conditions are unsuitable for them to be able to live in freedom and safety and with human dignity .
Our wording is more restrained , among other things , because we have seen that in some countries , visa liberalisation is being misused for the purposes of asylum applications without the prerequisites being in place .
Our text would read :
to countries in the Western Balkans ' where they might face homelessness and discrimination in the areas of education , social protection and employment ' .
( DE ) I hope that the Members who initially rejected the other amendment can vote in favour and accept this more restrained wording .
18 .
Schengen Borders Code with regard to surveillance of external maritime borders
Before the adoption of the draft resolution :
Mr President , I just wish the House to know that I was the original rapporteur on the decision on FRONTEX and I recommended that we adopt this because of the exceptional measures that are necessary to deal with intervention and rescue at sea , especially in the Southern Mediterranean .
The committee did not back me and therefore I removed my name from this report , and I will be recommending to the House that they reject the resolution that is now before them .
We need an absolute majority of 369 for it to be adopted , but I would recommend that the House reject the resolution that we are about to vote on .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Members have for their consideration a draft decision supplementing the Schengen Borders Code as regards the surveillance of the external borders in the context of FRONTEX operations at sea .
This is a necessary decision and it will help Member States and FRONTEX to manage our external sea borders more efficiently .
As you know , the number of boats will increase very soon as they always do at this time of year in the Mediterranean .
The proposal contains a set of very important principles and clarifications of rules that border guards must apply when controlling sea borders , for example , the principle of non-refoulement and the obligation to treat vulnerable peoples and unaccompanied minors with special care .
It also clarifies what assistance should be provided to persons in danger at sea and where to disembark persons that are rescued .
Many of you in this House have asked for these principles and rules for years and now finally , they are within our reach .
The changes that we are proposing will also reduce the risk of lives being lost in the Mediterranean by making sea border operations more efficient .
The draft decision is the result of very hard and long discussions with Member States and with experts from , for instance , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organisation for Migration .
It will provide our institutions with a better framework for exercising a proper monitoring of these operations where significant European funds are involved .
On the legal aspects of the proposal , the Commission has chosen Article 12 of the Schengen Border Code as the legal basis because the rules concern border surveillance patrols during FRONTEX operations , not border checks as I think Parliament 's legal opinion argues .
At the request of Members of this House , the Commission has made an investigation of alternative technical solutions that would allow for , firstly , not reopening the discussions on the substance and , secondly , having clear rules adopted in time for FRONTEX operations this summer .
Unfortunately , we have not found such an alternative so I therefore recommend the honourable Members not to reject these long-awaited new rules .
We cannot open a debate on that now , Mr Busuttil .
You have the floor , but we cannot open a debate .
Mr President , we have had two speakers addressing this House to reject the resolution but no speaker to speak in favour of the approval of this resolution .
So I think it is only fair that someone who can speak and urge Members to speak in favour of the resolution should be able to do so .
If you allow me just one minute , may I say that the reason why the LIBE Committee rejected these rules and therefore put forward this resolution is very simple .
We have been told by our legal services - not once but twice - that the Commission exceeded its powers in bringing forward these rules .
This is why we rejected them .
We definitely want these rules - I myself come from a country that wants these rules - but we do not want the European Commission to exceed its powers .
That is why we should support this resolution .
Just for the sake of clarity , if you vote against this , you are supporting the measure that enables interception at sea .
If you vote for this , you are not .
It is pure clarity .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
19 .
Priorities for the 2011 budget - Section III - Commission (
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my great pleasure to inform you that , as part of our series of interparliamentary meetings , we are being visited by a delegation from the Parliament of Tunisia headed by Mr Salah Tabarki , Chair of the Committee on Political Affairs , Human Rights and Foreign Affairs of the Tunisian House of Representatives .
We warmly welcome Mr Tabarki and the members of his delegation .
I would like to underline the importance that we attach to this meeting , which is the first to take place for five years .
Parliament is following the development of the political and economic situation in Tunisia with great interest , as we in the European Union are that country 's most important trade partner .
The relations that you will establish with the European Parliament Delegation for Relations with the Maghreb Countries will provide you with an adequate institutional framework for dialogue on matters of mutual interest regarding the development of democracy and the rule of law .
We therefore wish you an enjoyable and fruitful visit .
1 .
Budget guidelines : 2011 - other sections (
2 .
Agricultural product quality policy : what strategy to follow ? (
3 .
The effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation (
Before the vote :
Mr President , I would like to thank all of those who have taken part in the preparation of this report .
I would just like to point out that when we get to paragraph 31 , there is an oral amendment .
As agreed , I will now read the second part of the English version .
' Considers it appropriate , therefore , to explore the grounds for an agreement with creditor countries to establish a temporary moratorium or debt cancellation for the poorest countries to enable them to implement countercyclical fiscal policies to mitigate the severe effects of the crisis ; proposes that efforts be made to facilitate arrangements for transparent debt arbitration ' .
In any case , Mr Guerrero , if we have not been misinformed , this oral amendment affects paragraph 34 and not paragraph 31 .
( Mr Guerrero indicated that it did indeed affect the second part of paragraph 34 )
Now it is all clear .
( The vote took place )
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 22 :
( FR ) Mr President , we have brought to your attention an oral amendment concerning paragraph 22 .
I would point out that paragraph 22 relates to global governance and , in particular , to the composition of the G20 , which , unusually , does not include in its ranks any representatives from the least developed countries .
The oral amendment aims to fill this gap , and the text that I propose to the European Parliament meets this need .
( FR ) Mr President , you called for applause for the Tunisian delegation a moment ago .
Could you ask the Tunisian delegation to intervene to obtain the release of Taoufik Ben Brik , which the whole of Parliament is calling for ?
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
I am very happy about the way that the vote has gone .
However , this was essentially an own-initiative report and a different procedure has been agreed in this case .
Now we have been allowed to have individual votes on an own-initiative report .
We need to resolve this or all own-initiative reports will have individual votes in future .
Could you perhaps ask the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to clarify this issue ?
Otherwise , the interpretation made by the House 's services will defeat the whole object of the reform .
Mr Swoboda , it can be done .
It is possible to request split votes , in accordance with the procedure that the groups themselves sought .
At any rate , everything can be revised .
It could be revised in the future , but for the moment , that is how it is .
4 .
ECB annual report for 2008 (
Voting time ( continued )
Council positions at first reading : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
( SK ) The adopted draft resolution of the European Parliament on the second European Summit on Roma opens a new path for resolving the problems of the Roma population in the European Union .
It has become apparent that the individual efforts of various countries to settle the integration of the Roma into society have not produced a satisfactory result .
The causes of this situation are varied .
I therefore welcome the efforts of the European Union to get involved in solving the problem of the Roma and to improve the integration of this community into society in an organised way .
Mr President , while I deplore discrimination against any group in society on whatever grounds , I cannot support this resolution .
However , this resolution seeks to place the responsibility for fighting discrimination into the EU context whereas I would argue that attitudes and approaches in Member States are so varied that the interests of minority groups would be better addressed by Member States and particularly by those Member States who do not share the ideal of tolerance and equality that we British take for granted .
I am aware , for example , that one Italian MEP , a member of the EFD Group , has been prosecuted for taking part in a vigilante raid in which he set fire to the belongings of an immigrant .
This is unacceptable .
Please do not associate the British people with such behaviour by suggesting that minority groups in our country need the same levels of protection as the same poor soul that I have just referred to .
( NL ) Mr President , it is a matter of fact that anyone who denies a problem , who denies the truth , will obviously be unable to solve that problem .
That is a fact . We ought to be aware that , with our resolution on the Roma in Europe , which is a document full of politically correct nonsense , we will not be able to come up with or offer a single solution because what we are doing is denying the problem .
We should , first of all , observe that we are indeed facing major problems with large numbers of Roma who position themselves completely outside of our society and who are also very often responsible for very serious crimes , small and large .
Many values and standards , or the lack thereof , espoused by Roma communities are directly at odds with the values and standards that we wish to see respected in our European countries .
What I am saying might sound a little one-sided , but the resolution that we have just adopted is a great deal more one-sided in the opposite direction .
In any case , I think that each Member State should itself have the right to decide how to tackle this very serious problem .
( NL ) Mr President , this report is an extremely politically correct one , the type of report , indeed , for which this House appears to have obtained a patent .
The economic and social disadvantages of the Roma have yet again been ascribed to so-called intolerance and discrimination .
If we just lay down new quotas and muzzling laws and if we just turn on the money tap again , everything will be fine .
The experience from the Netherlands has clearly shown , of course , that the majority of the Roma community refuses to adapt and integrate , whatever we do .
It is not our fault , but the fault of the Roma community itself , that the Roma are disproportionately represented in crime statistics .
Their values and norms are directly at odds with our own .
I also oppose any attempt by Europe to meddle with this issue and I wish to repeat that each Member State is entitled to remove from its territory people who systematically refuse to adapt and who resort to criminal behaviour .
( LT ) I voted for the resolution on the priorities for the 2011 budget for many reasons , but mostly for the attention given to the matter of youth unemployment .
The current economic and social situation in many European Union countries requires a special approach to the increasing gap between youth and the labour market , although it is acknowledged that investment in young people and education is investment in the future .
Experience shows that during an economic slowdown , young people would rather remain in the education system or begin studies than look for work .
We can observe similar tendencies in our countries now .
Therefore , I would like to say that the planned measures , a more active labour market and the coherence of the education system are very important .
Development of entrepreneurial skills and special programmes are very necessary whether we are talking about ERASMUS 's first work , or other measures .
I very much hope that the European Union has sufficient political will to not simply adopt very important documents , but to implement them as well .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against this report primarily because I totally disagree with the priorities which this Parliament has proposed to the Commission , including the harmonisation of immigration policy .
I know what this means ; harmonising immigration policies of all the Member States is being pushed forward as a clear priority .
I disagree with that .
However , I voted against this report , first and foremost , because it has already made it very clear that this Parliament is not in favour of the much-needed slimming down of European bureaucracy .
The contrary is true .
We should thoroughly reconsider abolishing all kinds of institutions and agencies which have , in effect , become , or always have been , superfluous .
However , this Parliament is calling for even more so-called decentralised agencies .
I repeat that , as I see it , we have too many of these already .
There are some that should be abolished before we go creating a new one .
I am thinking of the Committee of the Regions , the Agency for Fundamental Rights and the European Institute for Gender Equality .
How much does all of that cost our taxpayers and what use are they all , for heaven 's sake ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in extraordinary times such as these we are living through , we must adopt extraordinary measures .
Next year 's budget must not be drawn up as if these were ordinary times .
Unfortunately , the economic crisis is not yet over , and we cannot ignore it .
My group and I voted for the budget priorities today , but in the near future , we must have the political responsibility to take more important decisions .
We must give consideration to a reform of the Union budget so as to put Europe in a fit state to steer economic policy in a more incisive manner .
A fully implemented internal market , more resources for research and infrastructure , more investment in security and families must be the next objectives , or else we risk ever more conservative actions by the Member States .
To conclude , we must be more European and less nationalist , and bring into play a genuine European policy .
( ES ) Mr President , allow me to say that it is a pleasure to see you in the chair once again .
Mark Twain observed that , when all you have is a hammer , everything starts to look like a nail .
The European Union is very good at spending money - at spending other people 's money .
It was , I think , Milton Friedman who observed that there are two kinds of money in the world : there is your money and there is my money .
We are much more careful with the latter than with the former .
That explains what is happening in Europe today .
All of the Member States are looking for budget reductions .
In Greece , there is a public sector cut of around 10 % being proposed , in Ireland more than 7 % , Germany is looking at raising the retirement age , Spain - your country - is looking for savings of 2 % of GDP , but our budget here in the European Union continues to rise inexorably .
Why ?
Because there is no link in the European Union between taxation , representation and expenditure , so there is no external constraint from the taxpayers .
It was too much spending that got the world into this mess - too much spending by individuals , too much spending by corporations and too much spending by governments .
If , instead of spending these trillions on yet further aggrandisement of our debt , if we had given that back to the people in tax cuts , think what a stimulus effect that would have had .
( SK ) European agricultural products meet the highest quality standards in the world , which should , of course , make them more competitive on international markets .
EU citizens and discerning consumers must therefore be fully informed as to their advantages .
It is , above all , necessary to praise the fact that European products not only fulfil strict hygiene , safety and veterinary standards , but also respect the principles of sustainable development , climate change prevention , biodiversity and animal welfare .
I therefore fully support the introduction of a European quality logo for products originating exclusively from the EU .
The logo officially recognises the efforts of European farmers and provides protection for intellectual property at the international level .
I firmly believe that this will help many rural areas which have no other development opportunities .
The EU must provide financial support for modernising agricultural enterprises and developing micro-enterprises , especially in rural areas , in order to achieve high quality agri-food products by means of the Union .
( LT ) I voted for this document , since I think that ecological and clean farming is our future and we must promote it .
We also have to promote people 's interest in ecological farms and ecological products , both at EU level and in the Member States .
On the other hand , as we want to ensure and promote ecological farming , we must not rush to legalise genetically modified organisms .
Some countries have set a very good example , severely restricting the growing of genetically modified organisms around ecological farms .
There should be a clear divide .
Consumers must also be provided with all the information and results of scientific research linked to genetically modified organisms and the impact of genetically modified feed on the environment and people 's health without hiding anything from them .
Only then will we create a genuine common market of ecological products , which is very important for all our lives .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I should like to thank Mr Scottà for the work he has put into this report .
I consider that the protection and strengthening of a quality policy for our agricultural produce is a priority for the European Union , because it involves and is bound up with a series of other fundamental subjects at European level , such as ever greater consumer protection , support for SMEs , the preservation of the cultural and traditional heritage of many European regions and the competitiveness of European food producers on a global scale .
These are the reasons why I voted for this report .
( CS ) I appreciate the fact that the report on agricultural product quality policy ties in with the steps taken previously towards strengthening the policy on quality .
I consider it particularly beneficial to develop the system of geographical indications and designations of origin while retaining the demanding criteria for obtaining protection .
I agree with the retention of the instrument for guaranteeing traditional specialities , with the proviso that the rules for registration should be simplified .
In view of the fact that it involves a lower standard of protection , without the need to prove the specific geographical characteristics of the product , I see no reason why the handling of applications should take the same length of time as for geographical indications and designations of origin .
In my view , there is a weak point in current practice in the power of the Commission to reject applications it considers to be incomplete on a discretionary basis .
This often happens haphazardly and arbitrarily , without knowledge of the special characteristics of the product and the geographical area .
It is also necessary to establish measures against the circumvention of deadlines in the registration process in the form of the Commission coming up with more and more comments and supplementary questions .

Mr President , may I also thank Mr Scottà for the work in this important report .
I want to refer specifically to Amendment 4 , which asks for the maximum amount of information to be made available to the consumer .
It also supports the introduction of comprehensive and compulsory legislation for ' place of farming ' labelling .
Whilst these are laudable aims , I believe the amendment is too restrictive and would perhaps be better as a voluntary piece of information .
In Northern Ireland , we rely heavily on the ability to export produce to the rest of the UK and other European countries .
This amendment has the potential to affect Northern Ireland 's ability to sell products in certain markets where currently there is no difficulty , and I feel that it is important that new labelling does not create barriers which prevent trade between different Member States .
Whilst Amendment 4 poses some difficulty , I recognise the important work of the report and I recognise the importance of producing traceable , high quality and safe products .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with this vote , we have provided ourselves with a means by which to protect consumers and to add due value to agricultural produce : a goal that we have sought to achieve for a long time .
From today , the origin must be clearly indicated on the label of meat products , dairy products , fruit and vegetables , poultry and other processed single-ingredient products .
As far as animals are concerned , the place of origin must be given as a single defined location only where the animals are born , reared and slaughtered in the same country .
This is an intervention by which due recognition can be given to agricultural producers and to those who process agricultural produce .
We have shown that the European Parliament has just one goal where its action on agricultural foodstuffs is concerned , and that is to guarantee the quality and accessibility of the information available to consumers .
We have done a good job .
My compliments to those Members who have worked on this dossier .
Mr President , in principle , I have no problem with the idea of quality logos .
We see quality logos in a number of areas of our life .
Just so long as this is not being used as an excuse to override the choices of the consumer .
If food does not meet certain size restrictions or aesthetic restrictions , we should not be throwing it away , throwing it onto the heap , as we see happen with 30 % of European agricultural produce that is often wasted because it does not meet strict European standards .
We should also not be using our quality standards as an excuse to ban imports from farmers in developing countries , throwing those farmers into poverty , and then taking our taxpayers ' money to throw at corrupt governments when the farmers fall into poverty .
Surely , rather than quality marks and gestures like this , we should be trusting the market , we should trust the consumers and we should trust the people .
( SK ) I voted against this report because , as is often the case with other reports , in this own-initiative report , Europe again advances its own concept of so-called reproductive and sexual rights , which it forces on people in developing countries .
It must be made clear once and for all that , according to the World Health Organisation definition , this concept includes abortion as a method of family planning .
Human life is sacred from conception until natural death , and therefore I could not support this report . On the other hand , there are some good ideas there , which might , of course , help people in developing countries , and it could therefore be said that , as hundreds of millions of people in developing countries have to face the consequences of rising prices of basic products and foodstuffs , they will confront the problem of survival in these ways .
I am alarmed by the estimates of international financial institutions that the billions of people already on the planet will increase by hundreds of millions more and that in sub Saharan Africa , child mortality will increase by between 30 000 and 50 000 .
( GA ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on the effect the financial and economic crisis is having on the poor countries of the world .
Although the report does not give a sufficiently radical response to the problems of poor countries , at the same time , we can agree with many of the things that it includes .
It is poor people and poor countries that are suffering the most as a result of the economic crisis .
We should give all the help we can with regard to public investment , particularly in these countries .
However , it must also be said that the trade agreements the European Union has with poor countries are not really favourable to them .
Large European companies benefit most from these agreements ; small producers , small farmers and working people do not benefit from them and , as such , we must change the way we work with these countries .
Mr President , I voted against paragraph 7 of this report and I was disturbed to see , yet again , this Parliament using a report of this nature to covertly introduce the right to abortion and also the linkage of sexual and reproductive health to that of public health in developing nations .
It is not for this place to determine whether access to abortion is a right or not .
It is a matter for national governments to legislate .
I , and the vast majority of my constituents in Northern Ireland , remain firm in the belief of the right to life of the unborn child .
( NL ) Mr President , as Parliament , we ought to think twice before making proposals .
We ought to be making proposals for policies that will solve problems , not exacerbate them .
Now , as far as development aid is concerned , there are many serious studies that have actually demonstrated that granting development aid in too automatic a fashion invariably results in delays to economic reforms and thus in delays to opportunities for economic growth in developing countries .
Despite this , we as Parliament keep taking as our starting point the credo or the so-called axiom that granting ever more development aid in the first instance will help get African countries back on their feet .
Despite huge injections of development aid over so many decades , there is , regrettably , no clear evidence that most African countries are not in a far worse position today than immediately after decolonisation .
That was my first point .
I will be very brief with my second point .
It is , of course , true , as the report states , that developing countries are further undermined by brain drain , but why do we keep on insisting on the ' blue card ' , which exacerbates this problem even more ?
( SK ) I cannot understand why reproductive health has again been incorporated into a report on the consequences of the global financial and economic crisis for developing countries and development cooperation .
Reproductive health organisations support abortion as one of the ways of controlling the birth rate .
This industry is also financed at the European level from the taxes of citizens who oppose abortion and who are involved in protecting life .
For decades now , international institutions have been giving their views on birth rate control as a way of combating poverty , but developing countries still live in extreme poverty .
In my opinion , the EU wastes financial resources on birth control , which does not solve poverty .
I honour life and I also respect the principle of subsidiarity in relationships with developing countries .
That is why I have voted against paragraph 7 and against the entire report .
Mr President , it was predictable , perhaps inexorable , that the European Union would leap on the financial crisis in Greece in order to advance its well-laid plans for the harmonisation of fiscal policy .
We have seen repeated calls for a European debt agency , for a European Monetary Fund , for pan-European taxation , so as not to have to go to the national electorates for a bail-out .
Mr Van Rompuy and the other Commissioners are , as honest federalists , exactly agreeing with the case that was made by British sceptics , which was that you cannot have monetary union without fiscal and economic union .
I think it was John Maynard Keynes who wrote ' He who controls the currency controls the country ' .
I promise that is the only time I am going to quote Keynes approvingly .
In fact , let me give you a higher and better authority even than John Maynard Keynes .
I refer you to the Gospel of St Matthew , Chapter 22 .
I am sure you will remember this .
Our Lord is asked whether it is proper to pay taxes to Rome .
He says : ' Why tempt ye me , ye hypocrites ?
Show me the tribute money ' .
And they brought unto him a penny .
And [ Jesus ] saith unto them , ' Whose is this image and superscription ? '
They say unto him : ' Caesar 's ' .
And saith [ Jesus ] unto them : ' Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar 's ; and unto God the things that are God 's ' .
Now I am not arguing that Our Lord was on one side or the other of the debate about the euro .
The point is that , when looking for the supreme symbol of temporal authority , the absolute sign of sovereignty , it is the coin !
And so we have seen that the euro leads to common economic government .
Thank heaven we had the foresight to keep the pound .
Thank you for blessing this morning 's session , Mr Hannan .
Mr President , when you look at this report , you see many of the old , tired phrases about how the developing world is suffering as a result of the economic crisis .
Clearly there are people who will be suffering as a result of the economic crisis in these countries , but quite often they are not necessarily the people we want to help .
Quite often , they are the governments who are worried about their aid budgets being cut because , with less aid money coming to them , it is more difficult to keep corrupt and inefficient governments in power .
When I was in Africa last year talking to many centre-right politicians , they complained to me that aid budgets actually keep corrupt governments in power and it makes it more difficult to improve economic and political governance in those countries .
But let us look at some of the things that we propose .
We talk about more investment in developing countries - and everyone would agree to that - yet we have a proposal going through this House , the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive , which will reduce investment in developing countries .
We talk about helping developing country farmers , yet we continue , even in today 's budget , to vote for more resources for the common agricultural policy that does so much to damage farmers ' livelihoods in developing countries .
Let us really tackle the real source of the problems in these countries - bad governance , and protectionism in the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted against this report for two reasons .
Firstly , I am disturbed that Europe is increasingly taking a scatter-gun approach to development policy and that more and more resolutions and requests are encouraging this approach .
Secondly , I have voted against the report , because I believe it is a bad thing for us to try to impose family planning policy on developing and emerging countries in the form of a sort of cultural imperialism .
Abortion is not a solution and I regret the fact that some Members of the European Parliament refer euphemistically to ' reproductive medicine ' when they mean abortion .
This does not change the fact that abortion means killing an unborn child .
Therefore , I have voted against this report and I hope that in future , we will not use the same euphemistic terms in every resolution and own-initiative report to describe aspects of cultural imperialism .
Mr President , I voted against this report because it is a silly report .
It is an irrelevant report .
So : all the assets are in all the stock exchanges in New York , London , Tokyo , Frankfurt , etc .
You will now collect about USD 6 trillion worth of capital .
If you sell all the properties which are extra-legal , the slum-valued properties which are not part of the legal system in the developing countries , you will achieve USD 7 trillion .
There is a great deal of capital waiting in the developing countries which is outside the legal structures of those countries , from the slums to those millions of businesses you see on the side of the roads which are not part of the formal economy .
Secondly , if you ask how much money is coming out of the developing countries every year through the financial systems of the world , it is USD 800 billion .
Why are we not working to keep that capital in those countries making those countries richer ?
No , what did we go and do just now ?
We voted for a Tobin tax to hammer already weakened financial institutions in the west and give the money to a whole bunch of people who will probably steal it .
Mr President , like previous speakers , I , too , had an objection to the inclusion of paragraph 7 .
We were given a free vote by our group , but our delegation decided to vote against because - as speakers have said - talking about reproductive health rights is another way of saying abortion .
If that is what is intended by it , it should be spelt out and not brought in under an economic crisis plan .
So , like other speakers , we objected to that and voted against that section .
( DA ) Mr President , we in the Danish People 's Party voted against this report .
However , I actually feel the need to express my thanks for a number of the observations that were presented in the report .
I am thinking in particular of paragraph 27 , which very honestly states that the euro should quite naturally lead to closer coordination of economic policies within the euro area .
I am , of course , entirely opposed to this statement , but I would like to express my thanks for the clarity and honesty that the rapporteur displays in relation to the euro .
Thus , the euro is a construction formed with the intention of creating much greater economic unification in Europe . In other words , finance policy , labour market policy , structural policy - all economic areas , everything that has any significance to the economy - is to be unified .
This is what we are currently seeing in Greece , where economists in Frankfurt are telling the Greeks what sort of economic policy they should pursue , and this is what we will see in a few months ' time with regard to Spain and Italy and a whole list of other countries .
In this way , the report demonstrates , with all the clarity we could wish for , why Denmark - and my party , the Danish People 's Party , in particular - wishes to remain outside the euro area .
We want to decide for ourselves what economic policy we wish to pursue .
It is the Danish electorate and not economists in Frankfurt who should decide this .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - We approved of the proposal that the existing rules relating to the importation of live animals , meat and meat products should remain in force until replaced by measures adopted under the new regulatory framework .
Whilst we should prefer such laws to be the laws of each member country rather than of an EU superstate , there must be laws covering such matters .
However , the report also provided for a list of third countries or parts of countries from which Member States shall authorise importation of bovine animals , swine and fresh meat .
This will involve the United Kingdom being given a legal obligation to allow imports from these countries .
This will involve competition for our farmers and a further erosion of sovereignty .
As a result of this pairing of good and bad proposals , we decided to abstain .
Article 3 ( 1 ) of Council Directive 72 / 462 / EEC of 12 December 1972 on health and veterinary inspection problems upon importation of bovine , ovine and caprine animals and swine and fresh meat or meat products from third countries states that the Council , on a proposal from the Commission , would approve a list of third countries from which the Member States shall authorise the importation of bovine animals , swine and fresh meat .
Although this directive has been repealed , the procedure is still carried out and the aforementioned list has been modified over the years .
The Commission is now proposing to create a regulation that codifies all the relevant modifications carried out over the years , and which is due to be modified frequently , meaning that it is continually updated .
I believe that this procedure introduces clarity and transparency , not only for Member States , where there are modifications , but also for third countries that export the products in question to the EU .
I welcome the adoption of this report on health and veterinary inspection problems upon importation of bovine , ovine and caprine animals and swine and fresh meat or meat products from third countries .
This report is based on Council Directive 72 / 462 / EEC of 12 December 1972 , which led the Council to approve a list of third countries from which the Member States shall authorise the importation of bovine animals , swine and fresh meat .
Although this directive has been repealed , the procedure is still carried out and the aforementioned list has been modified over the years .
The Commission is now proposing to create a regulation that codifies all the relevant modifications carried out over the years , and which is due to be modified frequently , meaning that it is continually updated .
I believe that this procedure , as well as strengthening the EU public 's food safety , introduces greater clarity for Member States and third countries that export meat products to the EU .
The food safety of the European public is a fundamental issue that must be of concern to all of us .
Establishing health policy criteria for the importation of certain live animals and their fresh meat from third countries must be very rigorous and such products must be systematically monitored so that we can see if these criteria are being met .
It is therefore essential that a list be drawn up of the third countries that meet the animal health , public health and veterinary certification criteria allowing them to export live animals ( bovine , ovine and caprine animals , and swine ) and their fresh meat to EU countries .
In the merciless price war that is currently raging , companies are using outrageous methods to improve their profit margins .
Imported meat is being sold as domestic produce , rotten meat is often on sale and then there is the case of the fake ham .
Now , imitation products must be clearly labelled .
However , the mandatory labelling of feedstuffs containing genetically modified organisms was not supported by the majority of Members , despite the fact that the citizens of Europe have a very critical attitude towards genetic modification .
It is important to put in place provisions relating to animal health and hygiene .
However , there has been a failure to address the issue of genetic modification in the import regulations , which is why I have abstained .
in writing . - I voted ' yes ' at the final vote on this resolution .
It needs to be said that there has been an informal meeting with the Council and the Commission , where it became clear that Parliament could agree to the procedure .
The draft report submitted to vote by Jo Leinen takes over the COM proposal and amendments have been tabled in the ENVI Committee .
The Council already agreed it would approve Parliament 's position ; thus , a first-reading agreement is to be assumed .
We Greens agree with the procedure .
Changes to the law which are intended to improve animal welfare are essential , and I am very pleased by the fact that the European Commission does not now intend to make these changes without the participation of the European Parliament .
Therefore , I endorsed the Leinen report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Decision 79 / 542 / EEC drawing up a list of third countries or parts of third countries , and laying down animal and public health and veterinary certification conditions , for importation into the Community of certain live animals and their fresh meat .
Despite the fact that I am not a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I shall continue to be involved in the amendment of legislation , especially where the intention is to bring about a radical improvement in the transport of horses .
There are many motivations to this but , principally , Christian ethics compel me to care about bettering the existence not only of people , but also of animals and our natural environment .
The European Union can do a great deal here .
I supported both reports on the allocation of funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to unemployed workers in Lithuania .
In Lithuania , the economic and financial crisis has affected many different sectors and many people have been left without work and a source of livelihood .
The EGF 's rules on the allocation of funds were simplified , taking into account the complex situation in the labour market and the growing number of unemployed .
Therefore , Lithuania must exploit all possible opportunities to obtain the funds requested , in order to help unemployed people as much as possible .
It is also very important that we ensure the effective use of these funds and that they provide a real benefit for the people of Lithuania .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 to provide additional support to workers who suffer from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
From 1 May 2009 , the scope of the EGF was broadened to include support for workers made redundant as a direct result of the economic and financial crisis .
At this time when we are facing this severe economic and financial crisis , one of the principal consequences is an increase in unemployment .
The EU must use all the means at its disposal to respond to the consequences of the crisis , particularly in terms of the support to be provided to those who have been facing the day-to-day reality of unemployment .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this proposal on the mobilisation of the EGF to assist Lithuania , with the objective of supporting the workers made redundant in the 49 firms operating in the furniture manufacturing industry .
I voted for this report , as the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund 's ( EGF ) financial support will be allocated to the unemployed workers of companies in the furniture industry since , following the reduction in furniture industry exports , many workers were made redundant .
EU support will be earmarked to help workers requalify , search for new jobs or set up their own businesses .
I am delighted that the European Commission approved Lithuania 's application to receive EU funding since , during the recession , there is very little opportunity for the redundant furniture company workers to return to the labour market , and the mass redundancies from 49 companies is having a very negative impact on the country 's economic situation .
I would like to call on the EU institutions to ensure the smooth and swift adoption of decisions when considering matters concerning the provision of financial support , because the delaying of such decisions may only exacerbate the already difficult situation facing workers .
I would like to stress that financial aid from the EU will help workers who have suffered from major structural changes in the economy and trade to reintegrate into the labour market .
Similarly to Lithuania 's construction sector , which we have analysed before , that country 's furniture industry has also felt the effects of globalisation , as it is now exposed to the products of vicious competitors , whose production is on another level .
As the requirements for application and mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund have been met , I think that such a mobilisation would be of help .
Just two weeks after Parliament approved the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in response to the redundancies in Lithuania and Germany , we are once again approving its mobilisation , this time in response to the redundancies that have taken place in 49 companies in Lithuania 's furniture manufacturing industry .
As we said then , it has already been some time since the number of workers made redundant significantly exceeded the initial estimates of the Commission regarding the number of workers who would come to benefit from the fund .
We would remind you that this is an industry that has been struggling through serious difficulties in Portugal too , particularly in municipalities where it has an especially large presence , such as Paredes and Paços de Ferreira .
This has been leading to redundancies there too , exacerbating the region 's social situation .
With every new request for action , it becomes clearer that what are needed more than palliative measures - which are certainly necessary - are urgent measures to protect the productive sectors and jobs : specifically , those that are most vulnerable to the crisis and those that are involved in exploiting each country 's development potential , promoting public projects , and supporting micro , small and medium-sized enterprises and the cooperative sector ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 to provide additional support to workers who suffer from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
From 1 May 2009 , the scope of the EGF was broadened to include support for workers made redundant as a direct result of the economic and financial crisis .
At this time when we are facing this severe economic and financial crisis , one of the principal consequences is an increase in unemployment .
The EU must use all the means at its disposal to respond to the consequences of the crisis , particularly in terms of the support to be provided to those who have been facing the day-to-day reality of unemployment .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this proposal on the mobilisation of the EGF to assist Lithuania , with the objective of supporting the workers made redundant in the 45 firms active in the clothing manufacturing industry .
I am delighted that today , there was a vote on the provision of financial support to the Lithuanian clothing manufacturing industry , as this sector has been hit particularly hard by the recession .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that mostly women work in the clothing manufacturing sector and , due to redundancies caused by the crisis , in the year leading up to July 2009 , the number of unemployed women in Lithuania doubled .
I voted for this report , since the financial support received from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) will be used for employment stimulation measures to employ redundant workers as soon as possible , study and requalification payments , as well as benefit payments for minors under eight years old and the care of disabled family members .
Thus , this financial support is very necessary in the clothing manufacturing industry since , with the dramatic fall in demand for clothes in Lithuania and export areas , there has been a marked reduction in the amount of clothing manufacturing .
I would also like to stress that the dismissal of these workers is not just having a negative impact on the country and the local economy , but is also adversely affecting the lives of individual workers .
The Lithuanian clothing manufacturing industry is joining the country 's construction and furniture manufacturing industries in losing out from globalisation , with a significant number of workers having been made redundant .
The large majority voting in favour in the competent parliamentary committee confirms the measure 's apparent soundness .
Given this , I see no reason to vote against the mobilisation of the fund in this case .
Just two weeks after Parliament approved the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in response to the redundancies in Lithuania and Germany , we are once again approving its mobilisation , this time in response to the redundancies that have taken place in 45 companies active in Lithuania 's clothing manufacturing industry .
It is worth remembering that this industry is also enduring a serious crisis in Portugal , where it is suffering the effects of the liberalisation of world trade particularly intensely , without any of the actions necessary to safeguard it having been taken .
Every new request for mobilisation of this fund makes the measures that we have been advocating all the more urgent : unemployment must be tackled effectively , and jobs must be created and promoted with rights based on the development of economic activity , simulation of public employment , job security and reduced working hours without any reduction in salaries .
Measures are also required to combat companies moving offshore , beginning with making public subsidies - particularly Community subsidies - conditional on meeting obligations such as the protection of jobs and local development , measures that impose a clear break with the neoliberal policies which are causing an economic and social disaster in the countries of the European Union before our very eyes .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is born out of that purpose .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in the context of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , particularly China and India , to the detriment of countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of companies and , in order to achieve this , it is essential that these workers have access to new jobs in the future .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , particularly Portugal and Spain , so we should now grant this aid to Lithuania .
in writing . - I voted in favour of two reports by Barbara Matera on financial support for redundant workers in Lithuania from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I would also like to thank those colleagues who voted in favour as a qualified majority and three fifths of the votes cast were necessary for the adoption of the reports .
Both reports on the situation in the furniture manufacturing sector and in the wearing apparel manufacturing sector represent one of the most acute unemployment cases in Lithuania .
The sums are not big for the EU but they will alleviate the hardships Lithuanian workers are facing .
This is the case for those who worked in the 49 enterprises in the furniture manufacturing sector , where redundant workers will be paid EUR 662 088 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , as well as for those who worked in the 45 enterprises in the wearing apparel manufacturing sector , where the sum is EUR 523 481 .
Even though this might be only the tip of the iceberg of the unemployment problem in Lithuania , the financial support will help those most in need .
in writing . - We are not in favour of the European Union being responsible for help to redundant workers ( or for anything else ) .
We would oppose money being allocated to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund as we would oppose money being allocated to all EU funds .
We believe that Member States should help their own redundant workers .
However , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has money that has already been allocated to it and that money has come from Member States .
If it were proposed that money from the EGAF should be allocated to redundant workers in Britain , we would vote for it to be allocated and we would be criticised if we did not .
We must therefore vote for the fund to be used appropriately for other Member States .
Nevertheless , we intend to ensure that future money will be allocated to British redundant workers and , if we find that they are not eligible , we shall vote against all future mobilisations of the fund .
It is the thought of the Lithuanian workers sacrificed on the altar of globalisation that prompts me to abstain .
As they have been plunged into this situation by the consequences of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could feel justified in voting against the beggarly sums that the European elite want to give them .
However , what little is given may relieve their pain .
The logic of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is still intolerable nonetheless .
In the kingdom of Eurocrats , a clear conscience comes cheap .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Giegold 's report makes some interesting points concerning the current economic crisis , the worst since the process of European integration began .
I should like to emphasise that in a question I recently addressed to the Commission , I raised a question concerning the scope of the Stability and Growth Pact , which may be exceeded in certain exceptional cases , such as the implementation of public building and social housing projects .
Such works are , in fact , intended for social purposes and are a response to housing emergencies experienced in particular in large cities , and it might therefore be advisable to tackle this type of problem by resorting to exceptional measures .
I therefore consider it desirable for the Commission to adopt a very clear position so that it may issue directives in respect of the Member States with reference to budget and spending limits imposed by the parameters of the Stability and Growth Pact on local authorities , which , particularly in the case of large authorities , need substantial infrastructure investment .
I voted in favour of the report on the annual statement of the European Commission on the euro area and public finances .
What I recall , above all , from this report , which is rich in analysis and proposals , is its call for enhanced European economic governance and , in particular , for better coordination of budget policies .
Growth and solidarity : those are the two key words that must guide our European economic strategy .
Growth , because , without it , we will be unable to take up the social challenge .
Solidarity , because it is the raison d 'être of European integration and will be its future .
The Fianna Fáil members of the European Parliament , Pat the Cope Gallagher and Liam Aylward , strongly oppose what is proposed in this report regarding the introduction of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB in English ) .
A Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base in Europe would not improve the competitiveness of the European Union or the operation of the single market and , on top of that , the CCCTB could interfere with small open economies , like that of Ireland .
The question of taxation is within the competence of the individual Member States and the Irish Government has the right to use its power of veto in relation to any tax measures , including CCCTB .
This right is enshrined in the treaties , including the Treaty of Lisbon .
I supported this report , since I think that it highlights at length the problems of the euro area and public finances .
There has been a further decline in employment in European Union Member States and it is forecast that this will continue .
The chaotic structural reforms of some Member States , which are implemented without a concrete plan , threaten the stability of the entire EU .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are going through a particularly difficult period , since both the Member States and the European Central Bank were unable to control and ensure that funds earmarked for the banks were allocated for the main goal - the provision of preferential loans to small business .
It is also very important to support the development of the euro area and to take appropriate measures to create suitable conditions for Member States aiming to become members of the euro area .
I voted for the 2009 Annual Statement on the Euro Area and Public Finances .
I support the proposal made in the report , calling on the Eurogroup to facilitate entry into the euro area for those Member States wishing to join and meeting the specified conditions .
I think that it is vital to improve the regulation and supervision of the financial markets , as well as limit external and internal deficits in order to facilitate the successful development of the Economic and Monetary Union .
Furthermore , we must pay particular attention to the problems associated with fiscal discipline .
The future EU 2020 strategy must consider policies for creating jobs and promoting sustainable development so that we can prevent new economic crises from being triggered .
At the same time , Member States and the European Commission must work together to reduce fiscal imbalances .
The consolidation of public finances is a vital prerequisite for ensuring sustainable economic growth .
After the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Commission will play a bigger role in monitoring Member States ' economic development .
In accordance with Article 121 , the European Commission will be able to issue warnings to countries which fail to comply with the general guidelines on economic policies .
I voted for this report since the European Parliament drew the Commission 's attention to the fact that while developed states are gradually climbing out of the pit of the global crisis , the situation in developing countries is only getting worse .
Therefore , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , the European Commission and the euro area Member States must encourage the process of integration in the area of economic and monetary policy in the European Union and support the expansion of the euro area .
I am in favour of calling on the ECB to support the efforts of Member States outside the euro area to introduce the euro , especially in cases where Member States prove their ability to maintain reliable and stable fiscal discipline .
I would like to point out that , in order to avoid financial crises in the future , we must call on the Eurogroup , the Council and the ECB to better coordinate their actions in the area of currency exchange rate policy .
Therefore , in spite of the crisis , little progress has been made in the switch to a common international representation for the euro area .
The greatest concern is that in spite of the fact that every effort is being made to stabilise the area of monetary and fiscal policy , employment in the EU continues to fall and unemployment and social isolation are on the increase .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Giegold report because there is a need for continued detailed debate on the various issues that arise in this report .
It is necessary to ensure that different corporate tax regimes do not enable companies to evade their responsibilities to support society by a share of their profits through a fair corporate tax regime .
However , particular attention needs to be given to the negative impact that a CCCTB could have on small countries such as Ireland , whose prosperity and employment levels depend , to a large extent , on its capacity to attract foreign investment .
The Irish Labour Party does not support the introduction of CCCTB .
I abstained from voting on this particular report .
We must see that the recession is not going away , given that the economic situation in almost all the Member States is clearly negative and unemployment is increasing .
The specific problem is not one of ' sound ' finances .
Countries such as Greece face problems with public borrowing due to both speculative attacks by the markets and the institutional and political problems of EMU .
The crisis in public deficits , which is a general phenomenon throughout the EU , is due , among other things , to the massive scale of tax evasion , which is something that the Commission forgets .
Apart from that , the support packages for the banks from national governments also increased public deficits , as the Spanish Presidency admitted in answer to my question on that point .
Be that as it may , insistence on the Stability Pact , especially in a recession , is a disaster .
It exacerbates social inequalities and results in cuts in public investment , it increases unemployment and it undermines countries ' growth prospects .
That is why the anti-growth and anti-social Stability Pact needs to be changed and a different framework needs to be configured for the exercising of economic and social policy , predicated on work and social needs and sustainable , viable growth .
in writing . - At a time of serious economic and social crisis , we need to increase efforts to coordinate macro-economic and structural reform strategies across national borders so as to tackle the imbalances that hinder the generation of jobs .
I share the concerns regarding imbalances within the euro area , such as speculation in the construction sector , whose excesses contribute to asymmetric shocks , and call on the Commission to study possible mechanisms to improve the economic governance of the euro area and curb the expansion of such imbalances .
The need for stricter regulation and supervision of the financial crisis is as urgent as ever .
Any European discussion on a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base has to have regard to the needs of geographically marginal regions of the EU such as Ireland and their capacity to attract FDI .
A CCCTB is not about a common tax rate .
Taxation of companies is the exclusive responsibility of each Member State .
The idea of CCCTB is to establish a common legal basis for the computation of profits of companies with establishments in at least two Member States , to ease the bureaucratic burden on them to establish compliance with the tax codes of the states in which they are operating .
The financial , economic and social crisis has caused the Member States of the European Union great difficulties , reflected by the serious situation of their public finances .
The majority of countries have excessive levels of debt , so measures contributing to stability and growth are needed urgently in order to achieve a more balanced situation .
The reduction of public debt and the reviewing of Member States ' priorities are essential in order for public funds to be applied efficiently and , in particular , to create the basis for policies that foster economic growth and , consequently , social well-being .
The reviewing of tax policy is essential in order for suitable economic stimuli to be introduced , because only with a strong economy will it be possible to overcome the present difficulties and prepare for the future .
in writing . - I do not support paragraph 29 as it calls for the introduction of CCCTB .
One of the things we are told about CCCTB is that it will be more efficient and that it will simplify matters .
Given that , as it now stands , companies can opt in or opt out , we would end up with 28 tax bases instead of the current 27 ; that is hardly simplification .
As it is currently proposed , CCCTB would mean the redistribution of European profits across the EU , so a country like Ireland , which exports a lot of what it produces , would be penalised because the profits , of course , would be at the point of sale .
It does seem a little bit strange since , at the core of the EU , we have the free movement of goods ; therefore we would end up , if we use CCCTB , by penalising exporting countries .
Its introduction would damage Europe 's capacity to attract foreign direct investment , because the rules as such would not apply to the Member State in which it was located but would be by some reference to a complicated formula which can only be calculated in retrospect , which would damage our capacity to attract foreign direct investment .
I shall vote against this report , which blindly promotes the neoliberal logic that is responsible for the economic , social and environmental crisis , the consequences of which we are all suffering .
The text proposed to us is not only extremely dogmatic , it also shows contempt for the peoples , in particular , for the Greek people .
How can Parliament vote for a text that is so shameful that it calls into question Greece 's entry into the euro area in the light of the budget deficit created by the policies that it supports ?
Clearly , this Europe is yet another enemy of the people .
The economic crisis that has befallen the EU , and which is still being felt quite strongly , has revealed some gaps in Community monetary policy and in the public finances of certain Member States .
We must learn lessons from the mistakes made so that they can be avoided in the future .
The EU needs to improve in several areas , particularly regarding monetary policy , improved coordination and cooperation on economic policy , and the monitoring of Member States ' public finances .
It must also devote efforts to tackling energy dependency , and creating an increased number of new jobs in industries that are modern and sustainable from an environmental standpoint .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution ; it expresses in a satisfactory and insistent tone to the Council the problem of the anticipated decrease in employment in the European Union , which concerns Greece in particular , while highlighting the extraordinary recovery measures that need to be taken at European level .
Paragraphs 12 to 18 , which refer to improved coordination of cooperation in the field of economic policy , highlight the imbalances within the euro area due to the lack of cohesion between the economic and , more importantly , the trade policies of the Member States in times of recession .
I also consider that the European Parliament 's official recommendation to the Commission that eurobonds be issued and that a common approach be taken to the challenges within the euro area ( paragraph 26 ) is particularly important in light of the policy which the European Union decides to pursue in the immediate future .
in writing . - I followed our rapporteur 's position on this topic , Giegold , and voted in favour of his report .
The Annual Statement of the Commission on the euro area aims to stimulate a broad debate on euro area economic policies .
More specifically , it presents the Commission 's views on the challenges the euro area economy has to face , on the one hand , and its analysis of the appropriate response of economic policies , on the other hand .
In my speech , I spoke about the situation in the euro area and public finances in 2009 .
The verdict expressed by my vote has a broader context .
As predicted by economists , 2009 was the most difficult for crisis-hit Member States .
The Union 's GDP fell by 4 % , industrial production by 20 % , unemployment rose to 23 million and so on .
The costs of fighting the crisis have led to a drastic worsening of the situation of public finances .
However , some countries , even before the recession , showed a high level of public debt which was in contravention of the Stability and Growth Pact .
For the euro area , the financial crisis has proved to be the greatest challenge in its history .
The crisis has ruthlessly laid bare the weaknesses of the common currency system .
The most serious of these is , without doubt , the existence of huge differences between euro area countries in terms of the stability of their public finances and level of debt .
It suddenly became apparent that the Stability and Growth Pact , which was , in principle , to be a guarantee of meeting convergence criteria , was being disregarded by national authorities and also by EU authorities .
The lack of discipline , and the lack of an appropriate system of penalties , led , as a result , to a crisis of the common currency .
Many politicians who are not in favour of European economic integration have already announced the collapse of the euro area , and are circulating a vision of catastrophe for the whole process of integration .
I think , however , that these views are not justified and are speculative in nature , for the euro area is faced with an opportunity for thorough reform , which will improve mechanisms of supervision and ensure greater coordination .
We only need to carry out that process rationally .
The appointment of an eminent professional like Vítor Constâncio as Vice-President of the European Central Bank will enhance the value of the economic and financial policies advocated by this institution .
Vítor Constâncio is taking up the post of Vice-President of the ECB at a difficult time for the euro area .
However , his views on the way in which the European Union must respond to the Greek crisis highlight that he has vision and knows how to protect the European currency .
Mr Constâncio has an impressive CV .
The fact that he is Governor of the Bank of Portugal ( Banco de Portugal ) confirms his credentials as a professional .
This only serves to remind me of the recent incident involving the political appointment of a vice-president at the National Bank of Romania , anything but the model professional presented by Mr Constâncio .
Fortunately , the National Bank of Romania also has a huge number of professionals and its course of action during the current economic crisis has been faultless .
However , national banks should be the last place where appointments are made on the basis of political rather than competency criteria .
Mr Constâncio had a tough hearing before the European Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
However , Mr Constâncio did not waver once , continually expressing consistent opinions and demonstrating that his vision of the euro area 's future is sound .
Throughout his years as Governor of the Bank of Portugal , Vítor Constâncio has been a faithful follower of the guidelines imposed on Member States of the European Union by the European Central Bank .
These guidelines have been profoundly damaging to national interests and sovereignty , and constitute an attack on the rights of the workers and people of Portugal .
It is well known that he has constantly called for wage moderation in a country in which low wages abound and which has jarring social inequalities .
These are also the result of the unfair distribution of incomes , which punishes the workers in the interests of capital .
It is also well known that he has failed in the functions of supervision of the banking system that had been assigned to him .
We will continue to firmly and vehemently oppose arguments for the irrational criteria of the Stability Pact , and for exchange policy guidelines and other macro-economic guidelines , as well as the devaluing of production and labour - in which Vítor Constâncio has played a central role - as we have always done .
This vote on the Council recommendation on the appointment of Vítor Constâncio as Vice-President of the European Central Bank comes as no surprise to us .
His actions as Governor of the Bank of Portugal have always fitted in well with the liberal guidelines of the ECB .
The policies followed by the ECB and imposed in the Member States of the European Union by it , which are profoundly damaging to national interests and sovereignty and constitute an attack on the rights of the workers and people of Portugal , are basically the same as those that Dr Constâncio advocated and still advocates as Governor of the Bank of Portugal .
We will continue to fight these policies , regardless of who is involved in their management .
That is why we voted against this report , since the answers that it gives reaffirm the same old ECB line .
It advocates the irrational criteria of the Stability Pact and exchange policy and other macro-economic guidelines , as well as continuously devaluing the role of production and labour .
It is in full knowledge of the facts that I refused to give my approval to Mr Vítor Constâncio 's nomination as future Vice-President of the European Central Bank .
He , as an individual , is not in question , nor are his skills which , I might add , he shows off with some talent .
We would so very much like to believe him .
Only , the thousands of Portuguese ruined because of his thoughtlessness and his lack of foresight are living proof of his disastrous track record as head of the Portuguese central bank .
Three such important incidents are a lot for one man .
How can someone who has failed in his own country now aspire to be in charge of supervision in Europe ?
I made the provocative comment that this is a bit like giving sticks of dynamite to a pyromaniac .
These words were echoed loudly in Portugal .
Like me , the Portuguese cannot understand how someone who has failed in this way can be promoted to the top level .
Generally speaking , I am sorry that the European Parliament is not going the way of the US Senate and making nominations that are decisive for the future of the European Union .
I spent several months in 2008 participating in a committee of enquiry for the Portuguese Parliament .
It discovered and reported serious failures of supervision , which resulted in the nationalisation of a bank in 2008 .
Another consequence still being felt today has been that hundreds of customers of another bank are unable to move the money that they have invested ( in many cases , their life savings ) .
I am referring to Banco Português de Negócios and Banco Privado Português .
At the time , I repeatedly and publicly criticised the way Dr Constâncio carried out his supervisory duties whilst in charge of the Bank of Portugal .
The fact that he is Portuguese and my loyalty to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) prevent me from voting against .
However , my conscience and even my intellectual honesty could not permit me to vote for an appointment as a result of which he will end up as supervisor at the European Central Bank .
I supported the nomination of Mrs Rasa Budbergytas a member of the European Court of Auditors .
Her nomination is viewed very favourably both in Lithuania and in Europe , since she has extensive work experience and established a high quality , independent auditing system in Lithuania .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Budbergytė 's nomination was very highly rated - almost all of the members approved her nomination .
She is a competent specialist and her professional experience and personal qualities will allow her to perform all the duties of a member of the European Court of Auditors appropriately .
Moreover , Mrs Budbergythas pledged publicly to organise her work on the basis of independence and auditing standards , taking ethical requirements into account .
If appointed to this office , she promises to carry out her work according to two principles .
Firstly , irreproachable adherence to international auditing standards and the auditing practices and procedures introduced by the European Court of Auditors .
Secondly , productive work when performing her own personal duties , duties at the Group / Chamber level and those as a member of the college of the European Court of Auditors .
She is planning to strengthen the interinstitutional cooperation of the European Court of Auditors with the European Parliament , and especially the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I am convinced that the auditor has proved her competence and professionalism in the area of auditing .
I am sure that her faultless work will be an excellent contribution to the entire European Union .
The nomination of Mr Fazakas as a member of the European Court of Auditors has caused heated and controversial debate in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Although his nomination has been known since November , just a few days prior to his nomination hearing in the committee , information was spread about Mr Fazakas ' possible collaboration with the state secret police .
I am astonished that the question of Mr Fazakas ' competency is only being raised now , as Hungary is preparing for elections , whereas in the five years that Mr Fazakas has been a Member of the European Parliament , Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control and Quaestor , the question of his competency and ability to carry out his duties was not raised .
I am convinced that the European Parliament is no place for nebulous political games ; therefore , I supported Mr Fazakas ' nomination .

I think that there was ample time between November and the hearing for the interested parties to provide suitably substantiated information about circumstances that could have had an influence on Mr Fazakas ' appointment to the European Court of Auditors and to ensure an exhaustive parliamentary assessment , but this was not done .
Objections by anyone who does not wish to see the appointment in question take place are understandable .
Nevertheless , if we adhered strictly to this criterion , many others - and there are quite a few around Europe - would also be barred from the position because of their militant adherence to the communist or communist-inspired far left , and because they are guilty of acts that are even more worthy of condemnation .
That being the case , my abstention is justified .
in writing . - I voted against Mr Fazakas because in his official autobiography , he withheld the information that , during the Communist dictatorship , he was a secret agent of the Hungarian state secret police from 1976 until the collapse of the regime in 1989 .
According to official documents from the Historical Archives of State Security Services of Hungary , Mr Fazakas was recruited in 1976 by the State Security Service , the Communist secret police , ' on a patriotic basis ' ( i.e. he entered the service voluntarily ) for activities of counter-espionage .
In relation to today 's vote on the nomination of candidate Members of the European Court of Auditors , I would like to express my support for the decision we have made concerning the controversial candidate , Mr Fazakas .
According to official documents , for many years , Mr Fazakas supported the Communist dictatorship in Hungary , as a member of the Hungarian security service .
The universally known facts cast a dark shadow over his curriculum vitae and should have been taken into account at an earlier stage .
The EU has always stood in defence of democracy , freedom of speech and freedom of conscience , and those values were , for decades , violated by the socialist regime , not only in Hungary , but also in the many other countries of what was known as the Eastern bloc .
It is true that times have changed , and today we can all enjoy extensive liberties , but we must also remember those who restricted that freedom .
in writing . - The vote in favour of Mr Fazakas is disappointing .
It sets a serious precedent .
I voted together with the EPP against Mr Fazakas ' confirmation as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
This was no ordinary vote .
Mr Fazakas is suspected of being an ex-collaborator of the Communist secret services .
The Hungarian press produced a document regarding this .
A number of opinions were heard that opposed any ' punishment ' against Mr Fazakas .
They asked for the past not to be revived .
This is wrong .
The past is not dead .
Tens of millions of eastern Europeans still live a life troubled by the Communist horrors .
If the past is dead , then there is no sense in leading a life guided by norms and values .
This would be a recipe for the politics of diminished responsibility .
Public office would lose dignity .
Anyone , however corrupt or immoral , could stand for public office .
If there still are politicians unaware of the Communist record in eastern Europe , this does not qualify them for an informed opinion .
The perpetrators of the Communist indignity should not be part of a democratic order they tried to suppress .
Mr Fazakas hid his past and lied when asked about it .
This lack of honesty should not be rewarded .
During this plenary sitting , we voted on the report on the nomination of Augustyn Bronisław Kubik as a Member of the Court of Auditors .
He is currently Undersecretary of State at the Ministry of Regional Development .
In the past , he has held the positions of Adviser to the President of the Supreme Chamber of Control and Chief internal audit inspector at the Ministry of Finance .
Mr Kubik performed very well during the European Parliament hearing , and his candidature has not raised any doubts .
He has the appropriate professional experience for a Member of the Court of Auditors , and will be the right person in the right place .
In view of this , I decided to endorse his candidacy .
The Court of Auditors is an institution that inspects the European Union 's receipts and expenses to verify their legality , as well as verifying good financial management .
It operates with complete independence .
Within this spirit , the appointment of the individuals of which it is composed must be governed by capability and independence criteria .
So , on the Council 's initiative , several individuals from various EU countries were put forward for the Court of Auditors .
They all submitted their curricula vitae , responded to a written questionnaire , and had hearings before the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The majority of them argued their cases well enough to justify their appointment to the Court of Auditors , where they will carry out their duties capably and independently .
in writing . - I fully endorse these recommendations .
I think that the EU 's strengthened external role should be used to enhance dialogue with key partners and to build a stronger EU .
The EU and its Member States are significant contributors to the UN 's budget .
In order to ensure that the Union 's values and interests are represented in a coherent and effective way in the UN system , it is necessary that the EU speaks with a single voice .
The EU should play an active role in supporting the reform process of the UN system and especially , the reform of the Security Council .
I believe that an EU seat in an enlarged Security Council should remain a goal of the European Union .
The report with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the 65th Session of the United Nations General Assembly has been adopted today , 25 March 2010 , without a vote by the European Parliament .
We would hereby like to state that we do not support the wording in the report that states that the Council should be urged to propose innovative funding mechanisms , such as an international tax on financial transactions .
in writing . - I was in favour of the recommendation to the Council on the 65th session of the United Nations General Assembly , which calls for strengthened EU visibility at the United Nations .
The European Union needs to support and encourage global governance reform , particularly as regards the Security Council , whose make up does not reflect the realities of the 21st century .
The ambition to gain an EU seat within an enlarged Security Council has to be pursued .
If the European Union is to further multilateral approaches to global challenges , its Member States must act coherently and consistently at the UN level , particularly in light of the forthcoming review conferences for the Millennium Development Goals and the Non-Proliferation Treaty , as well as the review of the Human Rights Council 's status and working methods .
We need to push for deeper involvement of national and transnational parliamentary assemblies in the works of the UN system , so as to strengthen its legitimacy and democratic nature .
The Member States should make every effort to have this matter included in the Assembly 's agenda .
At a time of serious social crisis , with increased poverty and unemployment resulting from the crisis of capitalism , this 65th Session of the United Nations General Assembly becomes even more important .
There are many issues of interest at global level .
Of particular importance is monitoring progress towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goals as minimum targets to be hit by 2015 .
Any attempt to reduce , weaken or postpone the promises made must be fought .
It is therefore important to attempt to reach agreement between developed and developing countries on speeding up progress .
This must include clear and specific commitments , as the international community is a long way off honouring its commitments regarding the Millennium Development Goals .
If appropriate measures are not taken , we could have nearly 1.5 billion workers in poverty because of unemployment or insecure and badly paid jobs .
I would like to say I am pleased by the fact that in the text of the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the EU 's priorities for the 65th Session of the United Nations General Assembly , the rapporteur has included matters relating to the very important theme of cooperation between the UN and the EU in the area of crisis management .
Very recently , the earthquakes in Haiti and Chile showed how very vulnerable people are to the suffering and harm caused by natural disasters .
However , in the case of both countries , cooperation between the EU and the UN worked very well during rescue and assistance of the victims .
It is my opinion that we should now concentrate on optimising this cooperation , in order to make the best use of available resources , so that we can not only rescue as many victims as possible as quickly as possible , but also enable them to survive later .
In addition , another crucial question is assistance in maintaining order and in rebuilding a disaster-hit country .
Despite the fact that all Member States of the EU also belong to the UN , and that the European Union has the status of permanent observer at the UN , it is difficult to develop a harmonious position shared by all EU countries .
I am sure that on matters concerning effective cooperation during aid operations in crisis situations brought on by natural disasters , developing a common , constructive approach is a priority .
I find it impossible to vote for this text , although I do admit that it has certain qualities .
It is true that it promotes the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the control of all weapons .
It is true that it promotes the abolition of capital punishment .
However , it still promotes the use of and research into civil nuclear power , which everyone knows today must be urgently abandoned ; it still supports the existence of the G20 , which has no legitimacy ; and it still stresses the importance of the ' principle of the responsibility to protect ' , the definition of which is so vague that it invites all kinds of interference with the peoples ' national sovereignty .
For all these reasons and others that I cannot list here , this text does not seem to me to be worthy of the European Union as I conceive of it .
The forthcoming session of the United Nations General Assembly is another opportunity for the EU to present itself as the true catalyst for world peace and solidarity .
We cannot forget that the EU is the main source of funds for the United Nations , contributing 40 % of its total budget , 40 % of peacekeeping costs and 12 % of the troops in conflict zones .
This is also the first General Assembly at which the EU will be represented by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
That being the case , we must assume our role as principal actors , redefining the role of the EU in the United Nations , and becoming involved in global governance and the reform of the United Nations , in peace and security , and in development and climate change .
The report drawn up by the German Member , Mr Lambsdorff , is a very comprehensive and competent presentation of the different areas of responsibility and future objectives of the United Nations from the perspective of the European Union .
There is no doubt that the UN and its role in the international system must be strengthened all over the world by means of appropriate reforms .
Reform of the development cooperation system , which is covered in the report , must also be supported .
This needs to be tackled urgently as the current development aid policy can be seen to have failed .
Therefore , I do not understand why the report calls for the Member States to increase their contributions significantly in the run-up to the reforms .
Development aid must be reviewed , reorganised and restructured together with the developing countries .
The statements on climate policy , which involve a stubborn refusal to enter into discussion with the critics of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and which treat the IPCC 's findings as dogma , are also problematic .
For this reason , I abstained during the final vote .
I recognise and fully support the United Nations ' objectives of nuclear disarmament , gender mainstreaming , combating poverty , the Millennium Development Goals and the United Nations ' important role in relation to promoting human rights and combating climate change .
If I abstain from voting , it is because the report seeks to prevent individual Member States from presenting their opinions in the UN , for example , where they are more critical than the EU of various dictatorships .
Furthermore , the report consistently links civil and military instruments , which is something that I cannot support .
in writing . - The majority of European Roma became citizens after the 2004 and 2007 enlargements and they and their families enjoy the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the EU .
However , in some Member States with a significant share of Roma population , the Roma are still faced with numerous problems such as segregation in education , housing , very low employment rates and unequal access to health care and public services .
The EU and Member States share a responsibility to promote and ensure the inclusion of Roma and to uphold their fundamental rights as European citizens and to increase their efforts to achieve visible results .
I voted for this resolution since Europe 's Roma continue to suffer great discrimination and , in many cases , experience immense poverty and social isolation .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the situation of most Roma living in many EU Member States differs from the situation of other European ethnic minorities and therefore , we must take the necessary measures at EU level and establish a joint strategy to combat discrimination against Roma .
I agree with the European Parliament 's call for the new members of the Commission to give Roma matters a priority in their areas of competence and to devote the required attention to implementing the strategy on Roma inclusion .
I would like to stress that living in a democratic and free society , we must honour the fundamental rights and freedoms of all people .
Therefore , the Commission and the Member States must agree and find a common dialogue on the Roma situation and take measures to combat their discrimination .
Only once we have found a common European approach on European Roma issues will the strategy be actively implemented .
I also support Parliament 's position that we should include representatives of the Roma community in the preparation process for EU policy on Roma issues .
The European Union is currently aware of the problems faced by the Roma minority , as is also highlighted by the number of reports discussed and implemented , including substantial funding for Roma social inclusion programmes which , however , have not had the anticipated impact .
We are talking , nevertheless , about a minority of 10-12 million people across Europe who lead their lives according to their own rules dating back hundreds of years and feel that it is natural for them to behave like this , in isolation within a majority .
In Romania , according to some estimates , the Roma minority amounts to more than 2 million .
This is larger than the Hungarian minority and , some would logically say , stronger .
However , the Roma minority in Romania has failed to appoint its own leader to represent this group in public or in the Romanian Parliament .
This fact may also be the reason that all the national social inclusion programmes have completely failed .
At the moment , given that the Roma population is spreading across the territory of several European states and is known for its tendency towards migration and involvement in crime ( a fact which has led to the use of the term ' gypsy ' to refer to many other citizens as well ) , the solution to the social inclusion issue has become a Community one .
It is likely that where Member States have failed ( something which they are often criticised for ) , the European Union will succeed .
The Second European Roma Summit represents a commitment to dialogue about cultural diversity and what that represents in terms of human wealth .
Education is the key to the integration process .
By offering education and training , we are fighting exclusion , unemployment and discrimination .
We are also guaranteeing a society that is more fair , more creative and more dynamic .
It is important to integrate ethnic minorities , not just into the labour market , but also into all areas of society .
Protecting fundamental rights and creating a common area of freedom , security and justice are objectives of European integration .
I applaud all those who promote integration at local level , including politicians , teachers and associations .
This is because it is often these people who are responsible for access to housing , health care , education , culture and an improved quality of life .
I call on the European Union and the Member States to promote concerted efforts , and to commit to political strategies that include clear legislative commitments and credible budgetary contributions .
It is important to adopt a common position on structural and pre-accession funding policy .
It is estimated that there are between 10 and 12 million Roma living in the EU , making up one of the largest ethnic minorities in Europe .
The majority of these people live in conditions of extreme poverty and on the margins of society , with limited access to employment and health care .
The members of this ethnic minority continue to suffer discrimination and social exclusion , despite efforts to integrate them .
The EU has been supporting the Member States in their efforts to implement effective policies .
In particular , support has been provided for specific projects , and attempts made to ensure that the laws against discrimination are correctly and effectively applied .
In Brussels this month , there was a conference at which the various EU projects that are being undertaken were introduced .
There must be discussion of the results in April at the Second European Roma Summit in Córdoba .
I hope that the results of this summit can contribute to the achievement of a strong European political commitment regarding a future strategy for promoting the inclusion of the Roma people in Europe 's economic , social and cultural life , and ensure equal opportunities for everyone in the EU , including the Roma .
All the countries which have a large Roma population have policies for integrating them , but they are only implemented by sector , while other policies do not consider specific factors , making them ultimately ineffective .
An analysis must be carried out of all the practices which have successfully achieved Roma integration , using them as a basis to finally draw up and adopt a European strategy for dealing with this group which is , as is well known , the largest minority on EU territory .
The main emphasis must continue to be placed on education , schooling for children , vocational training , phased entry into work , women 's empowerment , streamlining the social insurance system , etc .
In this area too , much closer cooperation is required between the European Commission and Member State governments on funding projects through the Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds , as well as specific programmes which focus more on individual empowerment than on the traditional hierarchy .
In my view , a broad information campaign aimed at the general public and Roma population , which counters the feeling of Roma exclusion from European social life and puts heavy emphasis on the principles of equal treatment and non-discrimination , is a vital component in this synergy of Community actions .
Roma communities have existed throughout Europe for many centuries and , until very recently , they were subjected to persecution by many of the Member States .
Their traditional nomadic lifestyle , the activities in which they worked , and the high rate of endogamy and exclusion to which they were committed have all contributed to the labelling of these communities as undesirable , dangerous and antisocial .
Even today , these prejudices persist , as do the consequences that have historically been inherent to them : even today , the Roma are one of the communities with the lowest levels of schooling and the highest rates of criminality .
It will fall to sociologists and historians to assess the causes and consequences of the issues surrounding the Roma .
It is demanded of politicians that they be capable of doing something for the communities that they serve .
That is why it is particularly important to put forward ways to combat the exclusion of the Roma and to promote their genuine integration in the societies in which they live , and to take concrete measures to that end which are based on serious and detailed studies of the issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this resolution makes reference to certain principles that must not be underestimated , such as the importance of combating discrimination against the Roma people and the need to integrate this minority by means of a global strategy .
These are all good proposals , but they do not take into account the state of degradation in which many Roma communities in certain Member States , such as Italy , find themselves , often by choice .
Illegal activities ( thefts , bag snatching , begging , prostitution ) , often increasingly aggravated by the exploitation of children for such purposes , and an almost non-existent desire to integrate and to live a civilised life , are the predominant characteristics of certain Roma communities in Italy .
The response to this critical situation ought to be the full application of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the free movement of EU citizens , which provides for the removal of EU citizens who , after a stay of three months in a Member State , cannot demonstrate a regular source of income and who refuse to embark on the process of integration offered by national and / or local authorities .
Generic ' integration ' is not enough .
We need programmes to accustom Roma communities to respect the rule of law and social norms , and certain punitive measures for those who exclude themselves from this process .
Otherwise , the legitimate call for respect for a minority is in danger of turning into a form of reverse discrimination , to the detriment of all those honest citizens who suffer the crimes and abuses of many Roma .
Integration cannot exist without respect for the rules and the Roma minorities are not exempt from compliance with this principle .
It is for these reasons that I abstained on the resolution , and dissented from my political group .
The resolution on the Second European Roma Summit , which takes place in Córdoba on 8 and 9 April , expresses concern about the discrimination suffered by the Roma in education , housing , employment and equal access to health care systems and other public services , as well as the astounding low level of their political participation .
However , Parliament has asked the Commission to draw up new proposals on the social inclusion of the Roma .
This House is also calling on the Member States to make greater and more visible measures to respond to the Roma 's legitimate rights , taking into account the fact that measures to combat discrimination are not sufficient to facilitate their social inclusion .
Concerted efforts at Community level are necessary , including financial contributions .
The resolution recommends that the Council adopt a common position on structural and pre-accession funding , reflecting the European political commitment to promote Roma inclusion .
We hope that the Second European Roma Summit focuses on strategic policy commitments that demonstrate a political will to close the gap between Roma communities and majority populations in various countries .
This resolution is yet another of those texts where absolute priority must be given to such and such a category of people , a category that must , of course , benefit from particular attention and be taken into account in all national and European policies .
Today , we are talking about the 10 or 12 million Roma in the EU .
When compared with others , examined here on other occasions , it brings us face to face with a hierarchy of people which henceforth places the Roma minority at the top , then migrants from outside Europe , then Europeans of non-European origin and , finally , right at the bottom , those of European ' origin ' .
If we then add the ' gender dimension ' and the reigning cult of youth , we can conclude that in your so-called European Union , it is not great to be a man who is middle-aged , European , and of European origin and not part of any ethnic , cultural , religious or sexual minority that you care to identify as such .
When will there finally be a policy that serves Europeans first ?
When will priority be given to these poor workers , to these middle classes crushed by taxes , to these unemployed , and to these families who are simply European and form the vast majority of the inhabitants of the European Union and are the citizens for whom we are responsible and who you only think about on the eve of elections ?
I supported this resolution , ahead of the Córdoba Summit on 8 April 2010 , because the inclusion of Roma in all spheres of society must be one of the priorities to be defended at European level .
In my opinion , we must not only emphasise the situation of Roma in Eastern Europe , where they suffer significant discrimination , but we must also be aware of the fact that these problems remain equally pronounced , but more insidiously so , in other European countries such as France .
We must also question the effectiveness of the measures implemented and find out how they could be improved to truly achieve their goals of allowing socio-economic integration and achieving full European citizenship for Roma .
I voted for the Resolution on Roma integration , based on the view that this European minority needs specific policies which must be implemented quickly .
Although we are halfway through the decade devoted to Roma inclusion , the problems associated with education , employment , regional development , etc. persist and are even getting worse in some Member States .
I agree that the principles need to be redefined , but I believe that we should devise instead a transversal , horizontal strategy which will tackle this minority 's problems in an integrated , but not exclusive , manner .
We are using this resolution to ask the new commissioners to give priority to the aspects of their portfolios relating to the Roma and to stop pursuing the current policy , which is long-winded , but devoid of any real action .
We have great expectations of the summit in Córdoba , but the needs of the Roma , who are expecting results in terms of respect for their rights and anti-discrimination policies , are greater .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome the adoption of the motion for a resolution submitted jointly by the six largest political groups in Parliament , in which , reiterating the previous cycle 's resolution from early 2008 , the European Commission is called upon again to work out an all-encompassing European strategy on the Roma , designed to remedy the social and economic exclusion suffered by the Roma in Europe .
The motion correctly points out that anti-discriminatory measures are insufficient in themselves to promote the social integration of the Roma .
Harmonised Community efforts resting on a secure legal foundation are needed in order to bring together all social and institutional actors and , at the same time , exert pressure on the participants to keep their own promises .
Furthermore , it is extremely important that the resolution unequivocally takes a stand beyond ' soft law ' instruments in support of binding legislative commitments and realistic budgetary contributions .
Finally , let me express my hope that the European Commission , in accordance with Parliament 's explicit instruction and the approval of the European Council , will set in motion as soon as possible the complex development programme described in the resolution .
This can at last put an end to the perpetuation of extreme poverty afflicting the Roma from generation to generation , it can make concerted efforts simultaneously in all related policy areas , and it will be able to intervene promptly in regions struggling with serious structural deficits and which are in the process of turning into ghettoes .
in writing . - I and my ECR Group colleagues agree with much of this report and we remain wholeheartedly supportive of providing equal rights and opportunities for all people regardless of race , religion , gender or sexual orientation .
However , whilst we fully support the integration of the Roma people within the European Union , we do have serious misgivings with regard to the involvement of the European Union on issues which we believe to be the preserve of individual nation states , such as access to health care , education , employment and housing .
The EU is an area of solidarity and inclusion , so it must do what is required to prevent discrimination against the Roma and to give them the same rights as regards education , employment , health care and housing in all Member States , as well as states that intend to join the Union in the future .
Decisive steps must be taken to bring an end to discrimination .
However , if this is to be achieved , the Roma cannot exclude themselves and must help with their own integration into a European area that is intended to be inclusive .
Many of the beggars in Western countries come from Slovakia , Romania and Bulgaria and the majority of them belong to the Roma minority .
Attempts have been made over a long period to improve the poor social situation of the Roma who live on the fringes of society in shanty towns or tent cities .
Simply pumping money into the Roma settlements will not do any good , as past experience has shown .
The key to success lies in education , because this is the only way of opening up long-term opportunities for living a different type of life .
In principle , the measures for combating poverty in Eastern Europe make sense .
However , those measures that have been put in place in the past have failed and no new , sensible approaches have been suggested .
For this reason , I have voted against the report .
This motion for a resolution is going in a one-sided direction by proposing subsidies and financial support for Roma people in the European Union .
Of course , we must do everything we can to ensure that marginalised groups , such as the Roma , are better integrated into society and , in particular , into the labour market .
However , the Roma people must show that they have the will and can make the effort themselves in order for this integration process to succeed .
They must start by introducing their children and young people into the European school system .
Too little emphasis is placed on these aspects in the motion for a resolution on the Roma Summit and , therefore , I have voted against it .
Discrimination against the Roma people was , for years , one of Europe 's biggest taboos .
In recent years , this has been changing .
Measures taken to combat discrimination against the Roma continue to be insufficient .
This problem is often neglected .
A very good example confirming this thesis is the lack of a reaction from the European Commission to the proposal of the European Parliament of 28 January 2008 on developing a European strategy on the Roma in cooperation with Member States .
The need of the hour is to renew that proposal .
For during the economic crisis , aggression directed against the Roma has increased .
This has affected many of the 10-12 million representatives of the Roma community in the European Union .
I think the issue of the Roma people should be made a priority by the newly appointed Commissioners , so I decided to endorse the motion for a resolution on the Second Roma Summit drawn up by fellow Members from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The joint motion for a resolution adopted by Parliament , which I voted in favour of , is extremely important .
As emphasised in paragraph 7 , even though the Roma make up a pan-European community and a collective effort is therefore needed at European level , the European Commission has not thus far responded to the call made by the European Parliament on 28 January 2008 for it to formulate a European strategy for the Roma , in cooperation with the Member States , in order to enhance coordination and improve the situation of this particular community .
Given that , on the basis of the principle of subsidiarity , it is the Member States that are competent for the smooth integration of this specific group of the population into their society - and in Greece there is a large , established Roma community - the European Parliament should - and this is the purpose of this specific motion - call for a more dynamic initiative by the Commission and the Council for better coordination of actions with the aim of fully integrating the Roma into European societies .
I voted for the resolution in the conviction that , during the period that immediately follows , the specific measures aimed at improving the situation of the Roma population will be put into practice rather than remain fine statements .
The European Structural Funds offer a huge opportunity for achieving the Roma population 's social inclusion .
However , the procedural and content aspects involved have , unfortunately , made it difficult to utilise this opportunity .
When applied in Romania , it has been noted that a different approach needs to be adopted on the employment issue when the Roma segment of the population is involved , as part of the measures implemented by POSDRU ( Sectoral Operational Programme for the Development of Human Resources ) .
Conventional measures involving professional retraining , consultancy and providing information to Roma beneficiaries must also take into account the specific nature of their culture .
Although beneficiaries from rural areas are most affected , there has never been any kind of programme for the Roma communities as part of the European programmes aimed at rural development .
The Roma are not included among the target groups favoured by such funding programmes .
Launching programmes for developing agricultural enterprises , encouraging the setting up of livestock farms , along with a package of incentives such as subsidies for employers in this sector , are solutions to be included in the equation when it comes to integrating the Roma population into the labour market .
I voted in favour of this resolution , since the inclusion of Roma communities is one of the priorities of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
This resolution shows Parliament 's position ahead of the Second European Roma Summit , which is being held on 8 and 9 April in Córdoba under the Spanish Presidency .
The situation of the Roma population is different from that of other minorities in the EU and their inclusion requires effective policies to curtail the systematic discrimination to which they are subjected .
All levels of government from the EU to local authorities must be involved and play a role in achieving equal treatment for them , since that is one of the fundamental values of the EU .
The resolution calls on European institutions to make a coordinated and strategic contribution to including Europe 's Roma population .
The Córdoba Summit must serve to take a step forward , moving from good intentions to concrete policies that allow the problems faced by these people regarding access to housing , education , public services and employment to be overcome .
in writing . - I am really glad this resolution was adopted ( I obviously voted in favour ) as it includes crucial statements in terms of promoting non-discrimination against the Roma population .
More specifically , it once again calls on the European Commission to develop a comprehensive European Strategy for Roma Inclusion as the instrument for combating social exclusion and discrimination of Roma in Europe .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the Second European Roma Summit as I believe that the battle against discrimination directed at the Roma , which is a pan-European community , requires a Community approach .
We must express our concern regarding the discrimination suffered by Roma in terms of education , housing and employment , as well as equal access to the health care system and other public services .
We condemn the recent escalation in hostility towards the Roma ( Romaphobia ) in a number of EU Member States , regularly displayed in the form of hate speeches and attacks against the Roma population .
We call again on the Commission to adopt a horizontal approach to the Roma issue and to draft additional proposals aimed at implementing a coherent policy at European level on Roma social inclusion .
With this in mind , we ask the Commission to prepare a European Roma strategy in cooperation with Member States to provide better coordination of and promote the efforts aimed at improving the situation of the Roma population .
Furthermore , I hope that Member States will use the various instruments currently available more efficiently to combat Roma exclusion , such as allocating a maximum of 2 % of ERDF resources to be used for housing for marginalised communities or the existing options as part of the ESF .
in writing . - We are obviously in favour of Frontex exercising surveillance beyond the territorial waters of border EU states .
There is contradictory legal advice about whether or not it already has such power .
However , this resolution imposed rules and guidelines that would impede this function .
In particular , they insisted not only that Frontex should rescue illegal migrants thought to be in danger at sea ( a self-evidently moral action to take ) but also to impose a duty to grant the rescued illegal immigrants asylum .
We believe that such rescued illegal immigrants should be taken to the country from which they are believed to have embarked or their home country and left there .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution for reasons which go beyond the draft decision and the content of the Council proposal on supplementing the Borders Code as regards the surveillance of the sea external borders .
Despite the fact that , especially in the second part which is not binding on the Member States , the decision refers to positive elements for defending human rights , the procedure being used to seek its ratification clearly circumvents the work and competences of the European Parliament .
In this draft decision , the Council exceeds its executive powers .
If the European Parliament accepts such a procedure , it will create a very negative precedent for its role and effective operation , whereas it should safeguard its control , law-making and other powers as the only elected institution at European level .
Recently , moreover , we saw that the decisive vote by the European Parliament overturned the agreement on the transfer of personal data on European citizens to the secret services and government of the USA .
Facilities such as this should not be set in motion .
There is an irrefutable need to move forward with the reinforcement of border checks coordinated by the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union .
There is also a need for common operational procedures , as well as clear rules for participation in joint maritime operations - mainly search and rescue - and the disembarkation of rescued individuals .
To this end , the Commission decided to submit a draft decision based on the comitology procedure .
The Council was not able to overcome its divisions on the subject , preferring to hide from Parliament behind technical arguments and so doing away with our competences .
The opinion of Parliament 's Legal Service is very clear .
The Commission exceeded its powers of implementation .
This is not merely a technical procedure .
According to Mrs Malmström 's own words , this is an initiative with great political significance and practical implications .
Our vote against is not only an affirmation of parliamentary prerogatives , but also an act of solidarity with small countries that are being unfairly penalised by this decision .
in writing . - Bearing in mind that Frontex was , inter alia , set up to ' protect ' the EU 's borders from so-called ' illegal ' migrants , we oppose the agency and its objectives .
However , we welcome the guidelines for an adequate consideration of international and European asylum and human rights law within the Commission 's proposal ( COM ( 2009 ) 0658 final ) .
We especially welcome point 1 of Annex I ( respect of the principle of non-refoulement , the consideration of the special needs of vulnerable persons and those who are in need of urgent medical assistance , training for border guards in human rights and refugee law ) as well as points 3 and 4 ( including consideration of the migrant 's situation , taking into account their possible requests for assistance or the seaworthiness of the ship , no disembarkation in countries where persons risk being persecuted and tortured ) mentioned in Annex II .
In addition to this , we emphasise the need for a binding character of this second annex and point out that we will amend the mandate of Frontex according to these principles .
I voted against this resolution , which would have prevented the adoption of a number of measures that constitute a step in the right direction , even though I admit the situation is far from being perfect .
This text will make it possible to bring appeals before the Court of Justice of the European Union concerning states that fail to meet their commitments in relation to the principle of non-refoulement on the high seas , whereas currently , they escape this completely .
It is important that the Member States operating under the auspices of Frontex provide assistance to migrants who find themselves in distress at sea , regardless of their nationality , their status or the circumstances in which they were found .
The motion for a resolution concerns the draft Council decision and supplements the Borders Code as regards the surveillance of the sea borders within the framework of operations coordinated by Frontex for measures to rescue people at sea .
As far as Greece is concerned , and due to increased immigration pressures , these specific measures facilitate the presence of Frontex in Greek seas .
To be specific , these are measures which consist both of rules and of non-binding guidelines and they focus on the reception , search and rescue of people at sea .
In essence , these are measures which need to be taken if a ship is identified and it is suspected that there are people on board trying to evade border controls .
Furthermore , search and rescue should be carried out on the basis of specific principles and the people arrested or rescued must be disembarked on the basis of a specific operational plan .
That is why I believe that this specific initiative should be supported and implementation of the measures referred to in the Council proposal should be accelerated .
in writing . - Contrary to our position ( I voted in favour ) , the qualified majority was not reached , and so the resolution to reject the Commission proposal and follow the advice of Parliament 's legal services has fallen .
This means that the Schengen Borders Code will now be amended as proposed by the Commission under the comitology procedure , adding the annex , with non-binding measures on obligations during sea search and rescue operations , to the directive .
We can only hope that the Commission will indeed use this as an opportunity to monitor more rigorously the operations coordinated by Frontex so we can avoid human tragedy and despair at sea .
There is a real risk , however , with this result that we will not be able to push for binding measures in the Frontex mandate being revised right now , but of course , we cannot give up and must try our best to obtain a better result in the future work on this .
in writing . - I and my ECR Group colleagues agree with much of this report , including improving budgetary efficiency , simplifying the application procedures for EU funds , as well as prioritising the completion of the 2020 strategy .
However , we do have serious misgivings with regard to references to an EU social pillar , an ambitious social agenda , a harmonised immigration policy and restrictions upon an agricultural single market , and stress that areas of education and military and defence are the preserve of Member States .
I voted in favour of this report on the priorities for Budget 2011 .
As stated in the report , specific support must be provided for entrepreneurship and for micro-enterprises , and these issues should be placed at the heart of European Union policy for youth and innovation .
The report demands that help be provided to all the programmes and instruments which encourage entrepreneurship - particularly in rural areas - as well as providing help during the start-up phase of new businesses and encouraging information exchange among young entrepreneurs .
Support should be given to programmes that help young people who are starting a new business .
I welcome the emphasis this report places on youth policy and on the role young people have to play as we attempt to escape from the current economic and financial crisis .
I strongly support the demand in the report for increased investment in young people and in education , as was recommended in the ' EU strategy for Youth ' .
The role and the importance of young people in the European Union and in the future of the Union must be recognised , encouraged and supported .
Young people , science and innovation are at the heart of the priorities of the next European Union budget .
Investing in young people is investing in the future .
This investment must be carried out in a way that is coordinated between the various policies .
Education , professional training and the transition from the educational system to the labour market are the central concerns of this budget .
Young people with degrees and qualifications are increasingly affected by unemployment .
That is why I consider the Erasmus First Job mobility programme to be a strategic commitment to the future , because it establishes a clear link between the education system and the labour market .
Of the other priorities in this budget , I would pick out the areas of research , innovation and the digital agenda : these areas are essential to Europe 's sustainable development .
I would also point out the importance of some already existing programmes that are contributing to this objective , such as the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
This budget even concentrates efforts on supporting the development of green and innovative technologies , thus making an essential contribution to economic recovery and giving impetus to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Commitment to young people , innovation and science is the key to making Europe a world leader once again .
Today , the Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of the priorities for the 2011 budget .
We support the general priorities and , in particular , the efforts to combat youth unemployment and to promote research , innovation and green technology .
Likewise , the Danish Social Democrats fully support the appropriation of the necessary funds for the EU 's growth and employment strategy , EU 2020 .
The Danish Social Democrats would like to emphasise , however , that the purpose of the EU 's common agricultural policy must continue to be to guarantee market stabilisation and we therefore cannot support permanent subsidies from the EU for the likes of milk and dairy products .
We Swedish Social Democrats chose today to vote in favour of the priorities for the 2011 budget .
We largely agree with the priorities stated in the report .
For example , we believe that it is important to invest in young people , research and innovation and in green technology .
We also believe that it is important for the EU 's new strategy for growth and employment , ' EU 2020 ' , to be given sufficient financial resources to allow it to succeed .
However , we would like to emphasise that we do not believe that the main task of the EU 's common agricultural policy is to guarantee market stability and thus we do not want the EU to provide permanent market support for milk and dairy products .
In a context of generalised crisis and against a backdrop of the ambitious requirements of the 2020 strategy in terms of innovation , the fight against poverty and social exclusion , and economic growth and employment , it is essential to put the challenges of the 2020 strategy at the heart of the budgetary priorities .
For that reason , I am pleased to discover a clear commitment to education , research and innovation policies in the priorities set for the 2011 budget by the Commission .
It is also essential to keep economic recovery and emergence from the crisis in mind , so I am also pleased to see support for small and medium-sized enterprises as one of the major concerns of the 2011 budget .
I would reiterate the need , within the framework of reforming the common agricultural policy , to step up funding for the CAP ; this is a priority that must also be taken up by the Commission .
I would point out that the 2011 budget will be the first to be adopted under the Treaty of Lisbon , with the resulting strengthening of parliamentary intervention .
The proposed priorities for the 2011 budget , despite the social rhetoric , which is unavoidable in times of crisis , are reasonably clear : the intention is to basically keep to the same priorities that have been giving previous budgets their direction .
Once again , indications are of a budget aimed at deepening the single market , at the lack of job security known as flexicurity , at liberalisation , and at the commercialisation of the environment and growing areas of social life .
Although they have been grouped together under the so-called new ' 2020 strategy ' , these are old guidelines .
The stated priority given to young people does not obscure the fact that the intention is to start planning from this point on for future generations of workers for whom unemployment will be structural , seen as a strategic variable to impose the devaluation of their labour power .
This will oblige even the qualified to flit between insecure jobs , alternating them with the inevitable unemployment .
These are priorities that also put the 2011 budget at the service of the EU 's external interventionism ; of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Common Security and Defence Policy ; of militarism and war ; of policies that criminalise immigration ; of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union .
That being the case , our only response to this report can be to vote against it .
However , this is neither the only way nor inevitable .
We tried to demonstrate just that with the various proposals that we tabled during the debate .
Constructing the EU budget during a financial crisis , with a very narrow budget margin and new areas of work relating to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , is not easy .
It therefore gave me all the more satisfaction , during the vote , to endorse Mrs Jędrzejewska 's report on the 2011 budget and the motion for a European Parliament resolution , both of which provide for ambitious budget priorities for next year .
Alongside the traditional priorities , such as cohesion policy and support for innovative and ecological technologies , the 2011 budget should concentrate on ensuring full operation of the new initiatives in the EU : the European External Action Service , the EU 2020 economic strategy and measures which are part of the Eastern Partnership .
All three face the threat of becoming a fiasco if the funds designated for them prove to be too ' symbolic ' .
Also worthy of note is the comprehensive approach to the question of young people .
Faced by demographic problems , the EU must not allow itself to have a low percentage of educated young people , because this would lead to a still greater rise in unemployment in that age bracket , which is something the EU simply cannot afford .
Therefore , the European budget must have funds reserved to support language learning , intercultural dialogue , increasing the mobility of young people and integration of graduates in the job market .
If I have understood the words of this report correctly , everything or almost everything becomes a priority , which means that there is no priority .
Quite simply , what is being asked for is a larger budget ; in other words , more taxes for Europeans .
It is true that the rapporteur 's concern to ensure that spending funded by the EU budget is not only useful but effective and that it brings genuine European added value to national policies is worthy of praise .
However , to be quite honest , this should have been a constant concern over the years .
On the one hand , I recall that in the last 14 or 15 years , this has not been the case , since the European Court of Auditors did not feel able to approve the execution of the annual budgets .
On the other hand , I am still looking for concrete proposals in this report that will enable this objective to be achieved .
In particular , I am looking for the proposals by which to put an end to programmes that are nothing but pure populism , the useless allocation of small amounts of funding , ideological propaganda and attempts to intervene more in areas in which the EU fortunately has only few powers and , above all , is ineffective .
Although I voted in favour of this report , I would like to underline some critical reservations I have about the priorities for the 2011 budget .
It is true that I willingly support the EU 's commitment to provide assistance for young people , for innovation and for the voluntary sector , as a number of structural elements for our society .
Even so , the financial framework is not at all adequate , in particular , in a period of economic crisis and unemployment : it does not enable us to fund any political ambition by which to instigate real change .

EUR 9 million , or 0.07 % of the budget earmarked for employment : that really does not represent substantial ambitions to support employment .
I voted for the report on the European Commission budget as I think it is important for the EU to have a balanced , realistic budget which will effectively meet the expectations of citizens wishing to exit the current economic crisis , have well-paid jobs and a more secure future .
I believe that financial support for SMEs must be made a priority in Europe because SMEs play a crucial role in ensuring large numbers of jobs , as well as in the development of regions and rural areas .
I also think that young people are extremely important at the moment and in the EU 's future .
This must also be reflected in the budgetary priorities .
Young people are at the heart of European social and inclusion strategies .
The innovative ability of young people is a key resource for development and economic growth which the EU should rely on .
I firmly believe that investing in young people and education means investing in the present and future , as is outlined in the EU Youth Strategy .
I welcome the fact that the youth policy must also take into account preparation for the labour market in schools and universities .
I shall vote against this report on priorities for the 2011 budget .
The latter implements the dogmatic and harmful Eurocratic policies that I oppose throughout Europe and the world .
I cannot reasonably vote for a budget that endorses so many potential disasters .
In the wake of the failure of the Lisbon Strategy , the EU has a new opportunity to be the great catalyst of the world economy with the 2020 strategy .
In order for this new plan to be a success , it is necessary that the various budgets that will be approved prioritise several areas that are fundamental to the success of the 2020 strategy .
We are talking about innovation , support for young people to increase social mobility , and consolidated support for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the true economic motor of countries .
It is also essential that there be investment on a very large scale in the areas of climate change , the environment and social policy .
In order for the 2020 strategy to be a success , therefore , it is crucial that new ways of financing and raising funds for it be found , as we cannot do what we have done in the past and reassign funds intended for the structural , cohesion or common agricultural policies .
I voted in favour of the report on the priorities for the 2011 budget , one reason being the proposals in terms of funding the CAP .
In particular , it notes that financing of priorities in connection with the future EU 2020 strategy through a possible reallocation of funds must not be detrimental to fundamental EU policies , such as the cohesion , structural or common agricultural policies .
It reiterates the concern expressed during the approval of the Community budget for the current year in terms of the narrow margin for agricultural spending and supports the provision for a sufficient margin in the 2011 budget .
A satisfactory margin for agricultural spending is especially important for dealing with unforeseen requirements in agricultural sectors , especially in light of price instability .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on priorities for the 2011 budget - Section III - Commission , thereby confirming that it must be the priority of political leaders in the European Union and Member States to preserve existing jobs and create other new ones which will allow European citizens to make a decent living .
The Communication from the Commission entitled ' Europe 2020 : a European strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ' provides the basis for an extensive debate on the EU 's economic and social strategy for the coming years .
I also voted for Amendment 5 , bearing in mind that unemployment is a key topic in current discussions and that , in order to be able to tackle fully the issue of the already high and ever-growing unemployment rate , the EU must implement an ambitious social agenda .
The European Union must invest , above all , in research and in the transport and energy infrastructure in order to be able to remain competitive globally .
Furthermore , both Member States and the EU must invest in education and the development of young people .
This is why programmes like Erasmus , especially the Erasmus scheme for young entrepreneurs , must feature as a priority which is also reflected in the 2011 budget .
I was pleased by the result of the vote on Mrs Jędrzejewska 's report on the European Union 's budget priorities for 2011 .
I did , of course , vote in favour .
Today 's vote was exceptional for two reasons .
Firstly , it is the first budget adopted under the rules of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Secondly , it was the European Parliament which presented its proposals for priorities first , and not the Commission .
The rapporteur very pertinently referred , in her document , to the question of young people and education .
During a crisis , it is particularly important to support young people by , for example , helping them find their first job or set up their own business .
The lack of sufficient reference to this matter in previous years is , today , particularly visible .
Employment experts point out that it is not only graduates who are having difficulties in the job market , but also people in their thirties who have been in the job market for several years .
I support this report since the circumstances in which the 2011 budget will be adopted will be exceptional due to the Treaty of Lisbon coming into force and the continuing economic and financial crisis .
The budget will have to be accurately balanced to ensure the successful realisation of the goals set out in the Treaty of Lisbon , like the creation of a common internal energy market for example .
In planning the budget , significant attention must also be focused on the consequences of the financial crisis , still being felt by many countries , and efforts to effectively remove these .
The main priority must continue to be job retention and creation , which is closely linked to the need for financial support for small and medium-sized enterprises that create a large portion of jobs .
When approving the 2011 European Parliament budget , particular attention must be paid to evaluating the European Parliament 's priority - the forming of high level lawmaking - and all necessary measures must be provided for that goal .
An appropriate solution must also be found to the question of the effective organisation of the EP 's work , including the establishing of one workplace for MEPs .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon means greater powers for Parliament .
In a globalised world , issues are increasingly complex , and decisions need to be technically sound and backed up by science .
It is crucial that policy makers are aware of recent scientific developments , as these will allow them to make the best decisions .
This budget introduces long-term guidelines for building policy , which could lead to reduced costs in the future .
I call for increased training and technical support for Members , as these provide the necessary resources for Parliament to perform its duties well , with the scientific and technical backing that is so necessary in the 21st century .
Given the increased responsibilities of many institutions under the new framework , as is the case with Parliament , it is essential that each institution 's operational budget ensures that it has the material and human resources necessary for it to carry out its tasks within the institutional framework with accuracy and excellence .
I advocate a realistic and feasible budget , but one that provides the various institutions with the material means necessary to carry out their duties .
These considerations must not , however , jeopardise budgetary sustainability and rigorous book-keeping , which are crucial in any institution .
Additionally , rigour and transparency must be ensured in managing the funds made available to the various institutions .
in writing . - Planning for the 2011 budget is very important and I agree with the report 's call for a carefully considered and transparent discussion .
It is also correct in asserting that the issue of the budget threshold is a delicate one , and must take into account global costs .
I am happy with the report 's cautionary aspect .
Approaching this with anything less than caution would be an insult to the people of my home country and of all of Europe who are facing their own budgetary concerns .
I 'd also like to take this opportunity to say that I hope our caution also shows our solidarity and fraternity with our Greek and Portuguese colleagues who are having a notably difficult time at the moment .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament new responsibilities .
This situation means additional administrative work , with the result that Members need qualified staff to act as advisors .
This new situation leads to two problems : increased costs arising from the need for more assistants , and additional space required in order for them to carry out their duties in good working conditions .
This situation leads to increased costs .
That is difficult to explain during this time of crisis , but if Parliament 's work is to be excellent , it needs to have the necessary financial and human resources .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important report .
The guidelines are the first step in the budget procedure , giving general guidance to the Secretary-General and the Bureau of the European Parliament for the subsequent step , the preliminary draft estimates , which are currently already before the Bureau .
The circumstances under which the 2011 budget is being adopted are exceptional and constitute a challenge at the same time .
The successful implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon is a greater priority , while the effects of the economic crisis , which are making themselves felt in the European Union , make achieving this objective even more demanding .
In this context , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to which I belong , continues to advocate a sustainable and rigorous budget , in which each item of expenditure is justified and in which the rigour and efficiency can be sustainably assured .
I therefore advocate a move towards a zero-based budget , which allows efficiency and savings .
In order to better achieve this objective , it is urgent that a long-term building policy be set .
I agree that it is necessary to promote greater cooperation and strong dialogue at interinstitutional level in order for resources to be better used in various areas , such as translation and building policy , amongst others .
I would stress the importance of making Parliament 's legislative excellence a priority and providing this House with the means necessary to successfully carry out its legislative role .
That is why I voted for the 2011 budget guidelines included in this report ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
I voted in favour of the report on the EU agricultural product quality policy because to me , it seems extremely relevant in two areas .
Firstly , it stresses the importance for the European Union to protect the quality of products and makes this a major priority of the European agricultural strategy .
Secondly , it defends the principle of geographical identification and traditional specialities , presenting them as two elements contributing to European agricultural competitiveness and the preservation of cultural heritage .
Ultimately , this report gives its support to the agricultural products of which we are so proud while , at the same time , advocating necessary administrative simplifications as regards their protection .
I voted in favour of the report entitled ' Agricultural product quality policy : what strategy to follow ? ' because quality is a decisive factor in the competitiveness of European products in international markets .
In this context , I consider the implementation of compulsory ' place of farming ' labelling positive , as it makes it possible to provide consumers with information relating to quality standards .
I also consider how the report deals with environmental protection and animal welfare to be positive .
It will be necessary for the common agricultural policy to commit to the increased quality of its agricultural produce , which is an undeniable value added for European competitiveness in the global market .
Quality policy cannot be dissociated from the common agricultural policy as a whole , nor can it stand aside from such new challenges as the fight against climate change , the need to preserve biodiversity , energy supply issues , the development of bioenergies , animal welfare , and water management in agriculture .
Consumers ' growing expectations also need to be suitably incorporated in the future quality policy for agricultural products , not forgetting that quality matters to informed consumers when making choices .
I would remind you , however , that agricultural product quality policy cannot be so demanding that it endangers small and medium-sized farmers , or the existence of traditional products that are typical of certain regions and whose manufacture cannot be subject to rules that are blindly uniform .
The purpose of quality policy must be to give the Member States ' agriculture impetus in the global market and to defend European products .
It is there to serve producers and consumers .
Some elements of the report under discussion are positive : for example , its support for the establishment of tools to allow the promotion and publicising of local producers , as well as traditional and artisanal products linked to specific areas and bearing a geographical name ; or its recognition of how slow , cumbersome and excessively costly the procedure faced by small producers is when applying for quality certifications .
However , it sidesteps issues that are vital to safeguard agricultural product quality and the sustainability of agricultural production in the EU : for example , the consequences of the deregulation of world trade and the unchecked liberalisation of the markets , both within the framework of bilateral agreements and within that of the World Trade Organisation ; the various dangers inherent to the introduction of genetically modified organisms into the environment in the way that it has been done ; lastly , the need for a profound reform of the common agricultural policy that supports local protection , the right to produce and the right to food sovereignty .
I would like to congratulate the fellow Member on his report , and to say that I agree with the view that agricultural product quality policy should not be treated separately from common agricultural policy or the central ideas of the Community 's policy for the next few years , such as sustainable development , biodiversity or combating climate change .
The European Union 's citizens expect high quality , healthy products manufactured using innovative technology which takes account of the environmental impact of the production process .
I also share the rapporteur 's opinion on the matter of conducting an information and educational campaign on the subject of all European agricultural product labels which are being and have been approved .
A campaign of this kind is essential because consumers ' lack of knowledge of the full meaning of the symbols puts a question mark over the entire quality policy .
in writing . - I would like to commend my colleagues in the Agricultural Committee for this initiative report .
The quality of our agricultural products is something that needs to be capitalised on .
We devote a lot of time in the European Union to making sure that the highest standards in farming are met ; our livestock is well treated and healthy ; our produce is safe ; our farming practices ethical in relation to their impact on the environment .
Every step of the industry 's chain of production is regulated , ' from farm to fork ' so to speak .
In order to make the most of the industry 's unique selling point - the high quality of its output - we need further promotion as pointed out in the Scottà report .
It is all very well to have products that are labelled according to their area of farming or according status as a traditional speciality , but unless the consumer is aware of its meaning , it is , in fact , like reading an alien language .
So I agree that the report 's recommendation for the Commission to promote awareness of this information will be an effective form of marketing .
It will help customers and small businesses alike .
It could be particularly beneficial to our agri-food sector .
I strongly support the own-initiative report on agricultural product quality policy for which a vote was held on 25 March 2010 .
There is a clear link between product quality and the origin of the raw materials .
The proposal for a ' place of farming ' label will indicate where the raw materials come from .
This seems to me to represent an important opportunity for the agriculture industry , which produces high quality agricultural products .
Clear labelling of the origins of products not only guarantees consumers the best product quality but also enables them to make a decision on the basis of objective and transparent criteria .
Quality is a key issue for the entire food chain and an essential asset in supporting the competitiveness of European agri-food producers .
The production of high quality foods is often the only employment opportunity in many rural areas with limited production alternatives .
Therefore , I am very much in favour of the Protected Geographical Indication and Protected Designation of Origin , together with the reintroduction of a regulated and protected designation for products from mountain regions and GMO-free areas .
The Traditional Speciality Guaranteed and Organic Farming schemes must also be retained .
I voted for the report because I support better protection for European products globally .
Geographical indications give agricultural products greater credibility and a higher profile in consumers ' eyes , while also providing a competitive environment for producers .
This guarantees , at the same time , protection for the intellectual property rights for products .
The geographical indication system is well established in the European Union and in many countries outside the EU , such as the United States , Australia and New Zealand .
However , the EU has , unfortunately , commercial partners who do not have legislation in this area .
For this reason , European products are not well protected within these states ' national systems , with the risk of counterfeiting occurring .
Although I am of the opinion that we should take care what we ask the Commission for in own-initiative reports , I am in favour of the report on agricultural product quality policy .
In particular , I support the call for closer monitoring and more coordination between the Commission and the Member States so as to ensure that imported food products meet the EU 's quality and food safety standards , as well as its environmental and social standards .
In the case of fresh or processed products that have a single ingredient , the country of origin should be indicated in order to allow consumers to make conscious , well-informed decisions about what they are buying .
I am relieved that my amendment which opposed the standardisation of Protected Designations of Origin and Protected Geographical Indications was accepted in the plenary session .
Combining this information would have made the existing designations superfluous and would have caused significant harm to producers with Protected Designations of Origin .
The subject of quantitative production management has been deliberately swept under the carpet in the Commission 's communication .
I am convinced that we still need production control instruments in order to guarantee stable prices for producers and give them the security to plan ahead , so that they can meet the high expectations of the consumers and the legislators .
This applies not only to milk production , but also to wine growing in particular .
This report has an undeniable flaw : it includes agricultural policy in the self-serving logic of the pursuit of maximum profit , which is the opposite of the notion we have of agricultural policy .
Therefore , I absolutely cannot vote for it .
However , in view of the improvements that it brings , I believe it is wiser for me to abstain .
In fact , I do not want to help obstruct such anti-productivist ideas as the desire to introduce ' ecological footprint ' labelling and to relocate part of agricultural production .
I noted the intention to move away from the logic of productivism .
I regret that these are only possibilities outlined in the text and that their actual implementation in a capitalist environment significantly reduces their impact .
However , I do not wish to overlook the importance of promoting such concepts .
The quality of European agricultural products constitutes a piece of heritage that is respected worldwide .
For this reason , there is a sense of the need to protect these products and prevent their confusion with others that are of inferior quality , are less safe and are sometimes counterfeit .
In order to prevent this , it is crucial that these products are labelled and attempts are made to ensure that consumers obtain trustworthy information relating to these products .
In order to avoid distortions in competitiveness , it is still important that there is a full understanding that imported agricultural products satisfy the same requirements as those imposed on products produced in the EU .
That is why I voted in favour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to European regulations that have laid down firm rules on the quality of agricultural produce , the health of citizens , environmental sustainability , and the specific characteristics of crops , we can say today with pride that European agriculture is a model without equal in the world .
While , on the one hand , farmers who have applied the rules with a great sense of duty must be thanked , we must , on the other hand , ask ourselves why the European Union sometimes tends to become tangled up in bureaucratic knots that are liable to eclipse this excellence and to simply create a great sense of disappointment among citizens .
Hence why , today , our citizens start their day with a good orange juice without oranges , and for lunch drink rosé wine made by mixing red and white wine fermented by adding sugar with their pizza containing mozzarella made with casein .
With no sense of fondness , they can always resort to chocolate without cacao .
Not even children are exempt from the consequences of the schizophrenic destruction of our high quality foodstuffs : in Europe , we run the risk of consuming spoiled products of whose provenance we are unaware ; one need only mention the melamine-tainted milk from China .

Citizens have the right to protection .
In order to allow consumers to make informed choices , we must insist that labels be complete and comprehensive and that products for mass consumption , such as long-life sterilised or UHT cow 's milk and dairy products derived exclusively from cow 's milk , carry an indication of the origin of the raw milk used in production , as well as other legally required indications .
I voted for Amendment 3 because this relates to a point in the motion for a resolution which could be interpreted as encouraging a return to standardisation of agricultural products ( shape and dimensions of fruit and vegetables ) .
This report emphasises the central role played by high quality agricultural products in consumer protection .
It also highlights support for traditional regional products and for small and medium-sized agricultural businesses .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the report .
I voted against Amendment 3 , because I am in favour of the restoration of trading standards in the fruit sector .
I consider the Commission decision to abolish them , despite the opposition of a broad majority of the Member States and the production sector in question , to be unwarranted .
The EU rightly has the highest standards for agro-foodstuffs , for the benefit of European consumers .
At the same time , quality policy is of strategic importance , as it is primarily on this that the added value of European agricultural goods on the global markets rests .
However , compliance with imported products to equivalent quality specifications remains a problem .
A catalogue needs to be made of all the private quality certification systems and a legislative framework of basic principles needs to be adopted at EU level in order to ensure that these systems operate transparently .
I am in favour of labelling all primary agricultural products with the place of production .
As far as geographical indications are concerned , we need to keep the three EU systems for agricultural products and food , alcoholic beverages and wine as they stand .
Safeguarding enhanced protection for geographical indications within the framework of bilateral trade agreements and the WTO is of primary importance .
I voted for this report as the strengthening of the quality policy at European Union level is an important incentive for European agricultural producers to step up their efforts in support of quality , food safety and respect for the environment .
I believe that this policy can result in a significant improvement in the added value of European agri-food production as part of an increasingly globalised market .
However , at the same time , better information must be provided to citizens through appropriate information campaigns and campaigns for promoting voluntary labels for other production methods which respect the environment and animals , such as ' integrated production ' , ' outdoor grazing ' and ' hill farming ' .
In the vote on the Scottà report on agricultural product quality policy , Amendment 5 was accepted , which called for the mandatory labelling of the origin of foods made from only one ingredient .
This requirement involves significantly more work and higher costs for the agriculture industry and food processors , without bringing any real added value for consumers .
For this reason , I have voted against this amendment .
I voted for the report on the future of food quality policy .
Let us underline straight away a positive point in the text : the proposal to establish a European logo for organic food .
This is both a clear demand by consumers and a requirement that must be respected in order to develop the internal market .
I come to the important question of geographical indications and traditional specialities .
Essential for European agriculture because of the privileged links established over time between products and regions , geographical indications and traditional specialities are closely linked to tradition and to the history of taste .
For this reason , we must protect them .
Consequently , I am delighted that we are opposing the merging of the two concepts of PDO ( Protected Designation of Origin ) and PGI ( Protected Geographical Indication ) as proposed by the European Commission .
It is true that simplifying the standards may , at first sight , seem desirable in terms of reducing the bureaucratic burden , but it must not result in a reduction of the standards that our European producers have courageously imposed on themselves .
Finally , let us not forget the work we still have to carry out to increase the protection , at international level , of geographical indications ( in particular , via the WTO ) .
in writing . - I finally voted in favour of the resolution mainly because our Amendments 3 ( concerning opposition to standardisation rules for fruit and vegetables ) and 5 ( concerning mandatory place-of-origin labelling ) were adopted .
in writing . - Whilst we are happy to see that common sense prevailed on misshapen fruit and vegetables , the British Labour MEPs still had some concerns with the Scottà report and have therefore voted against it .
We are against any attempt to bring in an EU quality logo which would only be available to EU produce , since this would discriminate against farmers from third countries and would not be in line with our development objectives .
The EPLP is in favour of an EU-wide organic label , but the Commission is already aware of Parliament 's support for this , and other parts of the report are of sufficient importance to vote against the whole report .
in writing . - ( SV ) The EU should have strong consumer protection .
Consumers have a right to accurate and clear information on the content and origin of goods and regarding whether or not they have been genetically modified .
Clear common rules create the conditions for a functioning market on equal terms within the EU .
When the market is functioning correctly , informed consumers can , through their choices , drive development towards even higher food quality .
However , I voted against the report on agricultural product quality policy : what strategy to follow ? .
The main reason for this is that the report violates the principle of subsidiarity .
For example , it is not the job of the EU to create a ' European knowledge bank for old recipes and historical food preparation methods ' .
In my opinion , protected geographical indications receive too great an emphasis in the report .
There is also a risk of setting up barriers to trade for countries outside the European Union when there is such a strong emphasis on the goods being produced within the EU .
Origin marking is important , but , in itself , the origin is not necessarily a guarantee that the product is of high quality .
The objective of adequate , safe and high quality food is a human requirement and demand of the workers which cannot be safeguarded within the framework of the capitalist method of production and trade in agricultural products .
The report expresses the EU philosophy of producing foodstuffs in order to increase the profits of the food industry , not to meet the people 's food requirements .
At a time when one billion people are suffering from hunger and poverty is striking broad sections of grassroots society in the capitalist countries , the EU is using food standards as a pretext for restricting production , concentrating land in large capitalist undertakings and ousting small-scale and poor farmers from their land and agricultural production .
The cases of food scandals that have multiplied in recent years , due to the capitalist conditions of food production being increasingly imposed by the EU and the WTO , will never be effectively addressed with administrative control measures , nor can GMOs coexist with conventional and organic foods .
Only food sovereignty and security , the safeguarding of safe , healthy , cheap food , support for poor farmers and the establishment of production cooperatives within the framework of people power and a people 's economy can meet modern grassroots requirements .
In the vote on the report on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation , I voted for the amendment of paragraph 31 , which calls for the introduction of an international levy on financial transactions .
Indeed , I am profoundly convinced that a levy , even a small one , on these transactions of huge amounts would mean that significant sums of money could be released .
Thus , we would be able to devote more funds to combating the ills that affect our planet and would have the funding needed to realise the Millennium Development Goals .
This is more than a question of justice ; it is a question of common sense .
in writing . - I fully support this report .
The global financial and economic financial crisis caused great disturbances in developed economies but it had even more profound effects on emerging and developing countries .
The achievement of Millennium Development Goals is now at stake because the progress that has been made in those counties over the last decade has stalled .
Financial aid alone cannot ensure economic progress in developing countries .
Thus , the Commission should urge the reform of international development cooperation .
Moreover , I believe that assistance to developing countries should be constantly adapted to the circumstances in those countries .
I voted for this report , since we must help developing countries , particularly during this difficult economic period .
In many developing countries and , above all , the least developed countries , there has been a reduction in income from exports and there has been a slowdown in the growth and development of southern regions .
It is especially important to agree on economic partnerships to strengthen the compatibility of EU policy for the good of development and , inter alia , the promotion of suitable work , welfare and job creation and ensure the appropriate implementation of trade commitments and the application of a suitable transition period for these commitments .
Developing countries need aid to reduce poverty and isolation , measures to contribute to development and measures essential to get out of the crisis .
In implementing these actions , the European Union must take the lead and act decisively and , to this end , all EU institutions must make greater commitments .
We cannot allow the crisis to halt the progress that these countries have achieved in the last decade in terms of stable economic growth and therefore I believe that the provision of greater support for development is essential .
in writing . - We opposed this motion because it purported to place a responsibility on European countries for the plight of the undeveloped Third World , rather than placing the responsibility on those countries themselves .
Furthermore , it looked forward with relish to the creation of various forms of political and economic world governance .
I am voting in favour of this report , which introduces key issues about sustainable development and the gradual integration of African , Caribbean and Pacific countries into the global economy .
It is developing countries that are the most affected by global warming , so it is essential to step up all measures to combat climate change , such as the transfer of appropriate technologies .
It is equally important that an agreement is reached on the EU 's greenhouse gas emission allowance trading scheme , under which at least 25 % of the revenue generated from auctioning carbon dioxide emission licences will be used as aid for developing countries .
Issues such as sustainable development and green growth must be strategic priorities for the EU .
I call for additional funds to be earmarked for developing countries .
These must be sustainable in the medium and long term and come from the private sector , the carbon market , and the public sector of industrialised countries or the most economically advanced developing countries .
The economic and financial crisis that is devastating us has had disastrous effects in developing countries that had already been the victims of successive crises ( food , energy , climate and financial ) .
Those who did not cause this crisis but are the most affected urgently need help .
The European Union and the developed countries must respond quickly , firmly and effectively .
I believe that it is crucial that the Member States meet their Official Development Assistance commitments and that they strengthen their commitments to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
The Commission and the Council must also press ahead with the reform of international development cooperation , which is one of the main reasons for the ineffectiveness of development aid .
I welcome the improved borrowing facilities for the poorest countries conceded by the financial institutions .
It is not enough , however .
I support this report 's calls for a sustained increase in development aid .
Developing countries , in particular , the poorest ones already hard hit by the 2007 food crisis , are today suffering the full force of the economic and social consequences of the international financial crisis that began in the developed countries .
The latter are now inclined to reduce their development aid to face up to their own difficulties .
Developing countries are thus paying twice for the mess caused by unregulated global capitalism .
I voted for the Guerrero Salom report , which reminds Europe of its responsibilities and demands respect for the commitments made in relation to official development assistance , in particular , the goal of contributing 0.7 % of GDP to this by 2015 .
By adopting it , Parliament is also calling for the implementation of an international levy on financial transactions to fund development , access to Global Public Goods and the adaptation of poor countries to the challenges of climate change .
It supports cancelling the debt of the least developed countries .
All of these recommendations are essential as we approach the review of the Millennium Development Goals at the United Nations in September .
The European Union has a moral duty to implement these new tools of international solidarity without delay .
For us Liberals , investment in developing countries is dear to our hearts .
We welcome new ways to get funds to aid-assisted countries , but we would like to make it clear that we do not believe that a tax on international financial transactions is the solution that will enable us to meet the Millennium Development Goals or correct global imbalances .
It is also important to point out that it will only be possible to implement such a tax if it is a global tax .
We would instead like to emphasise the importance of the EU Member States meeting the current commitments with regard to levels of aid that have been set .
In order to generate development and growth in developing countries , we ought to promote free trade and abolish the EU 's various direct and indirect barriers to trade .
I voted in favour of the report on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation .
It is important to stress that developing countries , although they are not the source of the international crisis , are affected disproportionately by it .
As the largest donor of aid to developing countries , the European Union plays an essential role in providing necessary leadership in terms of the adoption of measures at international level to enable the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
When we refer to the financial , economic and social crisis that we are currently experiencing , we are talking about a global crisis in which special attention must be given to developing countries , which have suffered the impact of this crisis both directly and indirectly .
The existing mechanisms for helping poorer countries and their populations - which are facing conditions of extreme poverty and misery - must be applied in a way that is more effective and focused .
They must not result in dependency , which could have negative effects on growth , salaries and employment .
It must therefore be guaranteed that development tools and policies will allow effective development .
This requires more coordinated action at bilateral and multilateral level .
Action must be taken relating to humanitarian aid , cooperation and development , and in this area , the Member States , the European Union and the international organisations play an essential role .
Nevertheless , I am opposed to the introduction of a tax on international financial transactions ( Tobin tax ) to help fund these countries because of the impact that it would have on society in general .
The report under discussion tackles very important issues and makes some arguments that are correct : for example , the closing of tax havens , the cancelling of the foreign debt of certain countries , the need for increased efforts in terms of Official Development Assistance , and a tax on financial transactions .
We must , however , point out some features of the report that are negative and even contradictory .
One example is the argument for liberalising trade in line with the patterns that the European Union has been following , particularly through the Economic Partnership Agreements , which the EU has been seeking to impose on African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
This has been the case despite resistance and reports of their negative consequences from many of these countries , not to mention the failure to tackle the problem of foreign debt in a more far-reaching way .
This Parliament 's texts sometimes border on the absurd , but I have to say that in the case of Mr Guerrero Salom 's report , you have surpassed yourself .
I will quickly pass over the unacceptable demand for global economic and financial governance , and over the fundamental contradiction that consists in lamenting the external dependency of poor countries , while advising them to open up even more to world trade .
I am also going to pass over the hypocritical condemnation of , and I quote , ' the concept of globalisation aiming at total deregulation and the rejection of any public governance tools ' , a concept that was and basically still is your own , and which you have been imposing here for years .
Then , to crown it all , there is paragraph 26 , in which you propose following the advice of George Soros !
He who owes his entire fortune to speculation .
He who , in partnership with other hedge funds , bets on the collapse of the euro and speculates on the Greek debt in order to cause it .
He who disregards the social and economic consequences of his actions so as to impose his own chosen global economic order .
However , it is true that you also share this wish for a unified Euro-Atlantic Bloc , global governance and a global currency .
I supported the report by my colleague , Mr Guerrero Salom , in order to remind the Member States of their responsibilities to developing countries in the face of the global challenges of the economic crisis and climate change , for which they are not responsible .
Europe must commit itself more to achieving the Millennium Development Goals ; in other words , it must devote at least 0.7 % of GDP to combating poverty in developing countries by 2015 .
In order to achieve this goal , I also supported the creation of a tax on financial transactions , as well as the consideration of possible options for cancelling the debt of the poorest countries .
Finally , access to sexual and reproductive health rights remains a priority for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , and it is on this basis that I voted in favour of this report .
This text has the merit of recommending the establishment of a moratorium on debt and the cancellation of that debt for the poorest countries , of advocating food sovereignty and of undertaking to respect the ILO .
However , this does not compensate for the fact that it is firmly in the camp of the carbon market and green growth and that it preaches free trade and an increase in financial services .
This text supports the implacable logic of liberal dogmatism .
It is therefore harmful .
I voted against .
I voted against this report for several reasons .
Firstly , the quick votes in plenary on what I considered key votes on amendments to paragraphs 7 , 31 and 34 .
Also , the decision regarding the so-called right to sexual and reproductive health .
Finally , the move towards establishing future European taxes to which I am utterly opposed , as I have stated on several occasions , particularly during the campaign to be elected to Parliament .
The most serious financial and economic crisis since the 1930s has hit Europe hard .
However , the developing countries are also suffering heavily from its effects and they are largely powerless to do anything about it .
Irresponsible speculation , greed for quick profits which are completely unrelated to the real economy in the Anglo-Saxon countries and a financial system that is coming apart at the seams have brought the world to the brink of a financial abyss .
Another cause of the crisis is a globalisation concept that has made complete deregulation its highest priority .
The countries of Europe are getting themselves ever deeper into debt in order to restart their economies .
However , in many cases , it is not possible for developing countries to do this because of their poor financial situation .
Therefore , they must be given the opportunity to protect their own national economies more effectively against imported goods which are sold at dumping prices and which destroy local markets and local people 's livelihoods .
We must give the developing countries the chance to emerge from the crisis under their own steam .
Traditional development aid has largely failed in its purpose .
Ultimately , we have to tackle the root of the problem and impose strict regulations on the financial markets , prevent speculative practices and quickly introduce a tax on financial transactions .
The problem will certainly never be solved by the type of ' world government ' proposed in the report , which will further disempower both people and states .
The report of the Committee on Development on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation rightly notes that in the last two years , there has not been just one crisis , but a whole series of related crises .
Instead of resulting in a reduction in development aid for developing countries , this situation should cause an increase .
The common objective should be to allocate 0.56 % of gross national income to development aid by 2010 , and 0.7 % by 2015 .
Apart from temporary aid , other measures are also needed which will change the architecture of world economic governance .
This explains my support for the immediate fulfilment of obligations undertaken at the G20 summit in Pittsburgh on the matter of a shift in the IMF quota share to emerging and developing countries of at least 5 % , and an increase of at least 3 % in voting power in the World Bank for developing and transition countries .
These measures should be correlated with action to end tax havens .
An important solution for the financial system , the introduction of which is worth considering , too , is what is known as the Tobin tax .
Taking into account the fact that the Committee 's report contains all the above-mentioned proposals , I decided to vote in favour of its adoption .
in writing . - I am glad the report was adopted , although with a tight majority ( 283 votes in favour , 278 against and 15 abstentions ) , especially because some split votes requested by the EPP to weaken the report in certain paragraphs - taxing the banking system for global social justice , international levy on financial transaction , debt moratorium and debt cancellation - did not succeed .
All these paragraphs were adopted by comfortable majority .
in writing . - ( SV ) On 25 March , I voted against the report on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation , primarily because of the wording in paragraph 31 concerning taxing the banking system and imposing a levy on international transactions .
Introducing a ' Tobin tax ' would run the risk of undesirable side-effects which would harm the international market , which is , of course , the market in which poor countries need to be involved in order to enable their economic development on fair terms .
In my view , it is not clear how the Tobin tax could help to prevent future financial crises without global consensus and support .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries and on development cooperation because these countries are the most affected by the economic and financial crisis .
We note with great concern that , according to estimates , developing countries are expected to face a financial shortfall in 2010 of more than USD 300 billion and that mounting budgetary problems in the most vulnerable countries are jeopardising the operation and development of core areas such as education , health , infrastructure and social protection , with a value in excess of USD 11.5 billion .
In addition , developing countries are also the hardest hit by the effects of climate change .
Consequently , we are urging the Commission and Member States to support all actions aimed at combating climate change and to speed up , in this context , the transfer of suitable technologies to developing countries .
In addition , I voted for the Member States and the Commission to devote particular attention to the promotion and protection of decent work and measures for combating gender discrimination and child labour , adhering to the recommendations made on this subject by the International Labour Organisation , whose role should be consolidated .
The euro area has faced an economic crisis of great magnitude during the last two years .
The cohesion of the policies applied by the ECB and consistent , yet relevant measures have ensured that the impact of the crisis has been kept to a minimum in the euro area .
The exception to this , Greece , came about due to systemic errors compounded over time and kept hidden .
The impact of the economic crisis has been felt significantly harder outside the EU 's euro area .
Romania is an example of this where , in spite of current appropriate economic measures , the impact of the crisis is considerable .
The effects would have been much smaller if there was fiscal responsibility , and Romania would not have entered the first year of the crisis , 2009 , with a 5.4 % budget deficit at a time when , just one year before , it reported record economic growth .
While states in the euro area have already been reporting a shift into the black for their own economies during the last six months , the first shoots of economic recovery , albeit fairly modest , are evident in Romania only now .
However , this cannot be sustained without a drastic reduction in the budget deficit , which is required to prevent us from ending up in the same situation as Greece .
The mechanisms for imposing penalties on Member States in the case of failure to meet the vital macro-economic indicators must be deployed without delay .
I voted against the ECB report for 2008 .
Since 2008 , the ECB has provided liquidity to merchant banks , but without setting specific and strict rules and criteria as to where this additional liquidity is to be used .
As a result , there has been a decrease in loans granted to small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers and the anticipated reduction in consumer borrowing rates has not come about .
At the same time , the ECB has demonstrated once again that it is unable to put an end to the mockery being perpetrated by the merchant banks , which borrow from the ECB at a rate of 1 % and lend to the states at much higher interest rates .
It must be acknowledged that the independence of the central banks was not the right choice , both from the point of view of democratic and political control and from the point of view of economic efficacy .
What we need now is not only strict regulation of the financial sector , but also a restriction on its size and importance in relation to the real economy .
The way that the European Central Bank has introduced measures in response to the current economic , financial and social crisis has played a vital role , particularly through the measures that have allowed the Member States to maintain their liquidity , issue credit to companies and reduce interest rates , amongst other things .
I therefore believe that exit strategies must make allowances for the genuine stability of the financial markets or suffer the return of a strengthened version of the effects that we have already experienced but whose impact has been softened by these measures .
Furthermore , I believe that we should give some thought to adapting the Stability and Growth Pact .
The purpose of this would be to make it more flexible and adapt it to exceptional situations such as the one we are currently experiencing .
As we know , the decisions of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) are partly to blame for the crisis that we are experiencing .
It is interesting to note that the report itself does not hold back from making some criticisms of the ECB 's actions .
This is , of course , the case when it notes that the ECB 's economic projections , like those of the International Monetary Fund and other international institutions , failed to predict the severity of the downturn in 2008 .
It also does so when it ' notes that the ECB 's interest rate cuts were less radical than those made by other central banks , including the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England in the UK , and compared with what many economic observers expected at the time ' .
However , the report continues to defend the ECB and its guidelines , even making major contradictions .
That is why we voted against it .
Nonetheless , there are other aspects that merit reflection , specifically when it expresses its ' disappointment that the extra liquidity injected by the ECB did not sufficiently ease the credit crunch faced by industry , particularly small and medium-sized businesses , and was instead used by some banks to improve their margins and cover losses ' .
Congratulating the European Central Bank for its actions in 2008 is a forced exercise with which I refuse to be associated .
The Bank did not see a major crisis coming , and it did not exactly shine in terms of its regulation either , which is far from being perfect .
I do not think that any lessons have been learned from this crisis : we still trust the handful of Anglo-Saxon rating agencies that are no more capable of rating the States today than they were of rating the banks and toxic financial products yesterday .
We continue to want to ' reassure ' completely irrational markets that increase hostile speculation against a State , when we should be eliminating speculation by renouncing monetary orthodoxy .
We are preparing for a swift return to the same policies that contributed to the crisis , in the name of the ' viability of public finances ' , but to the detriment of a potential recovery and of the purchasing power of households .
Above all , we are not doing anything concrete to change the system .
Legislation that you pretend to judge as urgent in order to fool opinion 